Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citations — See Ch. 29.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Construction and Penalties
[Adopted as Title 1, Ch. 1, §§ 1-1-2, 1-1-3, 1-1-5, 1-1-7 and 1-1-8, of
the 1994 Code]
§ 1-1. Principles of construction.
The following rules or meanings shall be applied in the construction and
interpretation of ordinances codified in this Code of Ordinances unless such
application would be clearly inconsistent with the plain meaning or intent
of the ordinances:
A. Acts by agents. When an ordinance requires an act be done by a person
which may be legally performed by an authorized agent of that principal
person, the requirement shall be construed to include all acts
performed by such agents.
B. City. "City" shall refer to the City of Monona, Dane County, Wisconsin.
C. Code and Code of Ordinances. The words "Code," "Municipal Code" and
"Code of Ordinances" when used in any section of this Code shall refer
to this Code of Ordinances of the City of Monona unless the context of
the section clearly indicates otherwise.
D. Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or
allowed by these ordinances, the day of the act or event from which the
period of time begins to run shall not be included, but the last day of the
period shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal
holiday. If the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven
days, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the
computation. As used in this section, "legal holiday" means any
statewide legal holiday specified by state law and any other City holiday
designated by the Common Council.
E. Fine. The term "fine" shall be the equivalent of the word "forfeiture,"
and vice versa.
F. Gender. Every word in these ordinances referring to the masculine
gender shall also be construed to apply to females, and vice versa; the
masculine gender is used solely in the interest of brevity.
G. General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed according to
their plain meaning in common usage. However, words or phrases with
a technical or special meaning shall be understood and construed
according to that technical or special meaning if such is the intent of
the ordinances.
H. Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or
more City officers or employees shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or other persons.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
§ 1-2. Conflict of provisions.
§ 1-3. Effective date of ordinances.
§ 1-4. Penalties. [Amended 7-20-2009 by Ord. No. 07-09-596]
I. Person. The word "person" shall mean any of the following entities:
natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, bodies politic
or any other entity of any kind which is capable of being sued.
J. Repeal. When any ordinance having the effect of repealing a prior
ordinance is itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive
the prior ordinance or any part thereof, unless expressly so provided.
K. Singular and plural. Every word in these ordinances referring to the
singular number only shall also be construed to apply to several
persons or things, and every word in these ordinances referring to a
plural number shall also be construed to apply to one person or thing.
L. Tense. The use of any verb in the present tense shall not preclude the
interpretation of the verb in the future tense where appropriate.
M. Wisconsin Statutes. The term "Wisconsin Statutes" and its abbreviation
as "Wis. Stats." shall mean, in these ordinances, the Wisconsin Statutes
as of the adoption of this Code, as amended or renumbered from time to
time. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
N. Wisconsin Administrative Code. The term "Wisconsin Administrative
Code" and its abbreviation as "Wis. Adm. Code" shall mean the
Wisconsin Administrative Code as of the adoption of this Code, as
amended or renumbered from time to time.
A. If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the
provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out
of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter.
B. If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with
each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the
events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more
general provision.
A. Code. The Code of Ordinances, City of Monona, Wisconsin, shall take
effect from and after passage and publication as provided by state law.
B. Subsequent ordinances. All ordinances passed by the Common Council
subsequent to the adoption of the Code of Ordinances, except when
otherwise specifically provided, shall take effect from and after their
publication.
A. General penalty. Except where a penalty is provided elsewhere in this
Code, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code
§ 1-1 MONONA CODE § 1-4
1:4
shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty, which
shall be as follows: [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(1) First offense penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of
this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50
nor more than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution, and
in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution
shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs
are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Second and subsequent offenses penalty. Any person found guilty of
violating any ordinance or part of an ordinance of this Code who
shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the same
ordinance within one year shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not
less than $100 nor more than $2,000 for each such offense,
together with costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of
such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the county jail until
such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not exceeding
six months.
B. Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues
or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall
preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or
remove a violation of any provision of this Code.
C. Other remedies.
(1) The City shall have any and all other remedies afforded by the
Wisconsin Statutes in addition to the forfeitures and costs of
prosecution above.
(2) Execution against defendant's property. Whenever any person fails
to pay a forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of any
court for violation of any ordinance of the City, the court may, in
lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant or after the
defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution
against the property of the defendant for said forfeiture and costs.
D. Forfeiture and deposit schedule.
(1) Any person who shall violate any of the ordinances listed in the Fee,
Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule approved by the Common Council
shall pay the forfeiture listed, in addition to costs and surcharges.
The deposit amount for the ordinances listed in the Fee, Forfeiture
and Deposit Schedule shall be the same as the forfeiture amount.
[Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(2) Traffic citations and Chapter 125 violations. The deposit amounts
set forth in the Revised Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule and
adopted by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference, as may be amended,
shall apply for traffic violations governed by § 345.27, Wis. Stats.,
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:5
§ 1-5. City Clerk to maintain copies of documents incorporated by
reference.
Whenever any standard code, rule, regulation, statute or other written or
printed matter is adopted by reference it shall be deemed incorporated in
this Code as if fully set forth herein, and the City Clerk shall maintain in his
or her office a copy of any such material as adopted and as amended from
time to time. Materials on file at the City Clerk's office shall be considered
public records open to reasonable examination by any person during the
office hours of the City Clerk, subject to such restrictions on examination as
the City Clerk imposes for the preservation of the material.
boating violations governed by § 30.77, Wis. Stats., and alcohol
violations governed by Chapter 125, Wis. Stats.
(3) Unless otherwise provided for in this section or elsewhere in the
Code of Ordinances, if a forfeiture for a violation is set with no
penalty range then the deposit amount for that violation shall be
the amount of the forfeiture, in addition to costs and surcharges.
For offenses with a penalty range and a maximum forfeiture of
$100 or greater, then the deposit amount shall be $100, in addition
to costs and surcharges. For those violations that have a penalty
range and a maximum forfeiture not exceeding $100, then the
deposit amount shall be the maximum forfeiture, in addition to
costs and surcharges.
E. Synthetic chemical cannabinoid prohibited. [Added 6-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 6-16-679]
(1) Any person violating the section:1 $500 to $1,000.
(2) Any commercial establishment displaying or offering for sale:
$1,000 to $5,000.
1. Editor's Note: See § 335-19, Synthetic chemical cannabinoid prohibited, of this Code.
§ 1-4 MONONA CODE § 1-5
1:6
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
§ 1-6. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., the ordinances of the City of Monona
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Common Council of the
City of Monona, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 480, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the City of
Monona," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-7. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-8. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-9. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall
remain there for use and examination by the public for at least two weeks,
in accordance with § 66.0103, Wis. Stats., and until final action is taken on
this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be
certified to by the City Clerk, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of said City Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Common
Council to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Monona"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be inserted in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:7
§ 1-11. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Monona, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required by law, a notice of the adoption of this
ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office
of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office
hours. The publication of notice of the enactment of this ordinance, coupled
with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-12. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the Code required
to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public, All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are included as supplements to said Code.
§ 1-13. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Common Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures
for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with
such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City
of Monona to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a penalty as
provided in§ 1-4 of the Code,
§ 1-15. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby,
§ 1-11 MONONA CODE § 1-16
1:8
§ 1-16. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-17. Repealer.
§ 1-18. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-17 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the City of Monona which is
not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect.
B. The following Titles/Chapters in the 1994 Code are specifically
repealed:
(1) Title 4, Ch. 1, § 2-4-2, Review of Administrative Determination.
(2) Title 9, Ch. 3, Cable Television.
(3) Title 11, Ch. 2, § 11-2-1, Prostitution.
(4) Title 11, Ch. 3, § 11-3-5, Regulation of smoking.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to June 19, 2017.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9
§ 1-19. Changes in previously adopted ordinances; new ordinances.
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances adopting or amending the Zoning Map or otherwise
rezoning property.
O. Any charter ordinances.
P. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
fee or fees.
Q. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
deposit or bond schedule.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing sewer or water
rates or charges.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the City of Monona, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsection D
hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the Common Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
B. The adoption of the Code includes the adoption of the following new
ordinances: Chapter 225, Fair Housing, and Chapter 411, Trees, Article
ID, Private Tree Maintenance.
§ 1-18 MONONA CODE § 1-19
1:10
§ 1-20. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
C. Specific fee amounts have been removed and/or reference to the City's
Fee Schedule inserted in the following Code sections: §§ 63-11, 128-4F,
159-3A(2), B(2), 159-4, 168-3D, 175-9B(2), 175- 39B(2), 175-55C,
175-66B(2), 191-2, 198-2, 238-1D(2), E(2), F(5), 245-3, 263-5C(l),
272-41 and J, 272-5, 272-6A(2), 272-7A, 272-12A, 272-22B(l), D(1),
(3)(d), 296-3G, 312-3D(1), 328-2, 328-3A, 328-4, 328-8C(3)(a)[2] and
(e), 395-17, 443-21G, 450-2A, 457-4A, 466-36, 480-68B.
D. The amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A2 attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number
references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and
appear in the Code.)
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-19D, the chapters, articles and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
9-17-689." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the City offices.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:11
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
[The provisions of Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes have been
adopted by the City and have been incorporated by reference herein.]
Chapter 18
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finance and taxation — See Ch. 63.
Mayor and Common Council — See Ch. 94.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 103.
Police and Fire Commission — See Ch. 112.
Zoning — See Ch. 480.
§ 1-20 MONONA CODE § 1-20
1:12
ARTICLE I
Boards and Commissions
§ 18-1. Plan Commission.
A. Composition. The Commission shall consist of two Common Council
members, one of whom, at the discretion of the Mayor, shall chair the
Commission, and six citizens, all of whom may vote. The Mayor may
appoint himself or herself as one of the Common Council members,
without being subject to confirmation by the Council. The Mayor, if not
appointed as a full member, and the City Administrator and/or their
designees shall be ex officio nonvoting members of the Commission.
Commission members shall elect a Vice Chair who shall act as Chair of
the meetings in the absence of the Chair. If both the Chair and Vice
Chair are absent, the members in attendance shall elect a Chair to act
just for that meeting. The Chairperson shall not vote except in the case
of a tie.
B. Appointment; term of office.3
(1) Council members. The Common Council members shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council,
during April for the duration of his or her current term of office on
the Common Council. The term of office on the Commission shall
begin on the third Tuesday of April.
(2) Citizen members. The six citizen members shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, during April for
terms of three years beginning on the third Tuesday of April. The
terms of the citizen members shall be staggered so that not more
than two such regular appointments are made annually.
C. Powers. The Commission may employ experts and a staff and pay for
their services, and such other expenses as may be necessary and
proper, not exceeding, in all, the appropriation that may be made for
the Commission by the Council or placed at its disposal through gift,
and subject to any ordinance or resolution enacted by the Council. The
Commission shall have the powers and perform the functions
enumerated in § 62.23, Wis. Stats., and as prescribed by the Common
Council.
D. Master Plan. Subject to the approval of the Common Council, the
Commission shall make and adopt a master plan for the physical
development of the City, including any areas outside of its boundaries
which, in the Commission's judgment, bear relation to the development
of the City. The Commission shall keep such Master Plan current as
required by this Code and the Master Plan.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 18-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-1
1:13
E. Zoning permits. Under the City's Zoning Code, the Commission shall
hear applications for zoning permits for all districts except the singlefamily
residence district and the two-family residence district. The
Commission shall grant or deny such applications and shall direct the
Zoning Administrator to issue or refuse to issue zoning permits under
the City's Zoning Code.
F. Occupancy permits. This subsection shall apply only to those uses,
structures and buildings for which the Commission has granted a
zoning permit. The authority to issue an occupancy permit for a use,
structure or building for which a zoning permit has already been
granted shall vest in the Commission, but the Commission may delegate
this authority to the Zoning Administrator. Appeals of decisions of the
Zoning Administrator to issue or refuse to issue occupancy permits
shall be made to the Commission.
G. Advisory Economic Development Committee. The Common Council may
create an Advisory Economic Development Committee to the Plan
Commission. This advisory committee shall consist of five members
nominated by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council for
three years, except that, of those first appointed, one shall serve for one
year, two shall serve for two years and two for three years. Vacancies
shall be filled for an unexpired term of members whose terms become
vacant. The Committee shall:
(1) Evaluate needs and opportunities for various types of future
economic growth (industrial, office and commercial) that would be
most directly beneficial to the residents of Monona, both as sources
of goods and services and as sources of employment for Monona
residents.
(2) Recommend to the Commission detailed plans for the future
development of Monona Drive as a center of retail and services
activity for Monona.
(3) Recommend to the Commission detailed plans for the future
development of the Broadway area, recognizing that different areas
will be appropriate for different uses.
(4) Recommend detailed plans for points of access to the planned
South Beltline, as these locations will be of prime importance to
Monona's long-term industrial growth.
(5) Hold joint meetings with the City of Madison Plan Commission, or
other appropriate body, to discuss areas of mutual concern.
(6) Review and recommend to the Commission revision of the City
Zoning Code.
H. Advisory Environmental Committee. The Common Council may create
an Advisory Environmental Committee to the Plan Commission. This
advisory committee shall consist of five members nominated by the
§ 18-1 MONONA CODE § 18-1
1:14
§ 18-2. Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 18-3. Board of Review.
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council for three years, except
that, of those first appointed, one shall serve for one year, two shall
serve for two years and two for three years. Vacancies shall be filled
for an unexpired term of members whose terms become vacant. The
Committee shall:
(1) Study issues which may affect the present and future environment
in Monona and its surroundings.
(2) Recommend to the Commission plans, programs or ordinance
changes which would improve the living or working environment in
Monona.
(3) Hold joint meetings with the City of Madison Plan Commission, or
other appropriate body, to discuss areas of mutual concern.
(4) Review and recommend to the Commission revision of the City
Zoning Code.
A. Creation and membership.
(1) A zoning board of appeals is hereby established with the powers,
duties and qualifications set forth in this section and in
§ 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five members
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council for
three years, except that, of those first appointed, one shall serve for
one year, two shall serve for two years and two for three years.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of members whose
terms become vacant. The Mayor shall appoint two alternate
members for staggered terms of three years, who shall act with full
power only when a member of the Board refuses to vote because of
conflict of interest or is absent. The members shall serve without
compensation and shall be removable by the Mayor for cause upon
written charges and after public hearing. A Council member shall
be appointed as the Chair, provided the appointment is concurrent
with membership on the Council. The Chair shall be one of the five
voting members of the Board. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 9-17-689]
B. Powers. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have those powers
prescribed in Chapter 480, Zoning, of this Code.
A. Composition. The Board of Review shall consist of a Chairperson, four
citizen members, and two alternates, all of whom shall be residents of
the City and one of whom may be a Council member and one of whom
§ 18-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-3
1:15
may be employed by the City. The Chairperson shall not vote except in
the case of a tie.
B. Appointment; term of office. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
9-17-689]
(1) Council members. If the Mayor chooses to appoint a Council
member, the Mayor shall appoint the Council member for a oneyear
term commencing the third Tuesday of April. The appointment
of the Council member shall be subject to confirmation by the
Council.
(2) Citizen members. Members of the Board shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. The terms of the
citizen members shall be three years beginning the third Tuesday
of April and shall be staggered so that not more than two such
regular appointments are made annually.
(3) Alternates. Alternates shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the Council, for a term of one year, beginning the
third Tuesday of April. The alternate members shall be designated
"first alternate" and "second alternate" by the Mayor. Alternates
shall act, with full power, only when a member of the Board refuses
to vote because of conflict of interest or when a member is absent
or removed by timely property owner request. [Amended
8-6-2018 by Ord. No. 7-18-708]
(4) Chair. The Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, shall
appoint annually the Chair, who shall hold office for one year and
until his or her successor is appointed and qualifies. The term of
office of the Chair, except when appointed to fill a vacancy, shall
commence on the third Tuesday of April of the year of appointment.
The Chair shall have all qualifications, powers and duties of a Board
member, but shall not vote except to break a tie.
C. Functions and powers.
(1) Meetings. The Board shall meet annually at any time during the
forty-five-day period beginning on the fourth Monday in April no
sooner than seven days after the last day which the assessment roll
is open for examination under § 70.45, Wis. Stats. The Board,
through its Clerk, shall establish its meeting hours and location
pursuant to § 70.47(3)(b), Wis. Stats. A majority shall constitute a
quorum, and a majority vote of a quorum shall be required to raise
or lower the Assessor's valuation of any property. Two members
may hold an evidentiary hearing, but no member may vote or
constitute part of a quorum for purposes of determining an
assessment unless the member attended the hearing of the
evidence, or received a transcript or a mechanical recording of the
hearing not less than five days prior to the meeting and read such
transcript or listened to such recording, or received a copy of a
§ 18-3 MONONA CODE § 18-3
1:16
§ 18-4. Transit Commission.
summary of the hearing and all exceptions thereto not less than
five days prior to the meeting at which the determination is made.
[Amended 8-6-2018 by Ord. No. 7-18-708]
(2) Duties. The Board shall have the functions and duties prescribed by
the Wisconsin Statutes, particularly § 70.47 thereof.
D. Clerk. The City Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Board. The Clerk may
not vote. The Clerk shall keep an accurate record of all Board
proceedings.
E. Income and expense records. [Added 5-15-2017 by Ord. No.
5-17-687]
(1) Requirement to supply information. No person may appear before
the Board of Review, testify to the Board by telephone or object to a
valuation if that valuation was made by the Assessor or the objector
using the income method, unless no later than seven days before
the first meeting of the Board of Review the person supplies to the
Assessor all of the information about income and expenses, as
specified in the manual under § 73.03(2a), Wis. Stats., that the
Assessor requests. [Amended 8-6-2018 by Ord. No. 7-18-708]
(2) Confidentiality of information. Whenever the Assessor, in the
performance of his or her duties, requests and obtains income and
expense information pursuant to § 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., or any
successor statute thereto, such income and expense information
that is provided to the Assessor shall be held confidential by the
Assessor; except, however, that such information may be disclosed
to and used by persons in the discharge of duties imposed by law;
in the discharge of duties imposed by office, including, but not
limited to, use by the Assessor in performance of official duties of
the Assessor's office and use by the Board of Assessors and Board
of Review in performance of their official duties; or pursuant to
order of a court. Income and expense information provided to the
Assessor under § 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., unless a court
determines that it is inaccurate, is, pursuant to § 70.47(7)(af), Wis.
Stats., not subject to the right of inspection and copying under
§ 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
A. Composition. The Commission shall consist of the Mayor or his or her
designee and two Council members (both of whom shall share the
Chairmanship of the Commission) and four citizens, all of whom may
vote. The Mayor may appoint himself or herself as one of the Common
Council members without being subject to confirmation by the Council.
The Mayor, if not appointed as a full member, and the City
Administrator or designee shall be an ex officio nonvoting member of
the Commission, and the City Administrator or designee shall serve as
its secretary.
§ 18-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-4
1:17
B. Appointments. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(1) Council member. The Council members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. The
Council members shall each serve a one-year term commencing the
third Tuesday of April of each year or until his or her successors are
appointed and confirmed by the Council.
(2) Citizen members. The four citizen members of the Commission
shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the
Council. Each citizen member shall be appointed for a two-year
term beginning the third Tuesday of April.
C. Functions and powers. The Commission shall have the following
functions and powers:
(1) It shall be the general duty of the Commission to develop and
recommend to the Common Council policies on the various
elements of transportation and transportation facilities for the
purpose of providing for the safe, efficient and economical
movement of persons and goods in the City of Monona and the
metropolitan area of service and recommendations for the
purchase of vehicles. These elements shall be limited to the
operation of mass transportation, bus and/or taxi vehicles and all
matters usual or necessary to operate transportation by bus for
disabled persons. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(2) Supervise and direct the expenditure of the transit budget with
authority:
(a) By the Commission Chairman, to authorize emergency
mechanical repairs for transit equipment up to $1,000.
(b) By the Commission, to authorize repairs for any transit
equipment owned by the City up to a maximum amount of
$5,000 with the written consent of the Mayor.
(c) By the Commission, to generally amend line items [other than
those discussed in Subsection C(2)(a) and (b) above] within the
transit budget up to $1,000, provided no changes are made in
the amount committed to regular urban service or specialized
services.
(3) On or before September 1 of each year, submit a budget to the
Finance and Personnel Committee to carry out existing policies of
the Council with alternatives for suggested changes. [Amended
10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(4) Report to the Mayor and Council within 45 days after the close of
each calendar quarter upon the financial status of the regular
urban bus service and specialized services.
§ 18-4 MONONA CODE § 18-5
1:18
§ 18-5. Senior Citizens Committee. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 9-17-689]
§ 18-6. Library Board.
A. Composition. The Committee shall consist of seven citizens, one of
whom may be a Council member, all of whom may vote. The Mayor and
City Administrator or their designees shall be ex officio nonvoting
members of the Committee.
B. Appointment; term of office.
(1) Council member. If the Mayor chooses to appoint a Council
member, the Mayor shall appoint the Council member for a oneyear
term commencing the third Tuesday of April. The appointment
of the Council member shall be subject to Council confirmation.
(2) Citizen members. The Committee members shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. The terms shall
be for three years beginning the third Tuesday of April and shall be
staggered so that not more than two such regular appointments are
made annually.
C. Functions and powers. The Committee shall investigate the needs of
senior citizens of the City, shall develop programs and services
specifically to serve senior citizens, shall provide public information
regarding senior citizens' programs and services to the people of the
City and to the Council, and shall have such other duties as prescribed
by the Common Council.
A. Composition. The Library Board shall consist of the School District
Administrator (or his or her designee) and six citizen members, one of
whom shall be a Council member, all of whom may vote. The Mayor and
City Administrator or their designees shall be ex officio nonvoting
members of the Board.
B. Appointment; term of office.
(1) Council member. The Mayor shall appoint the Council member for a
one-year term commencing the third Tuesday of April. The
appointment of the Council member is subject to confirmation by
the Council. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(2) Citizen members. The citizen members shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, for terms of three
years beginning July 1. The term of citizen members shall be
staggered so that not more than two such regular appointments are
made annually.
(3) School district member. The Monona Grove School District
Superintendent or his or her designee shall be appointed to the
Board by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, for a
§ 18-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-6
1:19
§ 18-7. Public Safety Committee. [Amended 6-17-2013 by Ord. No.
06-13-646; 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
term of three years. The term of office on the Board shall begin July
1.
C. Functions and powers. The Board shall have the power outlined in
Chapter 43, Wis. Stats.
A. Composition. The Committee shall consist of two Council members, one
of whom shall be Chair, six citizens, and one member of the Police and
Fire Commission, all of whom may vote. The Mayor and City
Administrator or their designees shall be ex officio nonvoting members
of the Committee. The Committee shall hear appeals pursuant to the
City's Fire Prevention Code. The Committee may adopt written notes
outlining the procedure for processing such appeals.
B. Appointment; term of office.
(1) Council members. The Council members shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. The term of office on
the Committee shall be for one year beginning the third Tuesday of
April.
(2) Citizen members. The six citizen members shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. The terms of
citizen members shall be three years beginning the third Tuesday
of April and shall be staggered so that not more than two such
regular appointments are made annually.
(3) Police and Fire Commission member. A member of the Public
Safety Committee shall be selected by the Police and Fire
Commission for a term of one year beginning the third Tuesday of
April, subject to confirmation by the Council. [Amended 2-5-2018
by Ord. No. 1-18-694]
C. Functions and powers.
(1) The Committee shall be advisory to the Common Council.
(2) The Committee shall review and recommend ordinances affecting
public safety to the Common Council.
(3) The Committee shall review and recommend ordinances and
policies relating to the organization and operation of the Police and
Fire Departments and the emergency medical service units.
(4) The Committee shall not possess the functions or the powers
prescribed for a police and fire commission in §§ 62.13(3), (4)(a),
(5) and (7), Wis. Stats., including but not limited to hiring, firing,
disciplining or promotion of personnel; nor shall the Committee
conduct any hearing or other quasi-judicial proceeding. None of the
functions and powers in this subsection shall be construed to
§ 18-6 MONONA CODE § 18-7
1:20
§ 18-8. Landmarks Commission.
include the functions and powers of the Police and Fire
Commission.
(5) The Committee shall hear appeals pursuant to the City's Fire
Prevention Code. The Committee may adopt written notes outlining
the procedure for processing such appeals.
(6) The Committee shall establish and modify all fees and charges of
the emergency medical services other than the base transport fee
at a minimum of once annually. Said fees shall approximate the cost
incurred by the City to obtain, administer and provide such goods
and services.
A. Composition. The Commission shall consist of one Common Council
member who, at the direction of the Mayor, shall chair the Commission
and six citizens, all of whom may vote. The Mayor and City
Administrator or their designees shall be ex officio nonvoting members
of the Commission. [Amended 9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 9-16-682;
3-5-2018 by Ord. No. 3-18-697]
B. Appointment; term of office. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
9-17-689; 3-5-2018 by Ord. No. 3-18-697]
(1) Council member. The Mayor shall appoint the Council member,
subject to confirmation by the Council, during April for the duration
of his or her current term of office on the Common Council. The
term of office on the Commission shall begin on the third Tuesday
of April.
(2) Citizen members. The six citizen members shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, during April for
terms of three years beginning on the third Tuesday of April. The
terms of the citizen members shall be staggered so that not more
than two such regular appointments are made annually. All
Commission members shall have, to the highest extent practicable,
a known interest, competence, or knowledge in historic
preservation. To the extent available in the community, the local
government shall appoint professional members from disciplines of
architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology,
or other historic preservation related disciplines such as urban
planning, American studies, American civilization, or cultural
geography.
C. Functions and powers. The Landmarks Commission may designate as a
landmark or landmark site any site, natural or improved, including any
building, improvement or structure located thereon, or any area of
particular historical, architectural or cultural significance to the City,
such as historic structures or sites, after following the criteria listed in
§ 480-20. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
§ 18-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-9
1:21
§ 18-9. Police and Fire Commission. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 9-17-689]
The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall consist of five citizens,
three of whom shall constitute a quorum. The Mayor shall annually, between
the last Monday of April and the first Monday of May, appoint in writing,
to be filed with the Secretary of the Board, one member for a term of five
years. No appointment shall be made which will result in more than three
members of the Board belonging to the same political party. The Board shall
keep a record of its proceedings.
§ 18-10. Community Media Committee. [Amended 10-6-2014 by
Ord. No. 8-14-665]
A. Composition. The Committee shall consist of one Council member and
eight citizen members and one member representing the Monona
Grove School District. The Mayor and City Administrator shall be ex
officio nonvoting members of the Committee.
B. Appointments. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(1) Council member. The Council member of the Committee shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. The
Council member shall serve for a one-year term commencing the
third Tuesday of April of each year or until his or her successor is
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. The Council
member shall serve as Chair of the Committee.
(2) Citizen members. The eight citizen members shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. The terms of the
citizen members shall be for three years beginning the third
Tuesday of April and shall be staggered so that not more than two
such appointments are made annually.
(3) Monona Grove School District member. The Monona Grove School
District Superintendent or his or her designee shall be appointed to
the Committee by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the
Council, for a term of three years beginning the third Tuesday of
April.
C. Duties and responsibilities. The Community Media Committee is
established to advise and assist the Media Coordinator in the carrying
out of his/her duties. The Committee shall perform the responsibilities
and duties assigned by the Common Council, including but not limited
to:
(1) Coordinate with the Administrator to assure the general health of
broadband telecommunications, radio and other media outlets in
the community.
(2) Monitor and review programming provided over the community
access television and radio and make recommendations to users
§ 18-9 MONONA CODE § 18-10
1:22
§ 18-11. Community Development Authority.
§ 18-12. Park and Recreation Board.
especially with respect to public access and/or local origination
programming. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(3) Recommending the purchase of equipment to upgrade the City's
community access television and radio. [Amended 10-16-2017 by
Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(4) Promoting the use of the citizen access channel over the
community access television, radio and other media outlets and
related programming.4
(5) Form subcommittees as needed.
A. Creation and composition. There is hereby created a Community
Development Authority for the City, with membership as provided in
§ 66.1335(2), Wis. Stats.
B. Appointment; term of office. The members of the Authority shall be
appointed by the Mayor as provided in § 66.1335, Wis. Stats.
C. Functions and powers. The Authority shall have all of the functions and
powers set forth in § 66.1335(4), Wis. Stats., except that the Authority
shall not have or exercise the powers of the City Plan Commission
under § 62.23, Wis. Stats.
D. Authority to report to Council. The Authority shall make monthly and
annual reports to the Council on the actual and contemplated activities
of the Authority.
A. Composition. The Park and Recreation Board shall consist of two
Council members and seven citizen members. The Mayor and City
Administrator shall be ex officio nonvoting members of the Board.
B. Appointments.5
(1) Council members. The Council members of the Board shall be
appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the Council. The
Council members shall serve for a one-year term commencing the
third Tuesday of April of each year or until their successors are
appointed and confirmed by the Council. One of the Council
members shall be designated by the Mayor to serve as Chair of the
Board.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 18-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-12
1:23
(2) Citizen members. The seven citizen members shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. The terms of the
citizen members shall be three years beginning the third Tuesday
of April and shall be staggered so that not more than two such
appointments are made annually.
C. Duties and responsibilities. The Board shall have the following duties
and responsibilities, which shall be advisory except as otherwise
provided:
(1) To review and recommend to the Council policies necessary for the
governance of the City parks and recreation facilities and
programs, which shall take into consideration and attempt to
provide for the social, physical and cultural well-being of the
citizens of the City.
(2) To review and recommend to the Finance and Personnel Committee
all budgetary, revenue and expenditure proposals relating to park
and recreation facilities and programs.
(3) To review and recommend to the Community Recreation Director
rules and regulations necessary for the effective management of
the City parks and recreation facilities and programs.
(4) To perform such duties and have such responsibilities as the
Council shall from time to time, by ordinance, resolution or by law,
direct.
(5) The Park and Recreation Board shall be designated as the official
tree governing committee to review and make recommendations
regarding tree planting, maintenance, removal, landscaping and
enforcement.6
6. Editor's Note: See also, Ch. 411, Trees.
§ 18-12 MONONA CODE § 18-12
1:24
ARTICLE II
Committees
§ 18-13. License Review Committee.
§ 18-14. Finance and Personnel Committee.
A. Composition. The Committee shall consist of one Council member and
four citizens, all of whom may vote. The Mayor, City Administrator and
City Clerk or their designees shall be ex officio nonvoting members of
the Committee.
B. Appointment; term of office.7
(1) Council member. The Council member shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, for a one-year term
beginning the third Tuesday of April.
(2) Citizen members. The citizen members shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, for terms of two
years beginning the third Tuesday of April. The terms of the citizen
members shall be staggered so that not more than two such
appointments are made annually. Initial members may be
appointed to one-year terms if necessary to accomplish the
staggered terms.
C. Functions and powers. The Committee has the responsibility and duty
to review and examine all applications for the granting of all fermented
malt beverage licenses and intoxicating liquor licenses, to receive all
recommendations relating thereto from staff, and to review and make
recommendations as to the subsequent granting of all such licenses by
the Council. The Committee shall also review and examine all
applications for licenses or permits required in various chapters of this
Code (see Chapters 63, Article IV, 145, 159, 191, 198, 245, 238, 272,
Article I, 296, 303, 328, 395, Article II, 404 and 457), except where the
City Clerk is specifically empowered to issue such license or permit
without review and has done so. All other license or permit applications
shall be reviewed by the Committee, and the Committee shall
recommend issuance or denial to the Council. The Committee shall also
review the City's policies and procedures regarding licensing and make
recommendations regarding amendment of those policies and
procedures to the Council.
A. Composition. The Committee shall consist of the Mayor, who shall be
the Chairperson, and two Council members, all of whom may vote. The
City Administrator or his or her designee shall be an ex officio,
nonvoting member of the Committee.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 18-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-14
1:25
§ 18-15. Public Works Committee.
B. Appointment; term of office. The members of the Committee shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. The
members shall serve one-year terms commencing the third Tuesday of
April of each year.8
C. Functions and powers. The Committee shall have the following
functions and powers:
(1) To review the audit procedures of the City and to supervise
implementation of recommendations made by the City's auditors.
(2) To investigate various options for borrowing funds for capital and
outlay expenditures.
(3) To recommend appropriate depositories for City funds.
(4) To review claims against the City, whether budgeted or
unbudgeted.
(5) To review the City's accounting procedures.
(6) At its option, to review all ordinances and resolutions having a
fiscal impact on the City.
(7) To receive and review the executive budget from the Mayor and
City Administrator and to receive comments from the public and
advisory boards, commissions and committees on the contents of
the budget, and to propose a legislative budget to the Council.
(8) To review recommendations for revenue generation by the City,
including investment of City funds.
(9) To review all franchises granted by the City.
(10) To review any intergovernmental contracts entered into by the City.
(11) To review all personnel matters, including establishment of wage
and salary schedules for management and unclassified employees.
Such matters as may be under the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Police and Fire Commission are excluded from this review.
(12) To review all labor contracts and labor relations policies of the City.
A. Election to dispense with a board of public works. The City hereby
elects not to be governed by the provisions of § 62.14, Wis. Stats.,
relating to a board of public works. The City hereby vests all authority
and power of a board of public works in the Public Works Committee.
The Chairperson of the Committee shall not vote except to break a tie.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 18-14 MONONA CODE § 18-15
1:26
B. Composition. The Committee shall consist of two Council members and
seven citizen members. The Mayor, City Administrator and City
Engineer shall be ex officio nonvoting members of the Committee.
C. Appointments.9
(1) Council members. The Council members of the Committee shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. The
Council members shall serve for a one-year term commencing the
third Tuesday of April of each year or until their successors are
appointed and confirmed by the Council. One of the Council
members shall be designated by the Mayor to serve as Chairperson
of the Committee.
(2) Citizen members. The seven citizen members of the Committee
shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the
Council. The terms of the first citizen Committee members shall be
staggered so that three are appointed for one-year terms, two are
appointed for two-year terms, and two are appointed for three-year
terms. Thereafter each citizen Committee member shall be
appointed for a two-year term commencing the third Tuesday of
April of the year of appointment and shall serve until his or her
successor is appointed and confirmed by the Council.
D. Powers and duties. The Committee shall have the following powers and
duties:
(1) Powers and duties of the Public Works Committee. The Committee
shall have all of the powers and duties of the board of public works
as set forth in § 62.14, Wis. Stats., including, but not limited to,
control of construction and maintenance of streets, alleys,
sidewalks, gutters, storm sewers and other public works projects.
(2) Recommendations on transportation issues. To review and make
recommendations to the Council on all transportation-related
topics, including, but not limited to, bus service, taxis, bicycles and
all forms of public and/or mass transit service.
(3) Review of Official Map. To review and make recommendations to
the Council regarding amendments or other revisions of the Official
Map of the City, including street names and installation of traffic
control signs and devices.
(4) Management of utilities. To review and report to the Council on the
general operation of all municipal utilities.10
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
10.Editor's Note: Former § 2-4-23, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 8-14-663.
§ 18-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-16
1:27
§ 18-16. Distinguished Service Award Committee. [Added 2-1-2010
by Ord. No. 1-10-610; amended 1-21-2014 by Ord. No. 1-14-655;
4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 3-15-670]
§ 18-17. Committee on Sustainability. [Added 09-20-2010 by Ord.
No. 8-10-616]
A. Composition. The Committee shall consist of the most recent former
Mayor who is willing and able to serve and four citizens, all of whom
may vote. The City Clerk or his/her designee shall be an ex officio
nonvoting member of the Committee.
B. Appointment; term of office.
(1) Citizen members. The citizen members shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, for terms of three
years beginning the third Tuesday of April. The terms of the citizen
members shall be staggered so that not more than two such
appointments are made annually. Initial members may be
appointed to one-year terms if necessary to accomplish the
staggered terms. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
C. Functions and powers. The Committee has the responsibility to review
citizen volunteer length and breadth of service to the community.
Awards are considered for all citizen volunteers with at least 10 years of
cumulative service. Recommendations for the award for three
individuals are considered at an annual meeting to be held no later than
60 days prior to the award event. Distinguished service awards are
presented at the City's annual Appreciation Event and consists of a
lapel pin specially designed for this purpose and a certificate of
appreciation. The Committee also makes recommendations for the
Mayoral Award.
A. Composition. The Committee on Sustainability shall consist of two
Council members and six citizen members. The Mayor and City
Administrator or their designees shall be ex officio nonvoting members
of the Committee. [Amended 9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 9-16-682;
11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 11-17-692]
B. Appointments. [Amended 9-19-2016 by Ord. No. 9-16-682;
10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(1) Council members. The Council members of the Committee shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. The
Council members shall serve for a one-year term commencing the
third Tuesday of April of each year or until their successors are
appointed and confirmed by the Council. One of the Council
members shall be designated by the Mayor to serve as Chairperson
of the Committee.
(2) Citizen members. The six citizen members of the Committee shall
be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council.
§ 18-16 MONONA CODE § 18-17
1:28
§ 18-18. Facilities Committee. [Added 12-03-2012 by Ord. No.
11-12-640]
The terms of the citizen members shall be three years beginning
the third Tuesday of April and shall be staggered so that not
more than three such appointments are made annually. [Amended
11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 11-17-692]
C. Duties and responsibilities. The Committee shall have the following
duties and responsibilities, which shall be advisory except as otherwise
provided:
(1) To review and recommend to the Council policies and programs
relating to sustainability.
(2) To review and recommend to the Finance and Personnel Committee
all budgetary, revenue and expenditure proposals relating to such
policies and programs.
(3) To perform such duties and have such responsibilities as the
Council shall from time to time, by ordinance, resolution or by law,
direct.
A. Composition. The Facilities Committee shall consist of one Council
member, one staff member and six citizen members, consisting of
members with experience in HVAC, electrical, plumbing, construction,
architecture, civil engineering or landscape work. The Council member
shall serve as Chair and shall not vote except in the event of a tie. The
Mayor and City Administrator shall be ex officio nonvoting members of
the Committee.
B. Appointments. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(1) Council member. The Council member of the Committee shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. The
Council member shall serve for a one-year term commencing the
third Tuesday of April of each year or until his/her successor is
appointed and confirmed by the Council.
(2) Citizen members. The six citizen members of the Committee shall
be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council.
The terms of the citizen members shall be three years, beginning
the third Tuesday of April and staggered each year.
C. Duties and responsibilities. The Committee shall have the following
duties and responsibilities, which shall be advisory except as otherwise
provided:
(1) To provide direction and support, from inception to completion, to
all City committees and departments involved in facility-related
projects.
§ 18-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-18
1:29
§ 18-19. Tourism Commission. [Added 10-3-2016 by Ord. No.
9-16-684]
(2) To use design and construction experience to assist in the
completion of the final design and budget.
(3) To monitor projects through bidding, construction, project
closeout, and assist with one-year punch if requested.
(4) To review projects for energy efficiency.
(5) To ensure that each project follows the "facility development
process," which is a list of procedures approved by the
Committee.11
(6) To assist in the creation of a preventive maintenance program and
maintenance cost control.
A. Composition. The Tourism Commission shall consist of five members,
one of whom may be a Council member and one of whom shall
represent the Wisconsin hotel and motel industry. Members shall be as
appointed under Subsection B. The Mayor and City Administrator or
their designees shall be ex officio nonvoting members of the
Commission.
B. Appointment; term of office.
(1) Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and
shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the members of the
Common Council who are present when the vote is taken.
(2) Commissioners shall serve for one-year terms beginning the third
Tuesday in April and may be reappointed.
(3) The Commission shall meet regularly, and from among its
members, it shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and
Secretary.
C. Functions and powers.
(1) The Commission shall coordinate tourism promotion and tourism
development for the City as set forth in § 66.0615, Wis. Stats.
(2) The Commission shall monitor the collection of room taxes in the
City, receive room tax revenue from the City and use it for tourism
promotion and tourism development in the City. The Commission
shall not use any of the room tax revenue to construct or develop a
lodging facility.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 18-18 MONONA CODE § 18-19
1:30
(3) The Commission shall review and recommend ordinances,
expenditures of room taxes, and policies relating to the promotion
of tourism in Monona to visitors and tourism development.
(4) The Commission shall report annually to the City Treasurer the
purposes and amounts for which room tax revenues were spent.
(5) The Commission shall report any room tax delinquencies or
inaccurate reporting to the municipality.
(6) The Commission shall contract with a qualified organization under
§ 66.0615, Wis. Stats., to perform the functions of a tourism entity.
§ 18-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-19
1:31

ARTICLE III
Rules for Boards, Commissions and Committees
§ 18-20. Classification of boards, commissions and committees.
A. Classifications. There are four types of review bodies established by the
Council. They are:
(1) Standing committees, commissions and boards.
(2) Nonstanding committees, commissions and boards.
(3) Special (statutory) boards and commissions.
(4) Ad hoc committees.
B. Definitions of classifications.
(1) Standing committees, commissions and boards. Standing
committees, commissions and boards are those bodies that must be
chaired by the Mayor or a Council member and which typically
meet at least on a monthly basis.12
(2) Nonstanding committees, commissions and boards. Nonstanding
committees, commissions and boards are those bodies for which
this Code does not require that the Mayor or a Council member
serve as chair of the group.
(3) Special boards and commissions. Special boards and commissions
are those bodies whose composition, duties and functions are
specifically prescribed by the Wisconsin Statutes.
(4) Ad hoc committees. Ad hoc committees are committees created for
a special purpose and for a limited duration of time. They may be
created and their members appointed by the Mayor with Council
confirmation. When the ad hoc committee has fulfilled the charge
given to it by the Mayor, the committee shall be disbanded.
C. Classification of existing committees, commissions and boards. The
existing committees, commissions and boards of the Council are
classified as follows:
(1) Standing committees, commissions and boards:
(a) Plan Commission.
(b) Finance and Personnel Committee.
(c) License Review Committee.
(d) Public Works Committee.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 18-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-20
1:33
§ 18-21. Meetings.
(e) Public Safety Committee.13
(f) Parks and Recreation Board.
(g) Sustainability Committee.
(h) Facilities Committee.
(2) Nonstanding committees, commissions and boards:14
(a) Senior Citizens Committee.
(b) Landmarks Commission.
(c) Community Media Committee.
(d) Distinguished Service Committee.
(3) Special boards and commissions:
(a) Board of Review.
(b) Police and Fire Commission.
(c) Zoning Board of Appeals.
(d) Library Board.
(e) Transit Commission.
(f) Community Development Authority.
(g) Tourism Commission.15
A. Standing committees, commissions and boards. All standing
committees, commissions and boards shall meet at least monthly at
regularly scheduled days and times. Meetings shall be noticed by the
City Clerk in accordance with Chapter 19, Wis. Stats. Special meetings
may be called by the chair and any two committee, commission or board
members upon written request therefor to the City Clerk.
B. Nonstanding committees, commissions and boards; special boards and
commissions; ad hoc committees. All nonstanding committees,
commissions and boards; special boards and commissions; and ad hoc
committees may meet on a monthly basis at regularly scheduled days or
times or at the call of the chair. Meetings shall be noticed by the City
Clerk in accordance with Chapter 19, Wis. Stats. Special meetings may
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
15.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 18-20 MONONA CODE § 18-21
1:34
§ 18-22. Appointment of alternate members.
§ 18-23. Attendance standard.
Members appointed to Common Council committees or to any other
standing City board, commission or committee are required to attend a
minimum of two-thirds of the meetings of their respective bodies in each
six-month period, unless excused by the membership of their body. Failure
to comply with this section may result in the removal and replacement of
the official found to be in noncompliance.
be called by any two committee, commission or board members upon
written request therefor submitted to the City Clerk.
C. Quorum. Every commission, committee or board is deemed to have a
quorum present for the purpose of transacting business if at least 51%
of the total number of authorized voting members are present, unless
this Code or statutes require a different quorum, in which case such
provisions shall apply.16
D. Records and reports. Every commission, committee or board shall keep
a written summary of its proceedings and shall file copies of same with
the City Clerk.
A. Unless otherwise provided by statute or ordinance, the Mayor, subject
to confirmation by the Council, may appoint citizens to serve as
alternates to a committee, commission or board. A citizen member
appointed as an alternate shall act with full power only when a member
of the committee, commission or board refuses to vote because of
conflict of interest or is absent.
B. If more than one alternate is appointed, the Mayor shall designate who
shall serve as first alternate, second alternate, etc.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 18-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-23
1:35
Chapter 29
CITATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See § 1-4.
§ 29-1. Method of enforcement.
The City of Monona hereby elects to use the citation method of enforcement
of ordinances. All City law enforcement officers and other City personnel
charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this Code are
hereby authorized pursuant to § 66.0113(1)(a), Wis. Stats., to issue citations
for violations of this Code, including ordinances for which a statutory
counterpart exists.
§ 29-2. Information contained in citation.17
The information required shall be that prescribed by the Wisconsin Uniform
Municipal Citation Form or the state-approved Non-Traffic Citation Form
(TRACS).
§ 29-3. Form of citation.
The form of the citation to be used by the City of Monona is on file in the City
Clerk's office and is adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein.
§ 29-4. Schedule of deposits.
§ 29-5. Issuance of citation.
A. The schedule of cash deposits shall be established for use with citations
issued under this chapter by the Common Council according to the
penalty provision of this Code.
B. Deposits shall be made to the Clerk of Municipal Court, who shall
provide a receipt therefor.18
A. Law enforcement officer. Any law enforcement officer may issue
citations authorized under this chapter.
B. City officials. The following City officials may issue citations with
respect to those specified ordinances which are directly related to their
official responsibilities:19
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 18-23 MONONA CODE § 29-5
1:36
§ 29-6. Procedure.
Section 66.0113(3), Wis. Stats., relating to violators' options and procedure
on default, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
§ 29-7. Nonexclusivity.
§ 29-8. Court costs. [Amended 1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 12-08-590]
The court costs for Municipal Court shall be assessed in the amount
established by state statute. If the applicable statute establishes a range of
court costs, the costs shall be the maximum amount allowed by the statute.
Chapter 36
CITY GOVERNMENT
§ 36-1. City government.
The City of Monona is a body corporate and politic, with the powers and
privileges of a municipality at common law and conferred by Chapter 62,
(1) Any law enforcement officer.
(2) Fire Chief or Fire Inspector.
(3) Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector, HVAC
Inspector.
(4) Weed Commissioner.
(5) City Administrator.
(6) Director of Public Works.
(7) Emergency Management Director.
(8) City Planner/Economic Development Director.
(9) Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Other ordinance. Adoption of this chapter does not preclude the
Common Council from adopting any other ordinance or providing for
the enforcement of any other law or ordinance relating to the same or
other matter.
B. Other remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude
the City or any authorized officer from proceeding under any other
ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method to enforce any
ordinance, regulation or order.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 29-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-1
1:37
Wis. Stats., other acts of the Legislature, the Constitution of the State of
Wisconsin and Charter Ordinance 7-68-327.
Chapter 47
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 18.
City government — See Ch. 36.
§ 47-1. Spring election.
The spring elections for judicial and municipal officers shall be held on the
first Tuesday in April.
§ 47-2. General elections.
The general election prescribed in the Constitution shall be held on the
Tuesday next succeeding the first Monday in November in even-numbered
years.
§ 47-3. Nonpartisan primary.
Candidates for elective City offices shall be nominated by a nonpartisan
primary conducted pursuant to § 8.11, Wis. Stats. Such candidate shall file
with his or her nomination papers a declaration that he or she will qualify
for the office if elected. Nomination papers shall be signed by electors as
required in § 8.10, Wis. Stats. If the number of candidates for an elective
City office does not exceed two times the number to be elected to such
office, no primary shall be held for such office and the names of such
candidates shall be printed on the official ballot for the ensuing election.
§ 47-4. Registration.
All electors for all elections shall be required to be registered pursuant to
§ 6.27, Wis. Stats.
§ 47-5. Appointment of alternative election officials.
The City Clerk shall have the discretion to hire election officials to work less
than a full day on the day of the election.
Chapter 54
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 54-1. Policy and purpose.
§ 36-1 MONONA CODE § 54-1
1:38
§ 54-2. Emergency Planning Committee.
§ 54-3. Emergency Management Director.20
A. To ensure that the City of Monona will be prepared to cope with
emergencies resulting from man-made or natural disasters, an
emergency management organization consisting of the Public Safety
Committee and Emergency Management Director is created to carry
out all emergency functions, other than functions for which military
forces are primarily responsible, to minimize and repair injury and
damage resulting from fire, tornado or other natural or man-made
causes.
B. To ensure that all civil emergency functions of the City are to be
coordinated to the maximum extent practicable with existing services
and facilities of the City and with comparable functions of the federal,
state, county and other political subdivisions, and of various private
agencies, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be
made of manpower, resources and facilities for dealing with any
disaster that may occur.
C. Chapter 323, Wis. Stats., is herein incorporated in this chapter by
reference.
A. Composition. The Emergency Planning Committee shall consist of the
Mayor and the Council's Public Safety Committee.
B. Appointment. The Committee members shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common Council.
C. Duties of the Emergency Planning Committee. The Emergency Planning
Committee shall be an advisory and planning group and shall advise the
Mayor, Emergency Management Director, and the Common Council on
all matters pertaining to emergency management. The Emergency
Planning Committee shall meet upon the call of the Chairperson.
A. Appointment. The Emergency Management Director shall be appointed
by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common Council, and shall
receive such salary as may be authorized by the Common Council. The
Emergency Management Director shall be appointed in odd-numbered
years for a two-year term of office, commencing on May 1 of the year of
appointment.
B. Duties and authority of the Emergency Management Director.
(1) The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration and operation of the emergency management
organization, subject to the control of the Mayor and the Common
Council.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 54-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-3
1:39
§ 54-4. Utilization of existing services and facilities.
In preparing and executing the disaster plan, the Director, with the full
cooperation of all City officers and personnel, shall utilize the services,
equipment, supplies and facilities of the existing departments and agencies
of the City to the maximum extent practicable.
§ 54-5. Emergency regulations.
Whenever necessary to meet a civil emergency for which adequate
regulations have not been adopted by the Common Council, the Mayor
(and, in his or her absence, in order, the Council President or the senior
member of the Common Council available) may by proclamation promulgate
and enforce such orders, rules and regulations relating to the conduct of
persons and the use of property as shall be necessary to protect the public
peace, health and safety, and preserve lives and property, and to ensure
the cooperation necessary in civil emergency activities. Such proclamations
shall be posted in a public place and may be rescinded by the Common
Council by resolution at any time.
§ 54-6. Mutual aid agreements.
The Emergency Management Director may enter into mutual aid
agreements with other political subdivisions, subject to approval by the
Common Council.
§ 54-7. Declaration of emergencies.
(2) The Director shall coordinate all activities for emergency
management within the City and shall maintain liaison and
cooperate with emergency management agencies of other political
subdivisions and of the County.
(3) The Director shall participate in county and state emergency
management activities upon request of the Mayor.
(4) The Director shall maintain a comprehensive disaster plan for the
City of Monona and shall present such plan to the Common Council
for its approval. All municipal agencies and emergency forces of
the City shall perform the duties and functions assigned by the
disaster plan.
(5) The Director shall have such additional authority, duties and
responsibilities as are authorized in this chapter and as may from
time to time be required by the Common Council.
A. Upon declaration by the Governor, the Mayor, the Emergency
Management Director in the absence of the Mayor, or the Common
Council of a state of emergency, the Emergency Management Director
shall issue all necessary proclamations as to the existence of such state
§ 54-3 MONONA CODE § 54-7
1:40
Chapter 63
FINANCE AND TAXATION
of emergency and shall issue such disaster warnings or alerts as shall
be required in the Disaster Plan.
B. The emergency management organization shall take action in
accordance with the Disaster Plan only after the declaration of an
emergency and the issuance of official disaster warnings. Such state of
emergency shall continue until terminated by the issuing authority with
the provision that any such declaration not issued by the Governor may
be terminated at the discretion of the Common Council.
§ 54-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-7
1:41

ARTICLE I
Finance
[Adopted as Title 3, Ch. 1, of the 1994 Code]
§ 63-1. Fee for returning checks with insufficient funds;
reimbursement of collection costs.
§ 63-2. Duplicate treasurer's bond eliminated.
§ 63-3. City budget system.
A. There shall be a fee as prescribed by Common Council for processing
checks made payable to the City that are returned because of
insufficient funds in the account in question.
B. Collection costs and attorneys' fees shall be added to the principal
amounts of unpaid bills owed to the City that are placed with collection
agencies.
A. Bond eliminated. The City of Monona elects not to give the bond on the
City Administrator in his or her capacity as City Treasurer-Finance
Director as provided for by § 70.67(1), Wis. Stats.
B. City liable for default of Treasurer. Pursuant to § 70.67(2), Wis. Stats.,
the City shall be obligated to pay, in case the City Treasurer shall fail to
do so, all state and county taxes required by law to be paid by such City
Treasurer to the County Treasurer.
A. Budget preparation.
(1) Budget schedule. The Finance Committee shall recommend and the
Council shall adopt a schedule for the preparation and
consideration of the budget for the next fiscal year. The budget
schedule shall include specific dates for:
(a) Completion of commission, committee and board consideration
of the budget;
(b) Public review by the Finance Committee on a consolidated
budget of expenditures and revenues;
(c) Common Council Committee of the Whole and public hearing
on the budget as recommended by the Finance Committee;
(d) A recommendation by the Finance Committee and action by
the Council for any referendum pertaining to the budget; and
(e) The public hearing on the budget as required by the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(2) Commission, committee, board and authority recommendations.
Each of the various boards, committees and commissions,
authorities and departments shall prepare a list of expenditures
§ 63-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-3
1:43
and anticipated revenues for the next fiscal year together with
recommended policy changes and priorities. Department heads
are encouraged to work closely with their respective commissions,
committees and boards, and the general public is to be encouraged
to participate in deliberations on the budget.
(3) Finance Committee deliberations. The Finance Committee shall
prepare a consolidated budget of expenditures and anticipated
revenues and hold a public review on the consolidated budget.
Department heads, commission chairs, and commission members
are to be encouraged to participate in the Finance Committee
deliberations and reviews.
(4) Council Committee of the Whole and hearing. The Common Council
shall convene as a Committee of the Whole to discuss the proposed
financial budget, recommended policy changes, and priorities as
recommended by the Finance Committee concurrently with a
public hearing.
(5) Recommendation for a referendum. The Finance Committee shall
recommend and the Common Council shall take action on any
request for a public referendum pertaining to the budget.
(6) Council public hearing. The Common Council shall hold a public
hearing on the budget in accordance with the Wisconsin Statutes
and Subsection C below.
B. Contents of budget.
(1) Indebtedness; appropriations; revenue. Such budget shall list all
existing indebtedness and all anticipated revenue from all sources
during the ensuing year and shall likewise list all proposed
appropriations for each committee, commission, authority and
department, and any activity accounts during the ensuing year.
(2) Actual and projected revenue and expenditures. Such budget shall
also show actual revenues and expenditures for the preceding year,
actual revenues and expenditures for not less than the first six
months of the current year and estimated revenues and
expenditures for the balance of the current year.
(3) Salaries. Such budget shall also show in a separate schedule the
proposed salary for each salaried employee of the City. This
schedule shall be considered part of the budget when adopted.
(4) Unexpended funds. Such budget shall also show for informational
purposes any anticipated, unexpended or unappropriated balances
and surpluses.
C. Public inspection and hearing.
(1) Applicability. This subsection pertains only to the Council public
hearing referred to in Subsection A(6) above.
§ 63-3 MONONA CODE § 63-3
1:44
§ 63-4. Changes in budget.
Upon written recommendation of the Mayor or a standing committee of
the Council, the Council may at any time, by a 2/3 vote of the entire
membership, transfer any portion of an unencumbered balance of an
appropriation to any other purpose or object. Notice of such transfer shall
be given by publication within 10 days thereafter in the official newspaper
of the City. However, transfers between budget line items shall not require
such approval, provided the total program expenditures are within the
parameters of the approved budget.
§ 63-5. City funds to be spent in accordance with appropriation.
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the City, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance
of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as
authorized by § 63-4 of this article. At the close of each fiscal year, any
unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund
and shall be subject to reappropriation, but appropriations may be made by
the Common Council, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in
furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will not be
completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in
force until the purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished
or abandoned.
§ 63-6. Fiscal year.
The calendar year shall be the fiscal year.
(2) Notice. A summary of such budget and notice of the place where
such budget is available for public inspection and notice of the time
and place for holding the public hearing thereon shall be published
in the official City newspaper at least 15 days prior to the time of
such public meeting. All notices and copies of the budget summary
shall indicate that a detailed budget is available for inspection at
the office of the City Clerk.
(3) Hearing. Not less than 15 days after the publication of the
proposed budget and the notice of hearing thereon, a public
hearing shall be held at the time and place stipulated, at which time
any resident or taxpayer of the City shall have an opportunity to be
heard on the proposed budget. The budget hearing may be
adjourned from time to time.
(4) Budget summary. Copies of the summary budget shall be available
to all who attend the public hearing or who make a specific request
following the above fifteen-day notice. Copies of the detailed
budget shall be made available to the press prior to the public
hearing, and at least three copies of the detailed budget shall be
available for the public at the hearing.
§ 63-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-7
1:45
§ 63-7. Public depositories.
The Common Council shall designate by resolution the public depository or
depositories within this state within which City funds shall be deposited,
and when the money is deposited in such depository in the name of the
City, the City Administrator or other designated City officials and bonding
company shall not be liable for such losses as are defined by state law.
The City Administrator shall invest and the interest arising therefrom shall
be paid into the City treasury. A copy of the resolution designating public
depositories shall be filed annually with the State Commissioner of Banking.
§ 63-8. Disbursements and financial claims.
A. General requirements. All disbursements from the City Treasurer in
satisfaction or payment of any bills, charges against the budget or other
financial claims against the City shall be made pursuant to § 66.0607,
Wis. Stats., except as modified or supplemented by this section or other
provision of this Code or the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Approvals required. The following approvals shall be required for
disbursements from the City treasury:
(1) Payments of each and every claim must be audited and approved by
the City Treasurer as a property charge against the treasury. The
Treasurer shall endorse his or her approval on each claim only after
having determined that the following conditions have been
complied with:21
(a) That funds are available therefor pursuant to the budget
approved by the Council.
(b) That the item or service covered by such claimant has been
duly authorized by the proper City official or department head.
(c) That the item or service has been actually supplied or rendered
in conformity to such authorization.
(d) That the claim is just and valid pursuant to law.
(e) That such proof and evidence necessary in the discretion of the
Treasurer to support the foregoing has been submitted.
(2) All claims submitted to and audited by the Treasurer pursuant to
Subsection B(1) above shall be submitted to the Finance
Committee for approval or disapproval. The Treasurer shall submit
a list of the bills, charges, appropriations and claims showing the
date of each claim, name and address of the claimant, purpose and
amount. The Finance Committee may request proof and evidence
to support the claim prior to its approval.22
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 63-7 MONONA CODE § 63-8
1:46
(3) Except as provided in Subsections G and H, payments made in any
other manner than prescribed in Subsection B(1) and (2) shall be
subject to the special vote and roll call requirements of this Code.
C. Facsimile signatures authorized.23
(1) The signatures of the Mayor, Administrator and Treasurer affixed
to order checks of the City shall be facsimile signatures of such
officers adopted by them and approved by the Council on motion.
The use of such facsimile signatures shall not relieve any of such
officials from any liability to which they are otherwise subject,
including the unauthorized use thereof.
(2) Upon enactment of this section and Council approval of facsimile
signatures adopted by the Mayor, Administrator and Treasurer, the
City Clerk shall file a certified copy of this Subsection C and of the
approved facsimile signatures with the public depositories of the
City.
D. Vouchers. All vouchers or orders against the City treasury shall be
signed by the City Treasurer, attesting that the provisions of Subsection
B have been complied with, except where the provisions of Subsection
B(3) apply.24
E. Bonds. The Clerk and Treasurer shall be covered by a fidelity bond of
not less than $5,000.
F. Tort claims. Compliance with the provisions of this section shall not
relieve any claimant from compliance with the provisions of § 62.25,
893.80 or 895.46, Wis. Stats.
G. Payment of regular wages or salaries. Payment of regular wages or
salaries pursuant to the budget and salary schedule adopted by the
Council shall be made by payroll, verified by the City Clerk under
Subsection B(1), and filed in time for payment on the regular payday.
The Clerk shall submit the schedule of salary and wage payments made
to the Finance Committee.
H. Investments. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
disbursements of City funds for purposes of investment under
§ 66.0603(1m), Wis. Stats.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 63-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-9
1:47
§ 63-9. Temporary investment of funds not immediately needed.25
The City Administrator and City Treasurer may invest any City funds not
immediately needed, pursuant to §§ 66.0603(1m) and 219.05, Wis. Stats.,
provided that investment of surplus funds in the local government pooled
investment or local government trust investment funds shall be subject to
prior approval under § 63-8B(1) and (2).
§ 63-10. Receiving money; receipt for same.
§ 63-11. Statement of real property status.26
The City Clerk or Treasurer are authorized to prepare a statement of real
property status form to be used to provide information often requested
for transfers of real property, such as the amount of outstanding special
assessments, deferred assessments, changes in assessments, amount of
taxes, outstanding water and sewer bills, current water and sewer bills,
contemplated improvements, floodplain status, violations of the building
and health codes and similar information. Any such information sought shall
be provided to the person requesting it on said form. A minimum of one
business day is required for preparation of a statement of real property
status. There shall be a fee as prescribed by the City's Fee Schedule for
compiling such information, to be paid at the time of the request being
made.
§ 63-12. Accounts receivable billing procedures.
Billings by the City may be paid within 30 days after billing without interest.
Thereafter, interest may be charged at the rate of 1 1/2% per month or any
fraction thereof until the following 15th day of November, except in the case
of ambulance billings. Bills not paid on or before the first day of November
shall have added to the total amount due 1 1/2% of said charges, which shall
A. The City Clerk, Treasurer or their designees shall not receive any
money into the treasury from any source except on account of taxes
levied and collected during the fiscal year for which he or she may then
be serving without giving a receipt therefor in the manner specified by
the Finance Committee.
B. Upon the payment of any money (except for taxes as herein provided),
the City Clerk, Treasurer or their designees shall make out a receipt in
duplicate for the money so received. The City Clerk, Treasurer or their
designees shall charge the amount thereof to the treasury and credit
the proper account. The payment of the money to any receiving agent of
the City or to the City or to the City Administrator shall be safeguarded
in such manner as the Common Council shall direct.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 63-9 MONONA CODE § 63-12
1:48
be entered on the tax roll as a special charge and become a lien upon real
estate.
§ 63-13. Annual audits.
§ 63-14. Liability of City for acts of agents.
No agent of the City having authority to employ labor or to purchase
materials, supplies or any other commodities may bind the City or incur any
indebtedness for which the City may become liable without approval of the
Council. Each such employment or purchase order shall be drawn against
a specific appropriation, the money for which shall be available in the City
treasury and not subject to any prior labor claims or material purchase
orders at the time when such employment is negotiated or purchase order
drawn. The City Administrator shall keep a record of such employment and
purchase orders and shall charge them against the proper appropriation.
§ 63-15. Preparation of tax roll and tax receipts.
A. A firm of certified public accountants shall be employed each year by
the City, subject to the confirmation of the Common Council, to conduct
a detailed audit of the City's financial transactions and its books, and to
assist the City Administrator in the management of the City's financial
affairs, including the City's public utilities. These auditors shall be
employed on a calendar-year basis.
B. The audit shall include a separate review of the financial records and a
statement of opinion on the financial reports together with a
management letter detailing improvements that can be made in the
financial administration of the City, the City Water Utility, the City
Sewer Utility and the City Stormwater Utility. If deemed necessary or
advisable by the Finance Committee, the audit contract may be
expanded to include an operational review of one or more aspects of the
City or City Water Utility, City Sewer Utility or City Stormwater Utility
operations.27
C. Copies of the completed audit report shall be transmitted to the Mayor
and Council members within 10 days of receipt. Copies will also be
placed on file in the Monona Library and with the City Clerk.
A. Tax roll preparation. Pursuant to § 70.65(2), Wis. Stats., the City
Treasurer shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the aggregate
amount of state, county, school and local taxes in a single column in the
roll opposite the parcel or tract of land against which the tax is levied
or, in the case of personal property, in a single column opposite the
name of the person against whom the tax is levied.28
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 63-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-15
1:49
§ 63-16. Purchases by City Administrator.
B. Time for payment and penalty. Real estate taxes shall be paid in
accordance with state law. Taxes may be paid in advance pursuant to
state law.
C. Receipt of tax monies. After noting the payment of taxes upon the tax
roll, the City Treasurer shall issue a signed receipt to the taxpayer, a
duplicate thereof to be left in the book of receipts. The receipt shall
show the aggregate amount of taxes in a single column and the
separate proportion or rate of taxes levied for state, county, local,
school or other purposes.29
A. Subject to the limitations contained in § 62.15, Wis. Stats., the City
Administrator is authorized and empowered to make the following
purchases in behalf of the City without the prior approval of the
Common Council:
(1) Office machines, maintenance equipment and services and other
specifically budgeted capital or operating items previously
approved in the budget in a sum not to exceed the budgeted
amount or $25,000 each, whichever is lesser;30
(2) Gasoline, road gravel, street patching material, salt, office supplies
and other recurring expenses needed in the usual and ordinary
operation of the City government and its several departments in a
sum not to exceed the budgeted amount for each such purchases;
(3) Supplies and miscellaneous equipment in a sum not to exceed the
budgeted amount.
B. The City Administrator may delegate the authority to make individual
purchases not exceeding $2,500 to duly appointed department heads
for operating supplies, provided that the purchase amount is within the
department operating budget.31
C. Approval of the Common Council shall be required for the following
purchases:
(1) When the cost of an item exceeds $25,000;32
(2) When the cost of an item exceeds the budgeted amount or will
cause the particular budget account to be overdrawn;
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 63-15 MONONA CODE § 63-16
1:50
§ 63-17. Public work without bids.
Pursuant to § 62.15(1), Wis. Stats., the Common Council, by vote of 3/4 of all
the members thereof, may determine that any class of public construction
or any part thereof may be done directly by the City without submitting the
same for bids.
§ 63-18. Special charges/assessments for delinquent utility bills.
(3) When equipment other than that which was budgeted for is
required;
(4) When a vendor has attempted to exert undue influence.
D. All purchases made pursuant to this section, excepting Subsection B,
shall be initiated by purchase order.
E. Payment of invoices for purchases made pursuant to this section shall
be in accordance with § 63-8.
F. The City Administrator may make line item budget adjustments that do
not exceed $1,000.
A. In addition to other methods provided by law, it is hereby provided that
special charges/assessments for delinquent utility bills may be levied in
accordance with the provisions of this section, which are hereby
adopted pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.33
B. Delinquent utility bills and service charges shall be levied as a special
assessment against the real property, shall become a lien thereon, and
placed on the tax roll with the same effect as other City taxes unless the
Common Council otherwise determines, after notice and opportunity to
be heard as hereinafter set forth.
C. Charges for the following services rendered by the City of Monona and
the City's public utilities shall be paid within 20 days of the date of
billing, all other items within 30 days of the date of billing:
(1) Snow and ice removal.
(2) Weed elimination.
(3) Garbage and refuse collection, disposal and landfill dumping fees.
(4) Repair of sidewalks, curb and gutter.
(5) Charges for water and sewer service.
D. If the amounts due to the City of Monona for services listed in
Subsection C(1) through (4) are not paid when due, the City shall send a
notice of the delinquent bill.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 63-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-18
1:51
E. If the amount due to the City utilities for services listed in Subsection
C(5) is not paid when due, the City utilities shall send a notice of the
delinquent bill to the customer and to the property owner pursuant to
§ PSC 185.37, Wis. Adm. Code. If the bill is still delinquent by the month
of October of the billing year, the City utilities shall send a notice of the
delinquent bill.34
F. The notice referred to in Subsection D shall contain the following
statement:
"You are entitled to a hearing before the Finance Committee of the City
of Monona to dispute the amount of this charge. You must request this
hearing by notifying the City Clerk in writing within 10 days of the date
of this notice."35
G. In the event of a request for hearing, the City Clerk shall set the date
and time for hearing upon receiving a written request under Subsection
F.36
H. At the time of the hearing referred to in Subsection G, the hearing
authority shall hear all evidence brought before it concerning the
correctness of the amount billed by the City of Monona in accordance
with this section. At the conclusion of this hearing, the hearing
authority shall decide the amount due the City, and all parties in
attendance shall be notified of the decision.
I. If the amount determined to be due the City after the hearing referred
in Subsection H is not paid within five days from the date of the hearing
authority's decision, then this amount shall be a lien upon the real
estate served by the services referred to in Subsection C. This shall be
accomplished pursuant to the power granted to the City by § 66.0627,
Wis. Stats.37
J. If a hearing is not requested in accordance with this section, the
amount due the City of Monona or the City's public utilities shall
become a lien upon the real estate served by the services referred to in
Subsection C upon the expiration of 10 days from the mailing of the
notice referred to in Subsections E and F.38
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 63-18 MONONA CODE § 63-18
1:52
ARTICLE II
Special Assessments and Charges
[Adopted as Title 3, Ch. 2, of the 1994 Code]
§ 63-19. Special assessments; payment in installments.
§ 63-20. Use of alternative special assessment procedures.
A. Whenever any special assessments shall be levied to defray the cost of
any public improvement, such special assessments may be paid in
annual installments as determined by the Council.
B. The first installments shall include a proportionate part of the principal
of the special assessment determined by the number of installments
and interest accrued. All subsequent installments shall also include
interest at a rate to be determined by the Council based upon borrowed
money rates, including an amount to cover City-related administrative
costs at the time of the special assessments on the unpaid balance of
principal, computed beginning 30 days after notification of the
completion of the special assessment project by the City. Each
subsequent installment shall include a like proportion of the principal
and interest at the rate stated above upon the unpaid balance of such
assessment.
C. The first installment shall be entered in the first tax roll prepared after
such installments have been determined as a special tax on the
property upon which the special assessment was levied, and thereafter
this tax shall be treated in all respects as any other municipal tax. All of
the subsequent installments shall be entered in a like manner and with
like effect in each of the annual tax rolls thereafter until all are levied.
D. If any installment so entered in the tax roll shall not be paid to the
Treasurer with the other taxes it shall be returned to the county as
delinquent and accepted and collected by the county in the same
manner as delinquent general taxes on real estate.
A. In addition to other methods provided by law, special assessments for
any public work or improvement or any current service may be levied in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. Whenever the Common Council determines that any public work or
improvement or any current service shall be financed in whole or part
by special assessments levied under this section, it shall adopt a
resolution specifying this intention and the time, either before or after
completion of the work or improvement, when the amount of the
assessments will be determined and levied; the number of annual
installments, if any, in which assessments may be paid; the rate of
interest to be charged on the unpaid balance; and the terms on which
any of the assessment may be deferred while no use of the improvement
is made in connection with the property.
§ 63-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-20
1:53
§ 63-21. Repayment of special assessments for multiple parcel
developments.
C. The provisions of § 66.0703, Wis. Stats., shall apply to special
assessments levied under this section except that, when the Common
Council determines by resolution that the hearing on the assessments
be held subsequent to the completion of the work or improvement or
the rendering of the service, the report required by § 66.0703, Wis.
Stats., shall contain a statement of the final cost of the work, service or
improvement in lieu of an estimate of the cost.
D. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing on any special
assessment proposed to be levied and notice of the final assessment and
terms of payment thereof shall be given in the manner prescribed in
§ 66.0703(7) and (8)(d), Wis. Stats.
E. Any special assessment levied under this section shall be a lien against
the property assessed from the date of the final resolution by the
Common Council determining the amount of the levy.
F. Any person against whose property a special assessment is levied under
this section may appeal therefrom in the manner prescribed by
§ 66.0703(12), Wis. Stats., within 90 days of the date of the final
determination by the Common Council.39
A. In order to further assure the payment and collection of special
assessments levied to pay the costs of the construction of public
improvements to serve multi-parcel developments in the City, it is
hereby provided that, upon the sale of any part of the property
assessed, the seller of the property will deliver or cause to be delivered
to the City or its designated agent a bank cashier's check or certified
check payable to the City or its designated agent in an amount equal to
125% of the portion of the outstanding amount of the special
assessment which is attributable to the parcel of the property sold. The
seller will continue to make such payments with respect to the
remainder of its property until such time as the sum of all such
payments, together with the amount of the special assessments
otherwise paid by it, equals the total amount of the special assessments
levied against the property, together with the interest which has been
paid or is payable thereon. Any overpayment of special assessments by
the seller to the City will be refunded to the seller.
B. The City will enter into appropriate agreements with the owner in
question to assure payment of such amounts in a timely manner.
C. This section is adopted pursuant to § 66.0701, Wis. Stats. Except as
provided above, the provisions of § 66.0703, Wis. Stats., including
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 63-20 MONONA CODE § 63-21
1:54
provisions regarding notice and hearing, shall apply to special
assessments levied against multi-parcel developments in the City.
§ 63-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-21
1:55

ARTICLE III
Hotel-Motel Room Tax
[Adopted as Title 3, Ch. 5, of the 1994 Code; amended in its entirety
10-3-2016 by Ord. No. 9-16-683]
§ 63-22. Definitions.
In this article, the following definitions shall apply:
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — Any place of temporary
lodging that provides four or fewer rooms for rent, which is open for rental
more than 10 nights in a twelve-month period, is the owner's personal
residence and is occupied by the owner at the time of rental, and in which
the only meal served is breakfast.
GROSS RECEIPTS — Total revenue received from the retail furnishing of
rooms, lodging or similar accommodations by a hotel or motel as defined
herein.
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or group of buildings in which the public
may obtain accommodations for a consideration, including, without
limitation, such establishments as inns, motels, tourist homes, tourist
houses or courts, bed-and-breakfast establishments, lodging houses,
rooming houses, summer camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges and
cabins, and any other building or group of buildings in which
accommodations are available to the public, except accommodations rented
for a continuous period of more than one month and accommodations
furnished by any hospital, sanitariums or nursing homes or by corporations
or associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable
or educational purposes, provided that no part of the net earnings of
such corporations and associations inures to the benefit of any private
shareholder or individual.
TRANSIENT — Any person residing for a continuous period of less than one
month in a hotel, motel or other furnished accommodations available to the
public.
§ 63-23. Imposition of tax.
Pursuant to § 66.0615, Wis. Stats., a tax is hereby imposed on the privilege
and service of furnishing, at retail, of rooms or lodging to transients by
hotelkeepers, motel operators and other persons furnishing
accommodations that are available to the public, irrespective of whether
membership is required for the use of the accommodations. Such tax shall
be at the rate of 8% of the gross receipts from such retail furnishing of
rooms or lodgings. Such tax shall not be subject to the selective sales tax
imposed by § 77.52(2)(a)l, Wis. Stats.
§ 63-24. Collection of tax.
§ 63-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-24
1:57
A. Administration by City Treasurer. This tax shall be administered by the
City Treasurer who shall, at City expense, provide the necessary
application and reporting forms at no cost to the taxpayer.
B. Reporting periods. The tax imposed for the months of January, February
and March, and for each calendar quarter thereafter, is due and
payable on the last day of the month next succeeding the calendar
quarter for which imposed. A return shall be filed with the City
Treasurer by those furnishing at retail such rooms and lodging on or
before the same date on which such tax is due and payable. Such return
shall show the gross receipts of the preceding calendar quarter from
such retail furnishing of rooms or lodging, the amount of taxes imposed
for such period, and such other information as the City Treasurer
deems necessary. Every person required to file such quarterly return
shall, with his or her first return, elect to file an annual calendar year or
fiscal year return. Such annual return shall be filed within 90 days of
the close of each such calendar or fiscal year. The annual return shall
summarize the quarterly returns, reconcile and adjust for errors in the
quarterly returns, and shall contain certain such additional information
as the City Treasurer requires. Such annual returns shall be made on
forms as prescribed by the City Treasurer. All such returns shall be
signed by the person required to file a return or duly authorized agent,
but need not be verified by oath. The City Treasurer may, for good
cause, extend the time for filing any return, but in no event longer than
one month from the filing date.
C. Sale or conveyance of business. If any person liable for any amount of
tax under this article sells out his or her business or stock of goods or
quits the business, his or her successors or assigns shall withhold
sufficient portion of the purchase price to cover such amount until the
former owner produces a receipt from the City Treasurer that it has
been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If a person
subject to the tax imposed by this article fails to withhold such amount
of tax from the purchase price as required, he or she shall become
personally liable for payment of the amount required to be withheld by
him or her to the extent of the price of the accommodations valued in
money.
D. Determination of tax by audit.
(1) The City Treasurer may, by office audit, determine the tax required
to be paid to the City or the refund due to any person under this
article. This determination may be made upon the basis of the facts
contained in the return being audited or on the basis of any other
information within the City Treasurer's possession. One or more
such office audit determination may be made of the amount due for
any one or for more than one period.
(2) The City Treasurer may, by field audit, determine the tax required
to be paid to the City or the refund due to any person under this
article. The determination may be made upon the basis of the facts
§ 63-24 MONONA CODE § 63-24
1:58
contained in the return being audited or upon any other
information within the City Treasurer's possession. The City
Treasurer is authorized to examine and inspect the books, records,
memoranda and property of any person in order to verify the tax
liability of that person or of another person. Nothing herein shall
prevent the City Treasurer from making a determination of tax at
any time.
E. Failure to file return. If any person fails to file a return as required by
this article, the City Treasurer shall make an estimate of the amount of
the gross receipts under Subsections B and C. Such estimate shall be
made for the period for which such person failed to make a return and
shall be based upon any information which is in the City Treasurer's
possession or may come into the Treasurer's possession. On the basis of
this estimate, the City Treasurer shall compute and determine the
amount required to be paid to the City, adding to the sum thus arrived
at a penalty equal to 10% thereof. One or more such determinations
may be made for one or more than one period.
F. Interest on unpaid taxes. All unpaid taxes under this article shall bear
interest at the rate of 18% per year from the due date of the return until
the first day of the month following the month in which the tax is paid or
deposited with the City Treasurer. An extension of time within which to
file a return shall not operate to extend the due date of the return for
purposes of interest computations. If the City Treasurer determines
that any overpayment of tax has been made intentionally or by reason of
carelessness or neglect, or if the tax which was overpaid was not
accompanied by a complete return, he or she shall not allow any
interest thereon.
G. Delinquent returns; late fee; penalty.
(1) Delinquent tax returns shall be subject to a late filing fee, as
prescribed in the Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule. The tax
imposed by this article shall become delinquent if not paid:
(a) In the case of a timely filed return, within 30 days after the due
date of the return, or within 30 days after the expiration of an
extension period if one is granted.
(b) In the case of no return filed or a return filed late, by the due
date of the return.
(2) If no return is filed, or a return is filed late, or an incorrect return is
filed, the entire tax finally determined shall be subject to a penalty
of 25% of the tax, exclusive of interest or other penalties. If a
person fails to file a return when due or files a false or fraudulent
return with the intent in either case to defeat or evade the tax
imposed by this article, a penalty of 50% of the tax shall be added
to the tax required to be paid, exclusive of interest and other
penalties.
§ 63-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-25
1:59
§ 63-25. Records to be maintained.
Every person liable for the tax imposed by this article shall keep or cause to
be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such
form as the City Treasurer and this article shall require. Such records shall
be retained and made available for a period of five years from the due date
of a filing period.
§ 63-26. Confidentiality maintained.
§ 63-27. Distribution of room tax collected.
Upon receipt of the room taxes, the City shall retain for any public purpose
determined by the Common Council the greater of either 30% or the
maximum amount provided in § 66.0615(lm)(dm), Wis. Stats., and distribute
the remainder to the Tourism Commission for tourism promotion and
tourism development, as defined in § 66.0615(l)(fm), Wis. Stats.
§ 63-28. Tracking and reporting of room tax expenditures.
The Tourism Commission shall account for and maintain records of the
room tax revenue expenditures. The Tourism Commission shall provide a
written report to the City Treasurer no less than annually, in a form and
manner determined by the City Treasurer, of all expenditures of at least
the minimum as set by § 66.0615(4), Wis. Stats., and the impact of such
expenditures on generating paid overnight stays within the City.
A. All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to
such returns on file with the City Treasurer are deemed to be
confidential, except the City Treasurer may divulge their contents to
the following and no others:
(1) The person who filed the return.
(2) Officers, agents or employees of the Federal Internal Revenue
Service or the State Department of Revenue.
(3) Officers, employees or agents of the City Auditors.
(4) Such other public officials of the City of Monona when deemed
necessary.
B. No person having an administrative duty under this article shall make
known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information
obtained by an investigation of records of any person on whom a tax is
imposed by this article or the amount or source of income, profits,
losses, expenditures or any particulars thereof, set forth or disclosed in
any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or
examined by any person, except as provided above.
§ 63-25 MONONA CODE § 63-29
1:60
§ 63-29. Penalties.
Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this article who violates
any provision of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture pursuant to § 1-4
of this Code. Each day, or portion thereof, that such violation continues is
hereby deemed to constitute a separate offense.
§ 63-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-29
1:61

ARTICLE IV
Licenses
[Adopted as Title 7, Ch. 12, of the 1994 Code; amended in its
entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
§ 63-30. Payment of claims as condition of license or permit.
Except as otherwise provided by state or federal law, the City shall not issue
or renew any license or permit within the City of Monona for any person or
business delinquent in payment:
§ 63-31. Applicability.
An application for issuance or renewal of a license or permit subject to this
article shall be denied pursuant to the provisions of § 63-30, only following
notice and opportunity for hearing as provided by § 63-32 below.
§ 63-32. Appeals; notice and hearing.
Prior to any denial of an application for issuance or renewal of a license or
permit, including denials pursuant to § 63-30, the applicant shall be given
notice and opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided:
§ 63-33. Other license denial appeals.
Where an individual, business or corporation wishes to appeal the City
Clerk's decision not to issue a license or permit on grounds other than
A. Of any taxes, fees or other claims owed the City; or
B. Of any forfeiture resulting from a violation of any City ordinance.
A. With respect to licenses under Chapter 272, Intoxicating Liquor and
Fermented Malt Beverages, Article I, Licenses and Permits, of the Code
of the City of Monona, notice and opportunity for hearing shall be as
provided by § 125.12, Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time.
B. With respect to licenses other than those described in Subsection A
herein, the License Review Committee shall notify the applicant in
writing of the City's intention not to renew the license and shall provide
the applicant with an opportunity for hearing. The notice shall state the
reasons for the intended action before the License Review Committee.
The applicant may request a hearing within 10 days of the date of the
notice. If a request is made, the matter shall be scheduled for a hearing.
If the applicant shall fail to appear before the License Review
Committee on the date indicated on the notice, the License Review
Committee shall deny the application. At the hearing, both the City and
the applicant may produce witnesses, cross examine witnesses and be
represented by counsel. The decision of the License Review Committee
shall be final.
§ 63-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-33
1:63
those specified in §§ 63-30 through 63-32 above, the applicant may file a
request in writing with the City Clerk within 10 days of the decision that
the matter be referred to the License Review Committee. A public hearing
shall be scheduled by the License Review Committee. All parties may be
represented by counsel. The License Review Committee shall consider all
relevant information and shall render a decision which shall be final.
§ 63-33 MONONA CODE § 63-33
1:64
Chapter 70
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 232.
§ 70-1. Fire Department recognized.
§ 70-2. Department composition.
The Department is comprised of a combination of full-time, part-time and
paid-on-call personnel. The Department shall have a Fire Chief as well as
other officers and personnel as determined by the Common Council, which
shall be appointed by the Fire Chief subject to approval by the Police and
Fire Commission and subject to the day-to-day command authority of the
Fire Chief.
§ 70-3. Department funding and compensation.
The Department shall receive the funding necessary to provide service
as determined by the Common Council. The Common Council shall also
A. Pursuant to § 62.13(8)(a), Wis. Stats., the City of Monona Fire
Department is officially recognized as the provider of the essential
services of fire protection and emergency medical care to the people
that live, work or travel through the City of Monona. The Department
also provides service to those communities that reciprocally provide
mutual aid to Monona. The contemporary duties expected of a fire
department include but may not be limited to paramedic-level
emergency care and transportation, fire prevention inspections, public
fire and safety education, fire suppression, first responder first aid and
defibrillation, transportation accidents, construction accidents and
industrial accidents, and assistance to law enforcement, as well as
operations at natural and man-made disasters. The duties of the Fire
Department need to stay current with the needs of a dynamic
community.
B. The Fire Department shall be in charge of firefighting and emergency
care where fires, emergency medical incidents, accidents or disasters
threaten life and/or property and those duties related to the
performance of this service within the City.
C. Unless the context requires otherwise, all references in this Code to the
"Fire Department" or "Department" shall mean the City Fire
Department and include the provision of emergency medical care and
other rescue services where life(s) is threatened.
§ 63-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-3
1:65
establish the level of compensation for all personnel assigned to the
Department.
§ 70-4. Department organization.
The organization and internal regulation of the Department shall be
governed by the provisions of this chapter and by such rules, regulations,
standard operating procedures and guidelines as adopted by the
Department and approved by the Police and Fire Commission. The
Department shall consist of no less than 22 active members, unless
otherwise determined by the Common Council.
§ 70-5. Appointment, powers and duties of Chief.
A. Any person desiring to be a member of the Fire Department may file
with the Fire Chief an application in such form as the Department may
require.
B. All resignations from the Department shall take the same course as
applications for and appointments to membership.
A. Appointment. The Police and Fire Commission shall appoint the Fire
Chief, who shall hold his or her office subject to suspension or removal
by the Board for cause. The Fire Chief shall have command of the Fire
Department in accordance with state statutes and report to the Mayor.
The Fire Chief shall see that all City ordinances and all state laws
relating to fire protection in the City are enforced and that the required
inspections are made. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the
efficiency of the Fire Department and all members working under his/
her direction.
B. Filling of vacancy in office.
(1) A vacancy in the office of Fire Chief shall be filled by the Police and
Fire Commission. Other officers shall be chosen in the manner
provided by the Department Administrative Standard Operating
Guidelines (SOG). Upon creation of a vacancy in the office of Fire
Chief, the ranking officer shall perform the duties of the Fire Chief
until such vacancy has been filled.
(2) Upon appointment, the Fire Chief shall immediately assume office
and shall hold office until his or her successor is appointed. The
Fire Chief shall reside within 15 miles of the City.
C. General supervision. The Fire Chief shall have the responsibility of
overall supervision of the Department and personnel assigned to the
Department, which shall be subject to and not to conflict with this
chapter. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for all activities within the
Department, as well as the personnel, Department budget and general
efficiency of the Department. The Fire Chief shall perform such other
duties as are usually incumbent upon the commanding officer of a fire
department and as are detailed in the job description for this position.
§ 70-3 MONONA CODE § 70-5
1:66
§ 70-6. Records and reports.
§ 70-7. Authority of Department at fires, emergency incidents and
emergencies.
D. Presiding officer. The Fire Chief or a designee shall preside at all
meetings of the Department, call special meetings, preserve order,
decide all points of order that may arise and enforce a rigid observance
of this chapter.
E. Command responsibility. The Fire Chief shall have command of and
entire responsibility for all firefighting operations, shall plan the control
of the same, direct the action of the Department when at a fire, shall
grant leaves and/or release personnel and equipment from the scene of
an emergency when appropriate. In the absence of the Fire Chief, the
next highest ranking officer or, in the absence of an officer, the most
senior member of the Department shall be in charge and shall have the
same authority and responsibility at incidents as the Fire Chief.
F. Department report. The Fire Chief shall submit a written report to the
Council each month relating to the condition of the various pieces of
apparatus and appurtenances, the number of fires occurring since the
previous report, the date of same and loss occasioned thereby, the total
number of active members in the Department and resignations and
expulsions from the Department. The Fire Chief shall also report upon
the drill and training program of the Department, together with other
pertinent information, including recommendations of such
improvements as he/she deems proper and necessary for the operation
of the Department.
G. Enforcement of fire prevention laws. The Fire Chief or his/her designee
shall enforce all fire prevention ordinances of this City and state laws
and regulations pertaining to fire prevention and shall keep citizens
informed of fire prevention methods and of the activities of the
Department.
H. Additional duties. The Fire Chief shall perform such other duties as are
incumbent on the commanding officer of the Fire Department.
A. Legal custodian. The Fire Chief is the legal custodian of the reports,
records and property within the Department.
B. Fire reports. Per § 101.141, Wis. Stats., the Department shall maintain
a record of all fires. The Department shall participate in the Wisconsin
Fire Reporting System, supplying data collected to the Department of
Safety and Professional Services. Fire reports shall be maintained a
minimum of seven years.
A. Pursuant to § 213.095, Wis. Stats., the Fire Chief or other officer acting
as the incident commander at the scene of a fire, emergency medical
call or other emergency where the Department has been called to
§ 70-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7
1:67
§ 70-8. Apparatus and equipment.
perform service to persons or property shall have the authority to do
the following:
(1) Suppress any disorder and order all individuals or companies to
leave the neighborhood of any fire, emergency medical incident or
other emergency.
(2) Command from the inhabitants of the City all necessary assistance
for the suppression of fires and the preservation of property
exposed to fire and the necessary assistance for rendering aid
during an emergency medical incident or other emergencies.
(3) Enter any property or premises to do whatever may be reasonably
necessary in the performance of the officer's duties while engaged
in the work of extinguishing any fire or performing any duties
incidental thereto and/or while engaged in the work of aiding
persons or minimizing the loss to property at an emergency
medical incident or other emergency.
B. The incident commander conducting operations in connection with the
extinguishment and control of any fire, explosion or other emergency
shall have the authority to direct all operations of fire extinguishment or
control and to take the necessary precautions to save life, protect
property, and prevent further injury or damage. During such operation,
including the investigation of the cause of such emergency, the incident
commander shall be permitted to control or prohibit the approach to
the scene of such emergency by any vehicle, vessel or person.
C. No person shall obstruct the operations of the Department in
connection with extinguishing or control of any fire or actions relative
to other emergencies or disobey any lawful command of the incident
commander in charge of the emergency or any part thereof or any
lawful order of a police officer assisting the Department.
D. The incident commander in charge of an emergency scene shall have
the authority to establish barriers to control access in the vicinity of
such emergency and to place, or cause to be placed, ropes, guards,
barricades, or other obstructions across any street or alley to delineate
such emergency scene barrier. No person, except as authorized by the
incident commander in charge of the emergency or his or her designee,
shall be permitted to cross such barriers.
E. The incident commander in charge of an emergency scene shall have
the authority to have property damaged by fire or other emergency
barricaded or otherwise protected from persons or the elements. The
expense of such preventative action shall be borne by the property
owner.
§ 70-7 MONONA CODE § 70-8
1:68
§ 70-9. Fire Inspector.
Fire Chief to be a Deputy of the Department of Safety and Professional
Services. Pursuant to § 101.14, Wis. Stats., adopted herein, the Fire Chief
is a Deputy of the Department of Safety and Professional Services. The Fire
Chief is responsible for the enforcement of the state codes adopted within
this chapter.
A. The Fire Chief shall have control of all apparatus used by the
Department and shall be responsible for its proper maintenance.
Emergency repairs may be authorized by the Fire Chief.
B. No person shall willfully damage or injure in any manner, or interfere
with the operation of, any hose, hydrant or fire apparatus belonging to
the City, and no vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the
Fire Department when laid down on any street, private driveway or
other place to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of
the Fire Department official in command.
C. If a person or organization requests a dedicated firefighting apparatus
for an event, or such apparatus is otherwise required for such event,
the requester or event organizer shall be charged a fire apparatus
standby fee in an amount established by the Public Safety Committee.
The fee shall be paid at least five days prior to the event. [Added
10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 10-17-691]
A. The Fire Chief shall hold the office of Fire Inspector, with power to
appoint one or more Deputy Fire Inspectors, who shall perform the
same duties and have the same powers as the Fire Inspector.
B. The Fire Inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected semiannually
all buildings, including their premises, designed for occupancy by more
than two families, and all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares
open to the public within the City limits for the purpose of noting and
causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire. The
Inspector shall also investigate the storage and handling of explosives
and flammable liquids within the City.
C. Whenever in the City any inspection of the Fire Inspector or his/her
deputies reveals a fire hazard, the Fire Inspector or his/her deputies
shall serve a notice in writing upon the owner of the property to correct
the hazard within a reasonable period of time. If the fire hazard is not
removed within the time allowed, it shall constitute a nuisance. The Fire
Inspector or a deputy may have the same removed, and the cost of such
removal may be recovered in an action against the owner of the
property and shall be a lien against such property. Such owner shall in
addition be subject to forfeiture under § 1-4 of this Code for each fire
hazard.
D. The Fire Inspector shall keep a written record on each property
inspected, which record shall conform to the requirements of the
§ 70-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-9
1:69
Department of Safety and Professional Services, and shall make the
report of inspections required by the Department.
E. No person shall deny the Fire Inspector or any deputies free access to
any property within the City at any reasonable time for the purpose of
making fire inspections (one- and two-family dwellings are exempt). No
person shall hinder or obstruct the Fire Inspector or any deputies in the
performance of their duties or refuse to observe any lawful direction
given by them.
F. Special inspection warrant. If consent for entry to personal or real
properties which are not public buildings or to portions of public
buildings which are not open to the public has been denied, the Fire
Inspector shall obtain a special inspection warrant under § 66.0119,
Wis. Stats.
G. Correction of hazards. At such time as the Fire Inspector identifies a
violation or fire hazard, the Fire Inspector shall serve notice in writing
upon the owner of the property, giving such owner a reasonable time in
which to remove the hazard. However, where an extreme or hazardous
condition exists which, for the protection of the public, must be
corrected or removed immediately, the Fire Inspector shall have the
authority to take such steps as may be necessary to protect the public
and property, including closing and the vacating of a building, structure
or premises. If the owner fails to comply with the order to correct the
hazard within the time allowed, it shall constitute a nuisance. The Fire
Inspector shall also have the authority to take such steps as may be
necessary, including obtaining appropriate court orders, to enforce any
order of the Fire Inspector correcting a hazardous or potential fire
condition. The Fire Inspector may also have a hazard corrected or
removed by the City. The cost of such correction or removal shall be
recovered by the City against the property owner and may be entered in
the tax roll as a special charge against the property.
H. Compliance. No building or structure or any part of a building or
structure, land, water or air space within the City shall be used or
occupied, and no building or structure within the City shall be
constructed, placed, moved, extended, reconstructed, structurally
altered or repaired or converted to a new use, and no site development
work shall be conducted in the City, except in full compliance with this
chapter, Chapter 232, Fires and Fire Prevention, all other applicable
City ordinances and codes, all applicable decisions, orders, permits and
other approvals made or issued pursuant thereto, and all other
applicable federal, state or local laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or
regulations.
§ 70-9 MONONA CODE § 70-9
1:70
Chapter 94
MAYOR AND COMMON COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commission and committees — See
Ch. 18.
City government — See Ch. 36.
Elections — See Ch. 47.
§ 94-1. Mayor.
A. Election. The Mayor shall be elected every two years, and his or her
term of office shall commence on the third Tuesday of April in the year
of election and continue for two years or until his or her successor is
elected and qualifies.
B. Duties. The Mayor shall by virtue of the office be a member of the
Council and shall preside at all meetings of the Council and sign all
ordinances, rules, bylaws, regulations, commissions, licenses and
permits adopted or authorized by the Council and all orders drawn on
the treasury except as prescribed by law.
C. Veto power. The Mayor shall have veto power over the acts of the
Council as provided by § 62.09(8)(c), Wis. Stats.
D. Emergency powers. The Mayor shall have such emergency powers as
set forth in § 94-3E of the Code of the City of Monona.
E. Defense of City officials.
(1) The Mayor may authorize the City Attorney to defend any actions
brought against any officer or employee of the City of Monona or of
any of its boards or commissions, under the following conditions:
(a) The action arises from an act or acts done in the course of
employment or out of any alleged breach of duty of the officer
or employee; and
(b) The action was not brought to determine the right of the officer
or employee to hold or retain that person's office or position;
and
(c) The action was not brought by the City against the officer or
employee.
(2) Any such authorized defense shall be conditioned upon the
cooperation of the officer or employee with the City Attorney in the
defense of the action. The Mayor shall promptly report the granting
of any such authorization to the Common Council.
§ 70-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-2
1:71
§ 94-2. Common Council.
§ 94-3. Powers of Common Council.
A. Composition. The Common Council of the City of Monona shall consist
of six elected Council members whose term of office shall be two years,
three of whom shall be elected each year. The Common Council is
vested with all the powers of the City not specifically given to some
other officer.
B. Powers of the Council. The Council shall preserve order at its meetings,
compel attendance of members and punish nonattendance and shall be
judge of the election and qualification of its members.
C. Compensation. The salaries of all elected and appointed officials,
including members of boards and commissions, shall be as determined
by the Common Council from time to time, provided the salary of the
Mayor and members of the Council shall not be increased during their
terms of office (see § 66.0505, Wis. Stats.). A 3/4 majority vote of the
Council shall be required to increase the salary of the Council members
or Mayor.
D. Council members not to be interested in contracts. No Council member
shall have a private interest in a contract with the City contrary to
§ 946.13, Wis. Stats.
E. Term of office. The term of office of all Council members shall be two
years and until their respective successors are elected or appointed and
qualify. The term of each Council member shall commence the third
Tuesday of April in the year of election.
F. Committees. Subcommittees of the Common Council shall be appointed
at the Council's annual organizational meeting.
A. General powers. The Common Council shall have the management and
control of City property, finances, highways, streets, navigable waters,
and the public service, and shall have the power to act for the
government and good order of the City, for its commercial benefit, and
for the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public, and may
carry its powers into effect by license, regulation, suppression,
borrowing, taxation, special assessment, appropriation, forfeiture and
other necessary or convenient means. The powers herein referred to
shall be in addition to all other grants and shall be limited only by
express language.
B. Power of acquisition and disposal of property. The Common Council
may acquire property, real or personal, within or without the City, for
parks, libraries, historic places, recreation, beautification, streets,
waterworks, sewage or waste disposal, harbors, improvement of
watercourses, public grounds, vehicle parking areas, and for any other
public purpose; may acquire real property within or contiguous to the
City, by means other than condemnation, for industrial sites; may
§ 94-2 MONONA CODE § 94-3
1:72
§ 94-4. Meetings.
improve and beautify the same; may construct, own, lease and maintain
buildings on such property for instruction, recreation, amusement and
other public purposes; and may sell and convey such property.
C. Powers to finance City government. The Common Council may levy and
provide for the collection of taxes and special assessments; may refund
any tax or special assessment paid, or any part thereof, when satisfied
that the same was unjust or illegal; and generally manage City finances.
D. Construction of powers. All powers given herein shall be liberally
construed in favor of the rights, powers and privileges of the City of
Monona to promote the general welfare, peace, good order and
prosperity of the City and the inhabitants thereof.
E. Emergency powers. All powers enumerated in § 323.14, Wis. Stats.,
shall be reserved and exercised by the Common Council or the Mayor,
as provided in § 323.14, Wis. Stats. The Mayor may designate
temporary and permanent emergency routes and may designate or
suspend traffic control restrictions along such routes.
F. Statutes and Constitution. Sec. 62.11(5), Wis. Stats., and Article XI,
Section 2, Wisconsin Constitution, shall apply to the governance of the
City.
A. Time, date and notice. Regular meetings of the Common Council shall
be held on the first and third Monday evening of each calendar month
at 7:00 p.m. If the date of any regular meeting falls on a legal holiday,
such meeting shall be held on the next following secular day, at the
same place and at the same hour, unless canceled or rescheduled to
another date or time by order of the Common Council. Following a
regular City election, the new Council shall meet the third Tuesday of
April. All meetings of the Common Council, including special meetings
authorized under Subsection B, shall be held in compliance with
Subchapter V of Chapter 19, Wis. Stats., the Wisconsin Open Meetings
Law. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689; 2-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 1-18-694]
B. Special meetings.
(1) Who may call. Special meetings of the Council may be called by any
two members of the Council who file a written request with the City
Clerk at least 24 hours prior to the time the meeting is to be called,
stating the purpose and time of the meeting. The Mayor may also
call a special meeting.
(2) Notice of special meeting. Immediately after the receipt of a
request for a special meeting, the City Clerk shall notify each
member of the Common Council by telephone or by delivering a
written notice of the time and purpose of such meeting. If the
§ 94-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-4
1:73
§ 94-5. Presiding official.
The Mayor shall call the meeting to order and, if absent, the President of
the Council shall preside and, if absent, the senior member present (based
on the date of original election) shall preside until the Council, by motion,
selects an Acting President for that meeting. In the absence of the Clerk,
the presiding officer shall appoint a clerk for that meeting.
§ 94-6. Order of business.
Council member cannot be found, a copy of the notice shall be left
at the member's residence at least six hours prior to the meeting.
(3) Special meetings held without notice. A special meeting can be
held without notice being given when all of the members of the
Council are present, or consent in writing. If all the members
consent in writing each member shall file a written consent with
the Clerk prior to the beginning of the meeting. This section does
not, however, relieve the Council from the obligation of complying
with the Wisconsin Open Meetings Law.
(4) Special meeting may become regular meeting. Any special meeting
which is attended by all the members of the Council shall be a
regular meeting for the purpose of transacting any business that
may be presented by any member at any time.
A. At all meetings, the following order may be observed in disposing of
business before the Council, unless otherwise provided for in the
furnished agenda:
(1) Call to order.
(2) Roll call and pledge of allegiance.
(3) Approval of previous minutes.
(4) Public hearings.
(5) Appearances.
(6) Consent agenda.
(7) Unfinished business (items requiring formal action by the Council,
i.e., matters from previous meetings or committee reports).
[Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(8) Committee of the Whole (motion required).
(9) Any new business, including the introduction of ordinances,
resolutions or other communications (items requiring formal action
by the Council, i.e., action items in committee reports not included
in the Friday agenda).
(10) Appointments.
§ 94-4 MONONA CODE § 94-6
1:74
§ 94-7. Introduction of business.
(11) Reports of committees, commissions, boards, Mayor and City
Administrator (requiring no formal action by the Council).
(12) Miscellaneous business.
(13) Closed sessions under § 19.85, Wis. Stats. (motion required).
(14) Adjournment.
B. No business is to be taken up out of order, except by unanimous consent
or suspension of the rules.
A. Ordinances, resolutions and communications to be in writing. All
ordinances, resolutions, memorials or other communications shall be in
writing with a brief statement of their content and title endorsed
thereon, together with the name of the member presenting the same,
and shall be delivered to the Clerk. The Mayor shall then refer the
ordinance, resolution or communication to the appropriate committee
or to the appropriate place on the agenda. All ordinances, resolutions
and contracts shall bear the name of the sponsor, the drafter and the
initials of the City Attorney as to form and, at the discretion of the
Mayor, shall contain a fiscal note as to the cost involved, if any, to the
City. The Finance and Personnel Committee shall determine the form of
the fiscal note.
B. Ordinances, resolutions and appropriations to be given second reading.
Ordinances, resolutions or requests for appropriations shall be
introduced as items of new business at a Council meeting and then
adopted or rejected as an item of unfinished business at the next
Council meeting, unless the Council suspends the rules as provided in
§ 94-14 for the purpose of adopting or rejecting an ordinance without
referring the ordinance to a subsequent meeting and except as
provided in Subsection E hereof.
C. Subject, numbering and adoption of ordinances. No ordinance shall
relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its
title, and no ordinance or section thereof shall be amended or repealed
unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section
amended or repealed, and when practicable, all ordinances shall be
introduced as amendments to existing ordinances or sections thereof.
D. Financial claims. All bills and other financial claims against the City
shall be audited and approved in accordance with this Code.
E. Ordinances appropriating money. All ordinances and resolutions
appropriating money or creating any charge against the City for
payment of claims for purchases or work previously authorized by the
Council shall be acted upon by the Council at the next regular meeting,
provided that this provision may be suspended by 3/4 vote of all
§ 94-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-7
1:75
§ 94-8. Questions of order.
The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, in accordance with
§ 94-13, subject to an appeal to the Council. No appeal shall be debatable,
and the appeal may be sustained by a simple majority of the members
present, exclusive of the Mayor.
§ 94-9. Presiding officer to preserve order.
The presiding officer shall preserve decorum and if any member
transgresses the rules of the Council, the presiding officer shall, or any
member may, call such offending member to order in which case the
member called to order shall immediately sit down and be silent, unless
permitted to explain, and the Council, if appealed to, shall decide the
matter.
§ 94-10. Presiding officer shall remove himself or herself. [Amended
2-5-2018 by Ord. No. 1-18-694]
The presiding officer shall vacate the chair and designate a member to
preside temporarily whenever he or she desires to speak upon any question
or make any motion.
§ 94-11. Addressing Council.
No member shall address the Council until recognized by the presiding
officer. Such member shall address himself or herself to the presiding
officer. When two or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the
presiding officer shall name the member who is to speak first, and no person
other than a member shall address the Council except by vote of a majority
of the members present, except during the public appearances portion of
the agenda.
§ 94-12. Motions.
§ 94-13. Debate.
members of the Council. A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded on
such appropriations.
A. Motions in possession of the Council. When a motion is made and
seconded, it shall be deemed to be in possession of the Council and
shall be stated by the presiding officer or, being in writing, shall be
delivered to the Clerk and read by him or her previous to debate.
B. Motions without debate. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order,
and a motion to adjourn, lay on the table, and a call for the previous
question shall be decided without debate.
C. Unanimous consent. Any motion may be disposed of by unanimous
consent of the Council.
§ 94-7 MONONA CODE § 94-13
1:76
§ 94-14. Rules suspended temporarily.
The rules in this chapter or any part thereof may be suspended temporarily
in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of 3/
4 of the members present.
§ 94-15. Voting.
§ 94-16. Robert's Rules of Order to govern.
In the absence of a standing rule, the Council shall be governed by Robert's
Rules of Order, Newly Revised.
§ 94-17. Council agenda, preparation and dissemination of.
A. Actions in order. When a question is under discussion, no action shall be
in order except to adjourn, to lay on the table, to postpone to a certain
day, to refer to a committee, to amend, or to postpone indefinitely. All
such motions shall have precedence in the order listed. A motion to call
for the previous question shall require a 2/3 vote of the members
present.
B. Termination of debate. Any member wishing to terminate the debate
may move to put the question before the Council. The presiding officer
shall announce the question "Shall the main question now be put?" If a
2/3 majority of the members present vote in the affirmative, the main
question shall be taken without further debate, its effect being to put an
end to all debate and bringing the Council to a direct vote, first upon
pending amendments and then upon the main question.
A. Roll call vote. Any member may demand a roll call vote on any matter,
and such vote shall be entered in the proceedings, and every member
shall vote when a question is put unless the Council by majority vote of
those present shall excuse him or her for special cause. Abstentions for
conflicts of interest shall be considered a vote of the member under this
section. Roll call votes are required for ordinances or resolutions
approving contracts or appropriations of $500 or more.
B. Majority prevails. The majority vote of the members present shall be
necessary for passage of an ordinance or resolution or approval of an
appointment unless a larger number is required by statute or this Code.
C. Reconsideration of the vote. Any member voting in the majority may
move for a reconsideration of the vote of any question at that meeting
or at the next succeeding regular meeting. A member may not change
his or her vote on any question after the results have been announced.
A motion to reconsider being put and lost shall not be renewed.
A. Proposed agenda. A proposed agenda, together with relevant materials
and communications, shall be prepared by the City Administrator. The
Mayor, acting upon the Administrator's proposed agenda, shall set the
§ 94-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-17
1:77
§ 94-18. Consent agenda.
The City Clerk, subject to approval of the Mayor, shall place on the consent
agenda items which in his or her judgment are routine. No separate
discussion or debate on matters on the consent agenda shall be permitted.
A single motion, seconded and adopted by majority vote of the Council, shall
be sufficient to approve, adopt, enact or otherwise favorably resolve any
matter listed on the consent agenda without separate discussion thereof.
When the consent agenda is reached, any Council member may request
removal of any item from the consent agenda, and such item shall be
removed without further debate or vote. Any item or part thereof removed
from the consent agenda by action of the Council shall be considered
agenda. Any two Aldermen may also have an item placed on the agenda
by filing a written request with the City Administrator no later than
5:00 p.m. on the Monday preceding the meeting. The agenda shall be
delivered to the Mayor and Council members on the Thursday prior to
a regular Council meeting, unless special circumstances preclude such
schedule. A similar agenda shall be prepared for special meetings of the
Council under § 94-4B of the Code of the City of Monona.
B. Availability for public inspection.
(1) The proposed agenda, with the relevant materials and
communications, shall be available at the City Clerk's office for
public inspection and copying by 4:00 p.m. Friday prior to a regular
Council meeting. The agenda and materials for a special Council
meeting shall be available as soon as prepared and assembled by
the City Clerk.
(2) The City Clerk shall upon request make copies of the agenda and
accompanying material available for distribution and shall make a
charge therefor sufficient to recover the City's expense, provided
one copy shall be made available without charge to a
representative of a recognized news medium having general
circulation within the City. The Mayor may authorize the
distribution of additional copies at no charge.
C. Final agenda. Additions to or deletions from the proposed agenda may
be made by the City Clerk and/or City Administrator and by other City
officers upon request or approval of the Mayor, until 12:00 noon of the
Friday before the Council meeting. At such time the City Clerk and/or
City Administrator shall prepare a set of materials to include materials
not previously delivered for the Mayor and each member of the Council,
which shall be available for them in the Clerk's office until 5:00 p.m. the
day of the Council meeting and available at the meeting place of the
Council 1/2 hour prior to the time scheduled for convening the Council.
No item may be acted on by the Council unless it is on the final agenda
by unanimous consent of the Council or by suspension of the rules
under § 94-14.
§ 94-17 MONONA CODE § 94-18
1:78
separately at the appropriate time in the Council's regular order of
business, under unfinished business.
§ 94-19. Committee of the Whole.
By majority vote at any regular or special meeting in the regular order of
business as provided in § 94-6A(8), the Council may resolve itself into a
Committee of the Whole. Resolving into the Committee of the Whole as a
special order of business other than in the regular order of business shall
require unanimous consent of those present at the meeting. Standing rules
of the Council acting as a Committee of the Whole shall be deemed advisory
only and shall not authorize any official act by any officer, employee, agent
or representative on behalf of the City. The Mayor shall preside over the
Committee of the Whole. The Council may not adjourn any meeting or
conduct an executive session in the Committee of the Whole.
Chapter 103
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 18.
Finance and taxation — See Ch. 63.
Mayor and Common Council — See Ch. 94.
Police and Fire Commission — See Ch. 112.
§ 94-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-19
1:79

ARTICLE I
City Officers
§ 103-1. City Administrator.
A. Appointment. In order to coordinate and improve the various municipal
services rendered to the citizens of Monona, there is created the
position of City Administrator. The City Administrator shall be employed
by the Common Council and shall serve according to the terms of the
contract signed by the Administrator and the Council. The Mayor and
Personnel Committee shall review applications for the position of City
Administrator. The Mayor shall appoint the City Administrator, subject
to confirmation by the Common Council. Approval of the contract for
the employment of the Administrator shall constitute approval of the
appointment.
B. Authority. The City Administrator shall have the following authority:
(1) To have the overall direction and administrative control of the
Departments of Inspections, Finance, Public Works, Planning and
Economic Development and Parks and Recreation.40
(2) To recommend the selection and removal of all supervisors, subject
to the authority of the Mayor and the Council, consistent with the
general principles of personnel systems based upon merit, except
the Police and Fire Chiefs, who shall be selected by the Police and
Fire Commission.
(3) In cooperation with the Mayor, preparation and submission of the
Annual Executive City Budget.
(4) Budget implementation, including authority to transfer up to
$1,000 between items, except capital accounts. The Administrator
shall report any such transfer to the Finance Committee at its next
regularly scheduled meeting.
(5) To recommend to the Mayor and Common Council measures for
adoption which are deemed appropriate to deal with significant
municipal problems, with the right to participate in all discussions
on such measures with the Mayor and Common Council, subject to
Council rules or procedures.
C. Duties and responsibilities. The City Administrator shall have all of the
following duties and responsibilities:
(1) To attend all Council meetings.
(2) To submit annually to the Mayor and Council, and make available to
the public, complete reports on the financial affairs of the City and
the status of municipal programs.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-1
1:81
(3) To make monthly reports to the Mayor and Council concerning the
operation of all City departments, offices and special programs.
(4) To keep the Mayor and Council fully advised as to the financial
condition and future financial needs of the City.
(5) To make such recommendations to the Mayor and Council
concerning the overall management of the City as necessary.
(6) To establish and maintain a centralized purchasing system in the
City.
(7) To prepare Council agendas in cooperation with the Mayor and City
Clerk.
(8) To serve as the chief personnel officer of the City.
(9) To prepare and continually update a capital improvement program
for the City.
(10) To supervise and coordinate development of a comprehensive
community planning program.
(11) To serve as the coordinator for securing state and federal grant and
loan assistance for all City programs.
(12) To analyze, evaluate and measure the performance of the City
administration and make recommendations to the Mayor and
Council for the most efficient operation of the City government.
(13) To submit recommendations to the Mayor and Council for new or
changed programs that would improve the quality of life in
Monona.
(14) To perform any other duties prescribed by the state statutes or as
may be lawfully ordered by the Common Council.
(15) Submit an annual report and such other periodic reports as
requested by the Mayor, Council.
(16) To serve as City Comptroller in accordance with § 62.09(10), Wis.
Stats.41
D. Responsible to the Mayor and Council.
(1) The City Administrator shall be directly responsible to the Mayor,
subject to the control and management of the Council as a body and
not as individuals.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II); this ordinance also deleted original Subsection C(14) pertaining to Comptroller
duties.
§ 103-1 MONONA CODE § 103-1
1:82
§ 103-2. City Clerk.
§ 103-3. City Building Inspector.
(2) The Mayor, in writing, may delegate to the City Administrator the
responsibility of receiving day-to-day reports from the Chief of
Police and Fire Chief.
E. Removal. The Administrator may be removed for cause as provided in
§§ 17.12(1)(c) and 17.16, Wis. Stats., or otherwise as provided in the
contract of employment, if any, between the City Administrator and the
City.42
A. Appointment. The City Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor upon
recommendation of the City Administrator. Approval of the employment
contract for the City Clerk shall constitute confirmation by the Common
Council.
B. Duties and responsibilities. The City Clerk shall have all of the following
duties and responsibilities:
(1) Perform the duties of Clerk as prescribed in § 62.09(11), Wis.
Stats., and such other duties as prescribed by state statute or the
Council.
(2) Submit reports as requested by the Mayor, Council and/or City
Administrator.43
(3) The City Clerk or his/her designee shall be responsible for the
enforcement of all ordinances relating to licenses unless other
provision is made by the Council for the enforcement.
(4) Perform all duties as set forth in the job description of City Clerk.
(5) Fulfill such other duties as may be directed by the Mayor or City
Administrator.
C. Responsible to the City Administrator. The City Clerk shall be
responsible to the City Administrator, subject to the policy direction of
the Mayor and Council.
D. Removal. The City Clerk may be removed for cause as provided in
§ 103-21 of the Code of the City of Monona, or as otherwise provided in
the contract of employment between the City Clerk and the City.
A. Appointment. The City Building Inspector shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. Approval of the contract
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-3
1:83
§ 103-4. City Engineer. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 1-11-625]
for the employment of the City Building Inspector shall constitute
approval of the appointment.44
B. Duties and responsibilities.
(1) As Building Inspector. The duties of the Building Inspector shall be
to enforce the Building, Electrical, Plumbing and Heating,
Ventilating and Air Conditioning Codes of the City, and perform any
other duties prescribed by the Common Council.
(2) Health Officer. The Building Inspector shall serve as Health Officer
as defined in § 250.01(5), Wis. Stats.45
(3) Other. To perform any other duties prescribed by state statute or as
may be lawfully ordered by the Mayor or Council, and to submit an
annual report and such other periodic reports as requested by the
Mayor, Council and/or City Administrator.
C. Responsible to City Administrator. The City Building Inspector shall be
responsible directly to the City Administrator, subject to the policy
direction of the Mayor and the Common Council.46
D. Removal. The Building Inspector may be removed by the Mayor upon
recommendation of the City Administrator subject to confirmation by
the Common Council, after compliance with review procedures
established by the Common Council or as otherwise provided in the
contract of employment between the Building Inspector and the City.
A. Appointment. The City Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by the Council. Approval of the contract for the
employment of the City Engineer shall constitute approval of the
appointment.47
B. Duties and responsibilities. The City Engineer shall:
(1) Provide professional engineering services to the City as requested
by the Mayor, Common Council and/or City Administrator.
(2) Perform such other functions and duties as may be required by the
City Administrator.
(3) Perform any other duties prescribed by state statute or as may be
lawfully ordered by the Mayor or Council.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-3 MONONA CODE § 103-4
1:84
§ 103-5. City Attorney.
(4) Submit an annual report and such other periodic reports as
requested by the Mayor, Council and/or City Administrator.
C. Responsible to Public Works Director. The City Engineer shall be
responsible directly to the Public Works Director, subject to the policy
direction of the Mayor and the Common Council.48
D. Removal. The City Engineer may be removed by the Mayor upon
recommendation of the City Administrator, subject to confirmation by
the Common Council, after compliance with review procedures
established by the Common Council or as otherwise provided in the
contract of employment between the City Engineer and the City.
A. Appointment. The City Attorney shall be appointed or employed by the
Council, and the term of the Attorney's office shall commence upon
appointment and continue until his or her successor is appointed and
qualifies. Approval of the contract for the employment of the City
Attorney shall constitute approval of the appointment.
B. Duties and responsibilities.
(1) The City Attorney shall be responsible for the conduct of all legal
services of the City in accordance with § 62.09(12), Wis. Stats., and
shall serve as legal advisor to the Mayor, Council and all
committees, commissions and boards. The Attorney shall represent
the City in matters in which the City is interested before any court
or tribunal and shall perform such other duties as may be required
by the Mayor or Council. The Attorney shall call to the attention of
the Mayor and Council all matters of law affecting the City.
(2) The City Attorney shall submit an annual report and such other
periodic reports as requested by the Mayor, Council and/or City
Administrator.
(3) The City Attorney shall perform any other duties prescribed by the
state statutes or as may be lawfully ordered by the Council.
C. Responsible to Mayor. The City Attorney shall be responsible to the
Mayor, subject to the policy direction of the Common Council. The City
Attorney shall work closely and coordinate activities with the City
Administrator. Requests for legal opinions shall be made through the
Mayor and/or City Administrator pursuant to City policy.
D. Removal. The City Attorney may be removed from office by the Common
Council, after compliance with review procedures established by the
Council, and in accordance with any contractual rights between the
Attorney and the City.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-6
1:85
§ 103-6. Municipal Judge. [Amended 1-3-2011 by Ord. No.
1-11-622]
A. Municipal Judge.
(1) Office created. Pursuant to § 755.01, Wis. Stats., there is created
the office of Municipal Judge for the City of Monona.
(2) Election; term. The Municipal Judge shall be elected at large at the
spring election in even-numbered years for a term of four years, or
until a successor is elected and qualifies. The term of office shall
commence on May 1 next succeeding the election. Midterm
vacancies in the office of Municipal Judge shall be filled by special
election to be held not less than 55 days nor more than 70 days
after the order of the Council therefor.
(3) Salary. The Municipal Judge shall receive a salary as determined
from time to time by the Common Council, which shall be in lieu of
fees and costs. No salary shall be paid to the Judge for any time
during the term of office for which he or she has not executed and
filed the official bond and oath as required by Subsection A(4)
below.
(4) Bond; oath. The Municipal Judge shall execute and file with the
Clerk of Courts for Dane County the oath prescribed by § 757.02,
Wis. Stats., and a bond in the penal sum of $2,000. The Judge shall
not be qualified to act until a certified copy of the bond is filed with
the City Clerk and a certified copy of the oath is filed with the office
of Director of State Courts as required by § 755.03, Wis. Stats.49
(5) Jurisdiction. The Judge shall have jurisdiction as provided by law
and § 755.045, Wis. Stats., and exclusive jurisdiction of violations of
City ordinances, resolutions and bylaws.
B. Municipal Court.
(1) Court established. The Municipal Court for the City of Monona is
established pursuant to Ch. 755, Wis. Stats.50
(2) Hours. The Municipal Court shall be open as determined by order
of the Municipal Judge.
(3) Location. The Municipal Judge shall hold court in the Monona
Public Library Municipal Room, unless otherwise provided by the
Common Council.51
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-6 MONONA CODE § 103-6
1:86
§ 103-7. Chief of Police. [Amended 5-7-2012 by Ord. No. 5-12-639]
(4) Procedure. The procedure in Municipal Court for the City shall be
as provided by this section and state law, including, without
limitation because of enumeration, Chapters 755, 799, 800 and
§§ 23.66 to 23.99 and 345.20 to 345.53, Wis. Stats.
(5) Collection and return of forfeitures. The Municipal Judge shall
collect all forfeitures, penalty assessments, fees and taxable costs
in any action or proceeding before the Court and shall pay over
such moneys to the City Treasurer within 30 days of collection. At
such time the Municipal Judge shall also report to the City
Treasurer the title, nature of offenses and total amount of
judgments imposed in actions and proceedings in which such
moneys were collected.
(6) Contempt of Court. The Municipal Judge may punish a person for
contempt of court in accordance with the provisions of § 800.12 of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
C. Stipulation and deposits in Municipal Court.
(1) Deposit schedule to be established. The Municipal Judge shall
establish and submit to the Common Council for approval in
accordance with § 800.037, Wis. Stats., a schedule of deposits for
violations of City ordinances, resolutions and bylaws, except traffic
regulations which are governed by § 345.26, Wis. Stats., and
boating violations governed by § 30.77, Wis. Stats. When approved
by the Council, such deposit schedule shall be posted in the office
of the Municipal Court Clerk and the Monona Police Department.52
(2) Stipulation and deposit in lieu of court appearance. Persons cited
for violations of City ordinances, resolution or bylaws for which a
deposit has been established under this subsection shall be
permitted to make a stipulation of "no contest" and a deposit in lieu
of court appearance as provided in § 800.035(6), Wis. Stats.53
(3) Traffic and boating deposits. The deposit schedule established by
the Wisconsin Judicial Conference and the procedures set forth in
Chs. 23 and 345, Wis. Stats., shall apply to stipulations and
deposits for violations of traffic regulations in accordance with
§ 345.27, Wis. Stats., and boating regulations enacted in
accordance with § 30.77, Wis. Stats.
(4) When not permitted. Stipulations and deposits shall not be
permitted after initial appearance or in cases of contempt.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-7
1:87
§ 103-8. Fire Chief. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 10-09-608]
A. Appointment. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Police and
Fire Commission and shall hold office during good behavior subject to
suspension or removal by the Commission for cause. An employment
contract may be required.
B. Duties and responsibilities.
(1) To exercise general supervision of the Police Department and be
responsible for the personnel and general efficiency of the
Department.
(2) To enforce all ordinances of the City.
(3) To have the powers outlined in § 62.09(13), Wis. Stats., including
the duties of Constable.
(4) To perform any other duties prescribed by the state statutes or as
may be lawfully ordered by the Council.
(5) Submit an annual report and such other periodic reports as
requested by the Mayor, Council and/or City Administrator.
(6) The Chief of Police or designees are authorized to run a Wisconsin
criminal history records check for any lawful purpose, including
but not limited to on any applicant for a City of Monona license or
employment position to assist in determining whether the applicant
possesses the necessary qualifications and for any law enforcement
investigative purpose.
C. Responsible to the Mayor. The Chief of Police shall be responsible to the
Mayor, subject to the policy direction of the Council. The Chief of Police
shall work closely and coordinate activities with the City Administrator.
D. Removal. The Chief of Police may be removed from office by the Police
and Fire Commission for cause.
A. Appointment. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Police and Fire
Commission and shall hold office during good behavior, subject to
suspension or removal by the Commission for cause. An employment
contract may be required.
B. Duties and responsibilities.
(1) To exercise general supervision of the Fire and EMS Departments
and be responsible for the personnel and general efficiency of the
departments.
(a) Be responsible for daily administrative duties associated with
the EMS Department.
§ 103-7 MONONA CODE § 103-8
1:88
(b) Act as or designate the departmental training officer and
coordinate training programs for the Fire and EMS
Departments.54
(c) Supervise Fire and EMS Departments personnel.
(2) To have control of the apparatus used by the Department and be
responsible for its proper maintenance.
(3) To have complete command of and entire responsibility for all
firefighting operations, to plan the control of the same, direct the
action of the Department when at a fire, to grant leaves of absence
at a fire when deemed proper, and see that the fire apparatus is
kept in proper condition at all times.
(4) To serve as Fire Inspector, with power to appoint one or more
Deputy Fire Inspectors.
(5) To enforce all fire prevention ordinances of the City and state laws
and regulations pertaining to fire prevention and keep citizens
informed on fire prevention methods and on the activities of the
Department.
(6) Submit a monthly report and such other periodic reports as
requested by the Mayor, Council and/or City Administrator relating
to the condition of the various pieces of apparatus and
appurtenances, the number of fires occurring since the previous
report, the date of same and loss occasioned thereby, and the total
number of active members in the Department. The Chief shall also
report upon the drill and training program of the Department,
together with other pertinent information, including
recommendations of such improvements as are deemed proper and
necessary for the operation of the Department.55
(7) To perform any other duties prescribed by state statute or as may
be lawfully ordered.
(8) Annually update the Department's comprehensive set of standards,
operating policies, procedures and practices as well as the system
to evaluate the same on a wide variety of topics. These
Departmental standards, operating policies, procedures and
practices seek to conform to those established by the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA).
(9) Every three years, update a comprehensive three-year strategic
plan that sets goals and timetables for the Department.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-8
1:89
§ 103-9. Library Director.
§ 103-10. City Planner and Economic Development Director.59
C. Responsible to the Mayor. The Fire Chief shall be responsible to the
Mayor, subject to the policy direction of the Council. The Fire Chief
shall work closely and coordinate activities with the City Administrator.
D. Removal. The Fire Chief may be removed from office by the Police and
Fire Commission for cause.56
A. Appointment. The Library Director is appointed by the Library Board.57
B. Duties and responsibilities.
(1) To exercise general supervision of the Library and be responsible
for the personnel and general efficiency of the Library.
(2) To be responsible for the maintenance and improvement of the
Library collection.
C. Responsible to the Library Board. The Library Director shall be
responsible to the Library Board. The Library Director shall work
closely with and coordinate activities with the City Administrator.
D. Removal. The Library Director may be removed by the Library Board
after compliance with review procedures established by the Common
Council or as otherwise provided in the contract of employment, if any,
between the Library Director and the City.58
A. Appointment. The City Planner and Economic Development Director
shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the
Common Council. Approval of the employment contract shall constitute
confirmation by the Common Council.
B. Duties and responsibilities.
(1) To enforce the Master Plan and Zoning Code of the City.
(2) To coordinate current and long-range planning, as well as
providing input to the Common Council on the overall development
of the City.
(3) To serve as staff to the City Plan Commission and Community
Development Authority.
56.Editor's Note: Former § 2-3-9, Director of Fire Prevention/EMS Director, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 10-09-608.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-8 MONONA CODE § 103-10
1:90
§ 103-11. Parks and Recreation Director.60
(4) To serve as Zoning Administrator.
(5) To serve as Floodplain Zoning Administrator.
(6) To coordinate economic development activities of the City.
C. Responsible to City Administrator. The City Planner and Economic
Development Director shall be responsible to the City Administrator,
subject to the policy direction of the Mayor, Council and Community
Development Authority.
D. Removal. The City Planner and Economic Development Director may be
removed by the Mayor, upon recommendation of the City Administrator,
subject to confirmation by the Common Council, after compliance with
review procedures established by the Common Council or as otherwise
provided in the contract of employment between the City Planner and
Economic Development Director and the City.
A. Appointment. The Parks and Recreation Director shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common Council. Approval of
the employment contract shall constitute confirmation by the Common
Council.
B. Duties and responsibilities:
(1) Oversee the operation and coordinate the use of the Monona
Community Center.
(2) Develop and implement recreation programs involving the
Community Center, park facilities and other City and community
facilities.
(3) Serve as Director of the Monona Municipal Swimming Pool.
(4) Operate and maintain all City parks and recreation areas and
related facilities and buildings.
C. Responsible to City Administrator. The Parks and Recreation Director is
directly responsible to the City Administrator, subject to the policy
direction of the Mayor and the Common Council.
D. Removal. The Parks and Recreation Director may be removed by the
Mayor upon recommendation of the City Administrator, subject to
confirmation by the Common Council, after compliance with review
procedures established by the Common Council or as otherwise
provided in the contract of employment, if any, between the Parks and
Recreation Director and the City.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-12
1:91
§ 103-12. Weed Commissioner.
§ 103-13. Assessor.
§ 103-14. Senior Center Director.
A. Appointment. The Weed Commissioner shall be appointed by the Mayor
upon recommendation of the City Administrator, subject to
confirmation by the Common Council.
B. Duties and responsibilities. The Weed Commissioner shall have the
duties and responsibilities outlined in § 66.0517, Wis. Stats.
A. Pursuant to the Wisconsin Statutes, the City elects not to be governed
by those portions of the statutes which relate to the selection and
tenure of the City Assessor and which are in conflict with this section.
B. Instead of being elected, the Assessor or assessing firm shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to Council confirmation. Said person or
firm so appointed to perform the duties of such office shall have a term
as determined by contract. A corporation or an independent contractor
may be appointed as the City Assessor. The corporation or independent
contractor so appointed shall designate the person responsible for the
assessment. The designee shall file the official oath under § 19.01, Wis.
Stats., and sign the affidavit of the Assessor attached to the assessment
roll under § 70.49, Wis. Stats. No person may be designated by any
corporation or independent contractor unless he or she has been
granted the appropriate certification under § 73.09, Wis. Stats. For
purposes of this subsection, "independent contractor" means a person
who either is under contract to furnish appraisal and assessment
services or is customarily engaged in an independently established
trade, business or profession in which the services are offered to the
general public.
A. Appointment. The Senior Center Director shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common Council. Approval of the
employment contract shall constitute confirmation by the Common
Council.61
B. Duties and responsibilities. The Senior Center Director shall perform
the following duties:
(1) To oversee the operations of the Monona Senior Center.
(2) Maintain the financial and operational records of the Monona
Senior Center.
(3) Fulfill such other duties as may be directed by the Mayor or City
Administrator.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-12 MONONA CODE § 103-14
1:92
§ 103-15. Director of Public Works. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No.
1-11-625]
C. Responsible to the City Administrator. The Senior Center Director shall
be responsible to the City Administrator, subject to the policy direction
of the Mayor and Council.
D. Removal. The Senior Center Director may be removed in accordance
with the provisions of § 103-21 of the Code of the City of Monona, after
compliance with review procedures established by the Common
Council, or as otherwise provided in the contract of employment
between the Senior Center Director and the City.
A. Appointment. The Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common Council. Approval of the
contract for the employment of the Director of Public Works shall
constitute approval of the appointment.62
B. Duties and responsibilities. The Director of Public Works shall:
(1) Appoint all personnel under his or her direction, subject to
approval of the City Administrator and consistent with City
personnel policies.
(2) Manage and direct public works and utility programs of the City.
(3) Perform such other functions and duties as may be required by the
City Administrator.
(4) Perform any other duties prescribed by state statute or as may be
lawfully ordered by the Mayor or Common Council.
(5) Perform the duties of Water Superintendant.
(6) Prepare and submit an annual capital improvement budget and
five-year capital plan.
(7) Manage and direct the public works operating programs of the City,
including water, sewer, streets, stormwater, engineering, forestry
and sanitation.63
(8) Perform the duties of Street Commissioner.
(9) Submit an annual report and such other periodic reports as
requested by the Mayor, Common Council and/or the City
Administrator.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-15
1:93
§ 103-16. Finance Director.65
§ 103-17. Director of Administrative Services.66
C. Responsible to the City Administrator. The Director of Public Works
shall be responsible directly to the City Administrator, subject to the
policy direction of the Mayor and the Common Council.64
D. Removal. The Director of Public Works may be removed by the Mayor
upon recommendation of the City Administrator, subject to
confirmation by the Common Council, after compliance with review
procedures established by the Common Council, or as otherwise
provided in the contract of employment between the Director of Public
Works and the City.
A. Appointment. The Finance Director shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by the Common Council. Approval of the
employment contract shall constitute confirmation by the Common
Council.
B. Duties and responsibilities. The Finance Director shall have all of the
following duties and responsibilities:
(1) Perform the duties of Treasurer as prescribed in § 62.09(9), Wis.
Stats., and such other duties as prescribed by state statute or the
Common Council.
(2) Develop, evaluate and oversee the day-to-day and year-end
financial functions of the City.
(3) Submit annually to the Mayor and Council, and make available to
the public, complete reports on the financial affairs of the City.
(4) Keep the Mayor and Common Council fully advised as to the
financial condition and future financial needs of the City.
(5) Perform all duties as set forth in the job description of the Finance
Director.
(6) Fulfill such other duties as may be directed by the Mayor or City
Administrator.
C. Responsible to the City Administrator. The Finance Director shall be
responsible to the City Administrator, subject to the policy direction of
the Mayor and Council.
D. Removal. The Finance Director may be removed for cause, as provided
in § 103-21 of the Code, or as otherwise provided in the contract of
employment between the Finance Director and the City.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
65.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 103-15 MONONA CODE § 103-17
1:94
§ 103-18. Community Media Director.67
A. Appointment. The Director of Administrative Services shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common
Council. Approval of the employment contract shall constitute
confirmation by the Common Council.
B. Duties and responsibilities. The Director of Administrative Services
shall have all of the following duties and responsibilities:
(1) Direct the administrative support functions for the City
Administrator, department heads, Mayor and City Council.
(2) Perform all human resource functions for the City.
(3) Perform all duties as set forth in the job description of the Director
of Administrative Services.
(4) Fulfill such other duties as may be directed by the Mayor or City
Administrator.
C. Responsible to the City Administrator. The Director of Administrative
Services shall be responsible to the City Administrator, subject to the
policy direction of the Mayor and Council.
D. Removal. The Director of Administrative Services may be removed by
the Mayor for cause, as provided in § 103-21 of the Code, or as
otherwise provided in the contract of employment between the Director
of Administrative Services and the City.
A. Appointment. The Community Media Director shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common Council. Approval of the
employment contract shall constitute confirmation by the Common
Council.
B. Duties and responsibilities. The Community Media Director shall have
all of the following duties and responsibilities:
(1) Direct the programming, joint operations and promotion of the City
of Monona's/Monona Grove School District's PEG access channel
and LPFM radio station.
(2) Serve as Monona Grove High School's audiovisual coordinator and
student advisor.
(3) Perform all duties as set forth in the job description of the
Community Media Director.
(4) Fulfill such other duties as may be directed by the Mayor or City
Administrator.
66.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
67.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 103-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-18
1:95
C. Responsible to the City Administrator. The Community Media Director
shall be responsible to the City Administrator, subject to the policy
direction of the Mayor and Council.
D. Removal. The Community Media Director may be removed by the
Mayor for cause, as provided in § 103-21 of the Code, or as otherwise
provided in the contract of employment between the Community Media
Director and the City.
§ 103-18 MONONA CODE § 103-18
1:96
ARTICLE II
General Rules for Elected Officials, City Officers and Employees
§ 103-19. Qualifications for elected officials.
No person shall be eligible for election as an official of the City of Monona
unless he or she is a citizen of the United States and a resident of the City.
§ 103-20. Vacancies and absentees.
§ 103-21. Removal from office.
A. Vacancies in elective and appointive positions are caused as provided in
§§ 17.03 and 17.035, Wis. Stats.
B. Vacancies shall be filled as provided in § 17.23, Wis. Stats.
C. If any officer be absent or temporarily incapacitated for any cause, the
Council may appoint some person to discharge his or her duties until he
or she returns or until such disability is removed.
D. A Council member shall be eligible for appointment as Mayor to fill an
unexpired term.
A. Elected officials. Elected officials may be removed as provided in
§§ 17.12(1)(a) and 17.16, Wis. Stats.
B. Appointed officials. Appointed officials may be removed as provided in
§§ 17.12(1)(c) and 17.16, Wis. Stats.68
C. Qualifications of appointed officials.
(1) All citizen appointees to City committees, commissions or boards
shall be residents of the City. If an individual moves from the City
during the course of his or her term of appointment, this shall
constitute grounds for immediate removal from that particular
committee, commission or board, and the Mayor shall appoint a
replacement with Council confirmation.
(2) Nonresident members may be appointed to City committees,
commissions or boards upon the recommendation of the Mayor and
approval of 2/3 of the Council that the best interests of the City will
be served by such appointment.
D. Attendance at committee, commission or board meetings. All citizen
appointees are expected to attend all scheduled committee, commission
or board meetings. Three unexcused absences or six absences over a
six-month period of time from regularly scheduled meetings shall
constitute grounds for removal from that particular committee,
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-21
1:97
§ 103-22. Bonds to be filled by City officers.
Every bond required of a City officer shall be executed with sufficient
sureties in a sum fixed by the Council when not otherwise prescribed and
be approved by the Mayor. Whenever the Council shall deem any bond
insufficient, it may require an additional bond to be executed and filed in a
sum and within a time to be set by it. No City officer shall be accepted as a
surety on any bond, note or other obligation of the City.
§ 103-23. Oaths of office.69
Elected and appointed officials shall take and file the official oath within 10
days after notice of their election or appointment, as provided in § 62.09(4),
Wis. Stats.
§ 103-24. Rule-making authority. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No.
1-11-625]
commission or board, and the Mayor shall appoint a replacement with
Council confirmation.
A. Authorization for department heads. Heads of departments of the City,
including, without limitation by enumeration, the City Administrator,
City Clerk, Parks and Recreation Director, Chief of Police, Fire Chief,
and Director of Public Works, may make rules, regulations or directives
for the administration of their departments but not for the conduct of
the general public.
B. Approval of rules by City Administrator.
(1) Any proposed departmental rule, regulation or directive from the
Police and Fire Departments shall be referred to the City
Administrator for review. Within 15 days of formal presentation to
the City Administrator, the City Administrator shall forward the
proposed rule, along with his or her recommendations, to the
Mayor for review.
(2) Any proposed departmental rule, regulation or directive other than
those proposed by the Police and Fire Departments shall be
referred to the City Administrator for review. Within 15 days of
formal presentation to the City Administrator, the City
Administrator shall either forward the proposed rule along with
recommendations to the Mayor for review or return the proposed
rule to the department along with suggested revisions. Any rule, or
any part thereof, returned by the City Administrator to the
department head shall be deemed to be unacceptable and not in
force.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 103-21 MONONA CODE § 103-24
1:98
C. Time of taking effective. All proposed rules, regulations or directives
shall be effective 30 calendar days after presentation to the City
Administrator, unless returned by either the City Administrator or the
Mayor or the Common Council acts by resolution to nullify such rule. In
emergency situations requiring immediate action, rules may become
effective immediately, but all rules so enacted shall be reported to the
City Administrator, the Council and the Mayor within 24 hours, with the
reasons for the necessity of immediate implementation. All emergency
rules are temporary in nature and must be formally presented as
required in Subsection B to become permanent rules.
D. Notice. All proposed rules shall be posted by the department in the
work area of all employees subject to any such rule within 24 hours of
presentation to the City Administrator. The department shall file one
copy of the proposed rule with the City Clerk, who shall maintain such
copy for general public inspection. The City Clerk shall provide the
Common Council with copies of any proposed rule for its review. The
City Clerk shall distribute copies of such proposed rules to all Council
members and to the members of the appropriate advisory committee,
commission or board within 72 hours of the promulgation of the
proposed rule by the department.
E. Effect of failure to comply with rule. Each employee subject to any rule
shall comply with such rule. Failure to comply with such rule shall be
cause for disciplinary action.
§ 103-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-24
1:99
Chapter 112
POLICE AND FIRE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 18, especially § 18-9.
Fire Department — See Ch. 70.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 103.
§ 112-1. Organization of Police and Fire Commission.70
§ 112-2. Qualifications of applicants.
A. The word "commission," when used herein, shall refer to the Police and
Fire Commission.
B. The legal status of the Monona Volunteer Fire Department, Inc., as
permitted by § 62.13, Wis. Stats., shall not be affected or impaired by
this chapter or the rules and regulations contained herein.
A. Every applicant for appointment to the police and fire service shall:
(1) Be a citizen of the United States.
(2) Have the equivalent of 60 college credits for police and 30 college
credits for fire.
(3) Be able to speak the English language understandably.
(4) Not have been previously rejected by the Commission's medical
examiner for a cause that remains uncorrected.
B. Health and fitness.
(1) Every applicant for appointment to the police and fire service shall
be in good health and sound physical condition as determined by
the designated examiners of the Commission.
(2) Every applicant for appointment to the police and fire service shall
pass a physical fitness test as approved by the Commission.
C. Every applicant for police officer shall meet the recruit qualifications
and training standards set by the Wisconsin Law Enforcement
Standards Board.
D. Every applicant shall comply with the recruit qualifications, training
standards and testing procedure established by the Commission for a
given position.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). See also § 18-9, Police and Fire Commission.
§ 103-24 MONONA CODE § 112-3
1:100
§ 112-3. Application.
§ 112-4. Examination.
§ 112-5. Nature of examination procedure.
A. The Commission shall authorize the issuance of forms for making
application for appointments. Notice of the time and place for the
issuance of such forms shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the City at least 10 days prior to the issuance thereof and
by such other means of publicity as the Commission may direct.
B. Any misrepresentation in regard to any material fact contained in the
application shall be sufficient cause for excluding the applicant from
the examination or for removing the applicant's name from the eligible
list or for discharge of the applicant from the service.
C. Wherever the application itself reveals that the applicant cannot meet
the qualifications for the position, such application shall be rejected by
the Commission or its designated representative, and the applicant
shall be notified of the reason therefor.
D. An applicant previously rejected by the medical examiner shall not take
the examination herein provided for until a certificate from the medical
examiner shows that the cause for which the applicant was rejected has
been corrected.
E. Any former employee dismissed from either of the Departments for a
reason other than that set forth in § 112-9A shall thereafter be ineligible
to make application for appointment to any position in the police and
fire service.
F. Any former employee of the police and fire service who desires to
reenter the service shall undergo the same examination as a new
applicant.
A. The Commission shall hold examinations for appointments to the police
and fire service, and the Chief of each Department shall fix the date,
place and hiring process therefor whenever necessary to meet or
anticipate the needs of the service, subject to approval by the
Commission.
B. The Chief of each Department shall indicate to the Commission in
writing the duties of each position tested for and any special
qualifications desirable therefor.
A. The examinations shall be practical in their nature and relate to those
matters which will fairly test the capacity of the applicants for the
positions they seek.
B. Examination may include a written exam as determined by the
Commission.
§ 112-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-5
1:101
§ 112-6. Conduct of examinations.
§ 112-7. Appointments.
C. Proof of unsatisfactory background investigation shall be grounds for
disqualification.
D. The Commission shall conduct an oral interview for the purpose of
determining the personal fitness of the applicant for the position to be
filled.
A. All examinations shall be carried on under the supervision of the
Commission, which may designate the suitable person or persons to
conduct or assist in conducting the examinations and may fix the
compensation to be paid such persons by the City in conformity with
budgetary and other provisions established by the Council.
B. Information relative to the applicant's scores, as transmitted to the
Chiefs of the Departments and the Commission, shall be considered
strictly confidential and shall not be divulged, except as required by
applicable law or order of a court with jurisdiction, or insofar as it may
be necessary to determine those applicants eligible for additional tests.
C. Applicants shall not be permitted to give assistance during the
examination to another applicant participating therein. A violation of
this rule shall subject each applicant involved to exclusion from the
examination.
D. No applicant shall be given a second or special competitive test in
connection with any examination held, unless required by applicable
law or it is shown to the satisfaction of the Commission that the
applicant's failure to take or complete such test was due to a manifest
error or mistake for which the Commission or its designated assistants
are responsible, the nature of which shall be set forth in the minutes, or
that such failure was the result of other good and valid reasons.
E. Each Department will establish a minimum score that meets the needs
of that particular process. To the weighted total score of each applicant
who attains a passing mark the Commission shall apply the appropriate
veteran's preference points as provided by § 62.13(4)(d), Wis. Stats.
F. The final rating of any applicant's examination papers shall be
furnished to him or her upon request.
G. Examination papers may be destroyed by the applicable Chief or his or
her designated representatives at any time after the expiration of the
applicable public records retention period and in compliance with
§ 128-7 of this Code and §§ 19.21 and 19.35(5), Wis. Stats.
A. The Commission shall appoint the Chiefs of the Police and Fire
Departments, who shall hold office without probationary requirements
§ 112-5 MONONA CODE § 112-7
1:102
§ 112-8. Disciplinary actions.
during good behavior, subject to suspension or removal by the
Commission for cause.
B. For the position of Chief, the Commission may appoint a suitable
person, in its discretion, who need not be a member of the Department
or a resident of the City.
C. After each examination the Commission shall prepare an eligible list,
which shall contain the names of those applicants who have received a
passing mark and which may, in the discretion of the Commission, be in
order of their rank.
D. The Chief shall make appointments to all positions from the eligible list
so provided.
E. All appointees (subordinates only) shall be on probation pursuant to
union contract. If during the probationary period of actual service in the
new position the person appointed proves unsatisfactory or undesirable
for the position, the Chief may dismiss them from the service or may
reduce the person in rank if the appointment was promotional. The
appointees shall not be entitled to any appeal to the Commission from
such dismissal or reduction in rank.
A. Suspensions. A subordinate may be suspended as herein provided as a
penalty. A subordinate may also be suspended by the Commission
pending the disposition of charges filed against them.
B. Filing of charges. Charges may be filed against a subordinate by the
Chief, by a member of the Commission, by the Commission as a body, or
by any person aggrieved by an action of the subordinate. Such charges
shall be in writing and shall be filed with the President of the
Commission. Pending disposition of such charges, the Commission or
Chief may suspend such subordinate.
C. Suspension of subordinates. A subordinate may be suspended for cause
by the Chief or the Commission as a penalty. The Chief shall file a report
of such suspension with the Commission immediately upon issuing the
suspension. No hearing on such suspension shall be held unless
requested by the suspended subordinate. If the subordinate suspended
by the Chief requests a hearing before the Commission, the Chief shall
be required to file charges with the Commission upon which such
suspension was based.
D. Procedures. The following procedures shall be followed by the
Commission following the filing of charges:
(1) A copy of the charges shall be served upon the charged party. A
hearing, if necessary, shall be held not less than 10 days nor more
than 30 days following service of charges. Use of the phrase
"charged party" in this section shall refer to a paid employee
§ 112-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-8
1:103
appealing disciplinary action of a Chief or the person against whom
a complaint has been filed by a citizen or by the Commission.
(2) When a hearing is to be held, the President of the Commission shall
set the date. Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall
be given to the charged party and his or her counsel and the
complainant, by mailing a notice by certified mail to the address of
the charged party as obtained from the files of the Department.
Notice shall be given at least five days prior to the date of the
hearing. A copy of the charges and a brief explanation of the
evidence shall accompany the notice. The President or his or her
designees shall conduct the hearing, and the Commission may
retain counsel for assistance during the hearing.
(3) The hearing on the action shall be public. Both the charged party
and the complainant may be represented by an attorney, at their
own cost, and may compel the attendance of witnesses by
subpoenas, which shall be issued by the President of the
Commission. All testimony of witnesses at hearings shall be given
under oath administered by the Secretary or other member of the
Commission in the form and manner provided in § 887.03, Wis.
Stats.
(4) At the hearing the order shall be as follows:
(a) Statement of the charges by the President.
(b) Opening statements, if any, by both sides.
(c) Presentation of testimony and the introduction of evidence by
the complainant to substantiate the charges.
(d) Cross-examination of witnesses by the charged party or his or
her counsel.
(e) Redirect examination of witnesses by the complainant or his or
her attorney as determined appropriate by the President.
(f) Re-cross-examination of witnesses by the charged party or his
or her attorney as determined appropriate by the President.
(g) Presentation of testimony and the introduction of evidence by
the charged party to refute the charges.
(h) Repeat of Subsection D(4)(d) through (f) regarding witnesses
produced on behalf of the charged party.
(i) Opportunity for each side to present evidence in rebuttal of any
evidence presented by the opposing side.
(j) Closing arguments by both sides.
(k) Written briefs may be filed at the discretion of the Commission.
§ 112-8 MONONA CODE § 112-8
1:104
(l) Commissioners may ask questions of the witnesses.
(5) At the conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall prepare
written findings of fact based upon the evidence presented and
conclusions which are based upon the findings. For purposes of
deliberation after the hearing, the Commission may choose to
adjourn into closed session pursuant to § 19.85, Wis. Stats.
(6) Findings and determinations hereunder and orders of suspension,
reduction, suspension and reduction, or removal shall be in writing
and, if they follow a hearing, shall be filed within three days thereof
with the Secretary of the Commission.
(7) No request for a rehearing shall be entertained unless relevant and
material new evidence is submitted which could not have been
presented at the previous hearing. In all cases, the request for
rehearing shall be in writing, reciting the reasons for the request.
(8) Subsequent to the filing of charges, but prior to a hearing, the
President may set a prehearing conference and appoint a
Commissioner or other person as conferee to preside at the
prehearing conference. The purpose of the prehearing conference
is to narrow the issues to be heard and also to shorten the length of
time necessary to complete the presentation of evidence.
(9) The prehearing conference shall be scheduled at least five days
before the hearing. The charged party and the complainant shall be
notified in writing of the prehearing conference and may be
represented by counsel.
(10) The following matters shall be accomplished at the prehearing
conference:
(a) Witness lists and any prior written or recorded statements or
reports of witnesses will be exchanged between the parties (or
their counsel).
(b) Exhibit lists will also be exchanged between parties (or their
counsel).
(c) Witnesses not on the list submitted at the prehearing
conference will be permitted to testify at the hearing and
exhibits not on the list submitted at the prehearing conference
may be introduced at the hearing only if the Commission
determines that the party (or counsel) can demonstrate a
satisfactory reason for the exclusion of such witness or exhibit
from the list(s) submitted at the prehearing conference.
(11) If a party does not appear at the prehearing conference either in
person or by counsel, the conferee shall report this to the
Commission. In the absence of the appearance of the complainant
or counsel at the prehearing conference, the Commission shall
§ 112-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-8
1:105
§ 112-9. Layoffs and reemployment.
§ 112-10. Administration.
dismiss the charges, unless the party or counsel can demonstrate
a satisfactory reason for nonappearance within 72 hours of the
prehearing.
E. Commission determination. If the Commission determines that the
charges are not sustained, the charged party, if he or she is been
suspended, shall be immediately reinstated and all lost pay restored. If
the Commission determines that the charges are sustained, the charged
party, by order of the Commission, may be suspended or reduced in
rank, or suspended and reduced in rank, or removed, as the good of the
service may require.
F. Additional rules. Further rules for the administration of this section
may be made by the Commission.
G. Compensation. No person shall be deprived of compensation while
suspended pending disposition of the charges.
H. Appeals. Any person suspended, reduced, suspended and reduced, or
removed by the Commission may appeal from the order of the
Commission to the Circuit Court by serving written notice thereof on
the Secretary of the Commission within 10 days after the order is filed.
Within five days thereafter, the Commission shall certify to the Clerk of
the Circuit Court the record of the proceedings, including documents,
testimony and minutes.
I. Additional provisions. The provisions of Subsections A through H herein
shall apply to disciplinary actions against the Chiefs where applicable.
In addition thereto, the Commission may suspend a Chief pending
disposition of charges filed by the Commission or by the Mayor.
A. When it becomes necessary, because of need for economy, lack of work
or funds, or for other just causes, to reduce the number of subordinates,
the emergency, special, temporary, part-time or provisional
subordinates, if any, shall be laid off first, and thereafter subordinates
shall be laid off in the order of the shortest length of service in the
Departments. Those with identical seniority shall be laid off in order of
least ability to serve, as determined by the Commission from a
consideration of service reports.
B. The names of subordinates laid off for any cause set forth in Subsection
A shall be retained on an eligible reemployment list for two years after
their layoff. If any vacancies occur, or if the number of subordinates is
increased in the Department, such vacancies or new positions shall be
filled by persons on such list in the inverse order of layoff.
A. Meetings.
§ 112-8 MONONA CODE § 112-10
1:106
(1) Regular meetings with the Police and Fire Commission will be held
at the Monona City Hall upon the call of the Chairperson. The
Commission shall hold a regular spring meeting on or about the
second Wednesday of May; except, when the day so designated falls
on a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the first secular day
following the holiday.
(2) The President and Secretary shall be elected at the annual
meeting.
(3) At the spring meeting the Fire Chief and Chief of Police shall meet
with the Commission and present a summary of the previous year
in their Departments and/or their projected goals for the coming
year and any other further matters desired to be discussed by the
Commission or the Chiefs.
B. All special meetings of the Commission shall be held at the place where
the regular meetings are held, and such special meetings may be called
at any time by the President, or by any two members, by causing a
written notice thereof to be delivered to each Commissioner personally
if he or she can be found, and if he or she cannot be found, by leaving a
copy of such notice at his or her usual place of abode in the presence of
a member of the Commissioner's family of suitable age and discretion.
Special sessions may be held without notice specified in this section
when all members of the Commission are present in person or consent
in writing to the holding of such meeting. This provision shall not be
construed to permit violation of Chapter 19, Wis. Stats. (the Wisconsin
Open Meetings Law).
C. Whenever there are no appeals or disciplinary actions to be considered,
and there appears to be no other business to be transacted by the
Commission at any regular meeting, other than the annual meeting, the
President may dispense with such meeting by notifying each member of
the Commission not more than three days nor less than 24 hours prior
to the time of such meeting.
D. Three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum in order to
transact business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time.
All determinations of the Commission shall be made by a majority of all
the members.
E. The regular order of business of the Commission shall be:
(1) Roll call.
(2) Consideration of the minutes of the preceding meeting.
(3) Consideration of communications from the Chiefs of the Police and
Fire Departments.
(4) Unfinished and miscellaneous business.
(5) New business.
§ 112-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-10
1:107
F. The duties of the President shall be to preside over all meetings of the
Commission, except that, in the President's absence or disability, the
members shall select a President Pro-Tempore to call special meetings
of the Commission when necessary; to preside over hearings conducted
by the Commission, and to see that they are regularly conducted; to
receive written charges filed against Chiefs or subordinates; and to
issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses.
G. Secretary.
(1) The Secretary shall conduct all correspondence of the Commission;
receive appeals from the actions of the Chiefs; send out all notices
required by law, ordinance, these rules, or as requested by the
Commission; make such official publications as may be necessary;
attend all meetings and hearings of the Commission; prepare and
keep records and minutes of the Commission's proceedings;
provide for the taking and recording of testimony and other
evidence received at hearings, preserve such evidence in a
permanent record, and certify such record to the Circuit Court
when required to do so.
(2) The Secretary shall keep a minute book, showing all important
facts pertaining to each meeting and hearing. The minutes of each
meeting and hearing shall be signed by the Secretary, approved by
the Commission and signed by the President. A copy of the minutes
shall be provided each member as soon after each meeting as
possible. One copy shall also be filed with the City Clerk.
H. When a hearing is held, the President of the Commission shall set the
date therefor. Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be
given the accused and the complainant by mailing notice thereof to the
address of the accused as obtained from the files of the Department or
by personal service; in either case not less than five days prior to the
date of the hearing. A copy of the charges shall accompany such notice.
I. Hearings may be held at regular or special meetings of the Commission,
at such time as shall be determined by the Commission. All hearings
shall be open to the public, except that the Commission may take final
action in executive session to the extent permitted by law.
J. The accused and the complainant shall be entitled to representation by
counsel at any hearing, and each party shall bear its own cost of such
representation. In the absence of an appearance of the accused, the
Commission shall proceed to dispose of the matter on such evidence as
may be before it. In the absence of the appearance of the complainant,
if there be one, the Commission shall dismiss the charges without
consideration.
K. All testimony of witnesses at hearings shall be given under oath
administered by the Secretary or other member of the Commission in
the form and manner provided in § 887.03, Wis. Stats.
§ 112-10 MONONA CODE § 112-10
1:108
Chapter 119
PROPERTY, LOST, ABANDONED AND SURPLUS
§ 119-1. Disposal of surplus City property.
L. At the hearing the order shall be as follows:
(1) Statement of the charges by the Secretary.
(2) Testimony and introduction of evidence by the accused.
(3) Complainant's rebuttal.
(4) Accused's rebuttal.
M. The Secretary shall keep a record of each hearing, name and address of
the accused and complainant, if there be one, a brief description of the
charges involved, and the final disposition of the case. The Secretary
shall also show on the docket for each case all other important data and
dates concerning the case, such as date of filing notice of appeal, date
of sending out notices and to whom sent, and dates of hearings,
continuances and final determination.
N. No request for a rehearing shall be entertained unless substantial new
evidence is submitted which could not have been presented at the
previous hearing. In all cases, the request for rehearing shall be in
writing, reciting the reasons for the request.
O. All members and employees of the police and fire services shall conform
to and abide by the rules and regulations of such services, observe the
laws and ordinances in force in the state and the City, and render their
services to the City with courage, zeal, fidelity and discretion.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SURPLUS CITY PROPERTY —
That property which is owned by the City of Monona and which
has no further usefulness to the City. An item of property shall be
considered to have no further usefulness when:
The item or its function has been totally replaced by other City
property and no probable future function exists for it; or
(a)
The City no longer performs the service for which the item was
purchased and no other service can reasonably be provided by
the item; or
(b)
The item is no longer able to reliably or economically perform
the work required of it.
(c)
(1)
§ 112-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-1
1:109
Surplus property as defined in this chapter shall not include land
or buildings but shall include fixtures and such salvage as may
be taken from a building without structural damage when such
fixtures and salvage are not part of a demolition contract. Surplus
City property shall not include property which is obtained by the
City as a result of abandonment or loss by the property's original
owner. Surplus City property shall not include items of property
which are traded in for newer items. Surplus City property shall
not include library materials used by the public library for lending
purposes.
(2)
B. Determination of surplus City property. Whenever an item of City
property is determined to be surplus City property on the basis that the
City no longer performs the service for which the item was purchased,
the City Administrator, upon the recommendation of the pertinent
department head, shall determine whether or not the item is surplus
City property.71
C. Disposition of surplus City property.
(1) Whenever the City Administrator, upon the recommendation of the
pertinent department head, determines that an item of property is
surplus City property, he/she shall dispose of such property as he/
she determines.72
(2) Whenever the fair market value of an item is more than $10,000
and the City Administrator, upon the recommendation of the
pertinent department head, has determined, pursuant to the
previous subsection, that the item is surplus City property, the
department head responsible for the items shall dispose of the
property by:
(a) Donation to a nonprofit organization within the City or to a
governmental agency;
(b) Public auction;
(c) Sale by sealed bid; or
(d) Negotiated sale.
(3) In the event of a public auction or sale by sealed bid, the item will
be sold in "as-is" condition to the person submitting the highest bid;
provided, however, that a lower bid submitted by a nonprofit
organization or governmental agency may be accepted by the City.
The department head responsible for the item shall determine the
time in which the successful bidder must remove the item. In the
71.Editor's Note: Original Subsection B(2), pertaining to items with fair market value of
more than $10,000, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 119-1 MONONA CODE § 119-1
1:110
§ 119-2. Lost and abandoned property.
event the item is not removed within that time, the item shall revert
to the City, and the amount of the bid shall be forfeited to the City.
In the event no bids are received, the item shall be disposed of as
directed by the City Administrator.
(4) No public auction or awarding of bids shall occur under this
chapter unless a description of the item to be sold and an advance
notice of the time and place for such auction or bid submission is
first published as a Class 2 notice in the official City newspaper.73
D. Determination of fair market values. Whenever this chapter requires a
determination of the fair market value of an item of property, that
determination shall be recommended by the department head
responsible for the property.74
E. Authority to dispose of property.
(1) Except for library materials used by the public library for lending
purposes, only the City Administrator may dispose of City property
which is not surplus City property.
(2) Whenever this section provides for an auction or other disposition
of any property, the City Administrator shall be authorized to hire
an auctioneer or take such other action as is necessary to properly
dispose of the property; provided, however, that the fees of such
auctioneer and all such costs, other than those for City labor and
the use of City property, do not exceed the payment received by the
City from the auction or sale of the property.
A. City custody of lost or abandoned property. Property which appears to
be lost or abandoned, discovered by officers or turned in to the Chief of
Police by citizens, shall be disposed of according to this section.
(1) Lost and abandoned property will be examined by the Chief of
Police for identifying marks in an attempt to determine the owner.
If identifying marks are present, they shall be used by the Chief of
Police to attempt to contact the owner to return the property. If no
identifying marks are present, the property shall be taken into
custody by the Chief of Police.
(2) No City employee shall keep for his or her own use property found
in the course of duty, nor take possession of property during offduty
hours when the discovery was made while on duty.
73.Editor's Note: Original Subsection C(5), pertaining to items with fair market value of
$10,000 or less, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 119-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-2
1:111
(3) The Chief of Police shall permit citizens to claim lost property if
they can provide sufficient proof that they are the rightful owners.
(4) No City employee shall receive any lost, stolen, abandoned or other
unclaimed property from the Chief of Police, unless that person
receives a written receipt signed by the Chief of Police, a copy of
which shall remain with the City Administrator.
B. Disposal procedures.
(1) Classes of property. All property which has been abandoned, lost or
remained unclaimed for a period of 30 days after the taking of
possession of the same by the City shall be disposed of as follows,
except that, if the property is usable for City operations, the
property need not be sold at auction but may become the property
of the City.
(a) Vehicles. Vehicles shall be disposed of as set forth in the
applicable provisions of Chapter 342, Property Maintenance,
Article I, Junked Vehicles and Appliances, and Chapter 420,
Vehicles, Abandoned, of the Code of the City of Monona.
(b) Intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages. Intoxicating
liquor and fermented malt beverages shall be destroyed.
(c) Firearms, ammunition and explosives. Firearms or ammunition
shall be returned to its rightful owner, destroyed, or
transferred to the State Crime Laboratory, the Division of Law
Enforcement Services of the Department of Justice, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation or the Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
Bureau of the U.S. Department of Treasury; any explosive,
flammable or other material proving a danger to life or
property may be disposed of immediately upon taking
possession thereof. The Chief of Police and the Fire Chief, after
consulting with the County Sheriff's Department, are hereby
authorized to determine the disposal procedure; provided,
however, that any such procedure will attempt to return to its
rightful owner any such material which appears to have been
stolen.
(d) Other property with a fair market value of $100 or less. An
item of property with a fair market value of $100 or less shall
be destroyed or sold at public auction. Perishable property
which deteriorates to a fair market value of less than $100
shall be destroyed.
(e) Other property with a fair market value of over $100. An item
of property with a fair market value of more than $100 shall be
sold at public auction or by sealed bid.
(f) Illegal property. Property which cannot be legally possessed
shall be destroyed.
§ 119-2 MONONA CODE § 119-2
1:112
Chapter 128
RECORDS
§ 128-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTUAL COST — The total cost of personnel, including wages, fringe
benefits and all other benefits and overhead related to the time spent in
search of records.
AUTHORITY — Any of the following City of Monona entities having custody
of a City record: an office, elected official, agency, board, commission,
(2) Disposal by auction or sealed bid.
(a) Whenever any property under this section is sold by public
auction or sale or by sealed bid, such auction or the awarding
of bids shall be preceded by a Class 2 notice describing the
property and arranging the time and place for the auction or
bid submission; such notice shall be published in the official
City newspaper. The property auctioned or sold by sealed bid
shall be sold in as-is condition to the highest bidder. No sale or
auction shall occur until the Chief of Police has determined
that the property has no value to any probable investigation or
legal proceeding. The department head responsible for the
property shall determine the time in which the successful
bidder shall remove the property. In the event the property is
not removed within that time, the property shall revert to the
City, and the amount of the bid be forfeited to the City.
(b) Any City official selling property under this section shall
maintain for two years an inventory of any property not
disposed of by auction or sale by sealed bid and shall include a
record of the date and method of disposal, any payment
received for the property, and the name and address of the
person acquiring the property.
(3) Lost property. Property which is found by persons and delivered to
the Chief of Police for the purpose of locating the former owner
shall not be considered abandoned or unclaimed under this section
until 30 days after mailing to the person finding the property a
notice that he or she may claim ownership of said property. The
Chief of Police shall determine what portion, if any, of the property
or its value shall be given the finder. This provision shall not apply
to any City employee finding property in the regular course of his
or her employment.
(4) Payment to City treasury. All sums received from the sale of
property under this section shall be paid to the City treasury.
§ 119-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-1
1:113
committee, Council, department or public body corporate and politic
created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally
constituted subunit of the foregoing.
CUSTODIAN — That officer, department head, division head, or employee of
the City designated under § 128-3 or otherwise responsible by law to keep
and preserve any City records or file, deposit or keep such records in his or
her office, or who is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such
public records, and who is required by this chapter to respond to requests
for access to such records.
DIRECT COST — The actual cost of personnel, plus all expenses for paper,
copier time, depreciation and supplies.
RECORD — Any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual
or electromagnetic information or electronically generated or stored data
is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics,
which has been created or is being kept by an authority. "Record" includes,
but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts,
photographs, films, recordings, tapes, optical disks, and any other medium
on which electronically generated or stored data is recorded or preserved.
"Record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like
materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the
originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working;
materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have
no relation to his or her office; materials to which access is limited by
copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of
an authority other than a public library which are available for sale or which
are available for inspection at a public library.75
§ 128-2. Duty to maintain records.
A. Except as provided under § 128-7, each officer and employee of the City
shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his or her
predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited
or kept in his or her office, or which are in the lawful possession or
control of the officer or employee or his or her deputies, or to the
possession or control of which he or she or they may be lawfully entitled
as such officers or employees.
B. Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term
of employment, or whenever the office or position of employment
becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his or
her successor all records then in his or her custody, and the successor
shall receipt therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file said
receipt with the City Clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is
selected or qualifies, such records shall be delivered to and receipted
for by the City Clerk, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to such
successor upon the latter's receipt.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 128-1 MONONA CODE § 128-3
1:114
§ 128-3. Legal custodians.
§ 128-4. Public access to records.
A. Each elected official is the legal custodian of his or her records and the
records of his or her office, but the official may designate the City Clerk
to act as the legal custodian.
B. Unless otherwise provided in Subsection C, the City Clerk, or his or her
designee, shall act as legal custodian for the Common Council and for
any committees, commissions, boards or other authorities created by
ordinance or resolution of the Common Council. The following offices or
authorities shall have as a legal custodian of records the individual so
named:
Authority Designated Legal Custodian
City Assessor's Office City Clerk
General City Records (including
Council Records)
City Clerk
Fire Department Fire Chief
Police Department Chief of Police
Financial records City Administrator
City Attorney's Office City Clerk
Municipal Court Clerk of Municipal Court
C. For every authority not specified in Subsections A and B, the authority's
chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but
the officer may designate an employee of his or her staff to act as the
legal custodian.
D. Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his
or her absence or in the absence of his or her designee, and each legal
custodian shall send notice of the designated deputy to the City Clerk.
E. The City Clerk shall establish criteria for establishing the records
system and shall cause the department/office records system to be
reviewed on an annual basis.
F. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B, the City Clerk is
designated as the legal custodian of all electronic mail messages of all
departments, committees, commissions, boards and other authorities of
the City. All such electronic messages shall include a subject line which
identifies the matter to which the message pertains. If the sender
believes the message may be exempt from public disclosure, the subject
line shall begin with the word "Confidential." This subsection shall not
apply to the Police Department or Municipal Court, whose electronic
mail messages shall be maintained by the applicable legal custodian
identified in Subsection B and subject to public access in accordance
with this chapter and applicable law.76
§ 128-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-4
1:115
A. Except as provided in § 128-6, any person has a right to inspect a record
and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in § 19.35(1),
Wis. Stats.
B. Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular
office hours.
C. If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records
are kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon
at least 48 hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy.
D. A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those
available to City employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record.
E. The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may
impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an
original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged.
F. A requester shall be charged a fee per page, as prescribed by the City's
Fee Schedule, plus state sales tax, to defray the cost of copying
records.77
(1) If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual
and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing
shall be charged.
(2) The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in
printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and
audiotapes and videotapes, shall be charged.
(3) If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also
be charged.
(4) There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost
therefor exceeds $50, as prescribed in the City's Fee Schedule, plus
state sales tax; in which case the actual cost shall be determined by
the legal custodian and billed to the requester.
(5) The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and
shall require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment if such
estimate exceeds $5.
(6) Elected and appointed officials of the City shall not be required to
pay for public records they may reasonably require for the proper
performance of their official duties.
(7) The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge
or at a reduced charge where he or she determines that waiver or
reduction of the fee is in the public interest.
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 128-4 MONONA CODE § 128-4
1:116
§ 128-5. Access procedures.
§ 128-6. Limitations on right to access.
G. Pursuant to § 19.34, Wis. Stats., and the guidelines therein listed, each
authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for
inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a
notice containing a description of its organization and the established
times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the
methods whereby, the public may obtain information and access to
records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of
records, and the costs thereof. This subsection does not apply to
members of the Common Council.
A. A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal
custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably
describes the requested record or the information requested. However,
a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject
matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a
sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a request must be
in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under
§ 19.37, Wis. Stats. Except as provided below, no request may be
refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be
identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may be
refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a
fee is required under § 128-4F(5). A requester may be required to show
acceptable identification whenever the requested record is kept at a
private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or
regulations so require.
B. Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as
practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the
requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole
or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after
conferring with the City Attorney, determines that a written request is
so general as to be unduly time-consuming, the party making the
request may first be required to itemize his or her request in a manner
which would permit reasonable compliance.
C. A request for a record may be denied as provided in § 128-6. If a request
is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a
written statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the
requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a written
request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a
written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written
denial of a request shall inform the requester that, if the request for the
record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review
upon petition for a writ of mandamus under § 19.37(1), Wis. Stats., or
upon application to the Attorney General or a district attorney.
§ 128-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-6
1:117
A. As provided in § 19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records are exempt
from inspection under this chapter:
(1) Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal
law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law;
(2) Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law
enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require
exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a
condition to receipt of aids by the state;
(3) Computer programs and files, although the material used as input
for a computer program/file or the material produced as a product
of the computer program is subject to inspection; and
(4) Pursuant to § 905.08, Wis. Stats., a record or any portion of a
record containing information qualifying as a trade secret as
defined in § 134.90(1)(c), Wis. Stats.78
B. As provided by § 43.30, Wis. Stats., public library circulation records
are exempt from inspection under this section.
C. In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is
not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after
conferring with the City Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in
part, only if he or she determines that the harm to the public interest
resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full
access to the requested record. Examples of matters for which
disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality, which
were necessary and given in order to obtain the information
contained in them.
(2) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(a), Wis. Stats., records of current
deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing.
(3) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(b) and (c), Wis. Stats., records of current
deliberations concerning employment, dismissal, promotion,
demotion, compensation, performance or discipline of any City
officer or employee, or the investigation of charges against a City
officer or employee, unless such officer or employee consents to
such disclosure.
(4) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(d), Wis. Stats., records concerning current
strategy for crime detection or prevention.
(5) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(e), Wis. Stats., records of current
deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of City property,
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 128-6 MONONA CODE § 128-6
1:118
§ 128-7. Destruction of records.
investing of City funds, or other City business whenever
competitive or bargaining reasons require nondisclosure.
(6) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(f), Wis. Stats., financial, medical, social or
personal histories or disciplinary data of specific persons which, if
disclosed, would be likely to have a substantial adverse effect upon
the reputation of any person referred to in such history or data.
(7) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(g), Wis. Stats., communications between
legal counsel for the City and any officer, agent or employee of the
City, when advice is being rendered concerning strategy with
respect to current litigation in which the City or any of its officers,
agents or employees is or is likely to become involved, or
communications which are privileged under § 905.03, Wis. Stats.
(8) Pursuant to § 19.85(1)(h), Wis. Stats., requests for confidential
written advice from an ethics board and records of advice given by
such ethics board on such requests.
D. If a record contains information that may be made public and
information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record
shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the
information that may not be made public from the record before
release. The custodian shall confer with the City Attorney prior to
releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the City
Attorney when separating out the exempt material. If, in the judgment
of the custodian and the City Attorney, there is no feasible way to
separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without
unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the
entire record shall be withheld from disclosure.
A. City officers may destroy the following nonutility financial records of
which they are the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete,
after completion of any required audit by an auditor licensed under
Chapter 442 of the Wisconsin Statutes, but not less than seven years
after payment or receipt of any sum involved in the particular
transaction, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the State Public
Records Board pursuant to § 16.61(3)(e), Wis. Stats., and then after
such shorter period:79
(1) Bank statements, deposit books, slips and stubs.
(2) Bonds and coupons after maturity.
(3) Canceled checks, duplicates and check stubs.
(4) License and permit applications, stubs and duplicates.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 128-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-7
1:119
(5) Payrolls and other time and employment records of personnel
included under the Wisconsin Retirement Fund.
(6) Receipt forms.
(7) Special assessment records.
(8) Vouchers, requisitions, purchase orders and all other supporting
documents pertaining thereto.
B. City officers may destroy the following utility records of which they are
the legal custodians and which are considered obsolete after
completion of any required audit by an auditor licensed under Chapter
442 of the Wisconsin Statutes, subject to State Public Service
Commission regulations, but not less than seven years after the record
was effective unless a shorter period has been fixed by the State Public
Records Board pursuant to § 16.61(3)(e), Wis. Stats., and then after
such a shorter period, except that water stubs, receipts of current
billings and customers' ledgers may be destroyed not less than two
years after payment or receipt of the sum involved or the effective date
of said record.80
(1) Contracts and papers relating thereto.
(2) Excavation permits.
(3) Inspection records.
C. City officers may destroy the following records of which they are the
legal custodian and which are considered obsolete, but not less than
seven years after the record was effective unless another period has
been set by statute, and then after such a period, or unless a shorter
period has been fixed by the State Public Records Board pursuant to
§ 16.61(3)(e), Wis. Stats., and then after such a shorter period:
(1) Contracts and papers relating thereto.
(2) Correspondence and communications.
(3) Financial reports other than annual financial reports.
(4) Justice dockets.
(5) Oaths of office.
(6) Reports of boards, commissions, committees and officials
duplicated in the Common Council proceedings.
(7) Election notices and proofs of publication.
(8) Canceled voter registration cards.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 128-7 MONONA CODE § 128-7
1:120
§ 128-8. Preservation through microfilm.
Any City officer or the director of any department or division of City
government may, subject to the approval of the City Clerk, keep and
preserve public records in his or her possession by means of microfilm
or other photographic reproduction method. Such records shall meet the
standards for photographic reproduction set forth in § 16.61(7)(a) and (b),
Wis. Stats., and shall be considered original records for all purposes. Such
records shall be preserved along with other files of the department or
division and shall be open to public inspection and copying according to the
provisions of state law and of §§ 128-4 through 128-6 of this chapter.
§ 128-9. Disposition of obsolete Police Department or Municipal
Court records.
City officials are empowered to destroy the following Police Department or
Municipal Court records as provided below:
(9) Official bonds.
(10) Police records other than investigative records.
(11) Resolutions and petitions, providing the text of the same appears in
the official City minutes.
D. Notwithstanding the above provisions appearing in this section, it is
intended hereby that election materials may be destroyed according to
lesser time schedules as made and provided in § 7.23, Wis. Stats.
E. Unless notice is waived by the State Historical Society, at least 60 days'
notice shall be given the State Historical Society prior to the
destruction of any record as provided by § 19.21(4)(a), Wis. Stats.
F. Any tape recordings of a governmental meeting of the City may be
destroyed, erased or reused no sooner than 90 days after the minutes of
the meeting have been approved and published, if the purpose of the
recording was to make minutes of the meeting.
A. Transcripts or tape recordings of Municipal Court trials. Audio tape
recordings of trials or juvenile matters in Municipal Court shall be kept
until the time has expired for taking an appeal of such matters to the
Circuit Court for Dane County. Upon the expiration of such period, City
officials are empowered to dispose of, erase, destroy or reuse any such
audiotapes; and to destroy any written transcript made from such
tapes.
B. Municipal Court or traffic ordinance violation case files. All court
papers or written court records in the possession of the Municipal
Court or the City Police Department in proceedings commenced by the
issuance of Municipal Court citations or pleadings shall be kept for six
years after the entry of final judgment.
§ 128-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-9
1:121
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 145
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
License Review Committee — See § 18-13. Zoning — See Ch. 480.
§ 145-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable in this chapter:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as its stock-in-trade for
sale, rent, lease, inspection or viewing books, films, videocassettes,
magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specific
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, and
in conjunction therewith having facilities for the presentation of "adult
entertainment," as herein defined, including adult-oriented films, movies or
live performances, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT CABARET — A cabaret which features topless dancers, strippers,
male or female impersonators or similar entertainers.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any motion pictures, live
performance, display or dance of any type which has as its dominant theme
or is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on any actual or
simulated "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as
herein defined, or the removal of articles of clothing or appearing partially
or totally nude.
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material having as
its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas," as herein defined, for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material having as
its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
C. Police dispatch tapes. All police dispatch audio tapes shall be kept for
30 days, except for those tapes that cover significant incidents. Tapes
covering significant incidences will be retained for a longer period, as
directed by the Chief of Police.
§ 128-9 MONONA CODE § 145-1
1:122
"specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Includes, but is not limited to,
adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult mini motion-picture
establishments or adult cabaret, and further means any premises to which
public patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so
physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments
or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purposes
of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or wherein an entertainer
provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a
member, whether or not such adult entertainment is held, conducted,
operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect.
COMMITTEE — The License Review Committee for the City of Monona,
Wisconsin.
COUNCIL — The Common Council for the City of Monona, Wisconsin.
OPERATORS — Any person, partnership or corporation operating,
conducting, maintaining or owning any adult-oriented establishment.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Simulate or actual:
§ 145-2. Adult-oriented establishment license.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks and female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola.
A.
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if opaquely
covered.
B.
A. Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio or cunnilingus.
B.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breasts.
C.
A. Except as provided in Subsection D below, from and after the effective
date of this chapter no adult-oriented establishment shall be operated
or maintained in the City without having procured a license as provided
in this chapter and having further complied with all statutes,
ordinances and regulations of the state, county and City applicable
thereto.
B. A license may be issued only for one adult-oriented establishment
located at a fixed and certain place. Any person who desires to operate
more than one adult-oriented establishment must have a license for
each.
§ 145-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-2
1:123
§ 145-3. Application for license.
§ 145-4. License review procedure.
C. No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person.
D. All adult-oriented establishments existing at the time of the passage of
this chapter must submit an application for a license within 90 days of
the passage of this chapter. If an application is not received within such
ninety-day period, then such existing adult-oriented establishment shall
cease operations.
A. Any person desiring to secure a license shall make application to the
City Clerk. The application shall be filed in duplicate with and dated by
the City Clerk. A copy of the application shall be distributed promptly
by the City Clerk to the applicant.
B. The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the City
Clerk. An applicant for a license interested directly in the ownership or
operation of the business shall furnish the following information under
oath:
(1) Name and address, including all aliases.
(2) Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
(3) The address of the adult-oriented establishment to be operated by
the applicant.
(4) If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the
name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the
name and address of the registered agent, the name and address of
all shareholders owning more than 5% of the stock in such
corporation and all officers and directors of the corporation.
(5) Applications shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant as
provided by § 887.01, Wis. Stats.
(6) Applicants must provide a copy of their seller's permit, along with
their application, as proof that they are in good standing for sales
tax purposes, before they may be issued a license.
(7) Any false statement contained in such application shall
automatically nullify any license pursuant thereto.
(8) If any fact given in an application subsequently changes, the
licensee shall file a notice in writing of such change with the Clerk
within 10 days.
A. The Chief of Police shall make an investigation of the applicant to
determine whether the applicant possesses the qualifications necessary
for issuance of a license under this chapter within 14 days of receiving
an application.
§ 145-2 MONONA CODE § 145-4
1:124
§ 145-5. Standards for issuance of license.
To receive a license to operate an adult-oriented establishment, an applicant
must meet the following standards:
B. The Fire Chief and Building Inspector shall inspect the premises
proposed to be licensed to determine whether such premises conforms
to this chapter and with the ordinances of the City and the laws of the
state and any administrative regulations which are applicable which
have been issued by the state or any agency of the state within 14 days
of receiving an application.
C. Each of the above officers shall file written reports with the Clerk. If any
such report is unfavorable, a copy thereof shall be mailed to the
applicant together with a notice of the next regularly scheduled License
Review Committee meeting.
D. Each application shall be referred by the City Clerk to the License
Review Committee, which shall make such additional investigation as to
the advisability of granting such license as may be necessary or
desirable. The License Review Committee shall recommend grant or
denial of the license by the Common Council.
E. No license shall be granted under the chapter until the Council shall
authorize the same.
F. Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to
the investigation of the application, or his or her refusal or failure to
appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath
regarding such application, or his or her refusal to submit to or
cooperate with any investigation required by this chapter, shall
constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for
such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the Common
Council.
G. Whenever an application is denied, the City Clerk shall advise the
applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. If the applicant
requests a hearing within 10 days of receipt of notification of denial, a
public hearing shall be held before the next regularly scheduled Council
meeting as hereinafter provided.
A. If the applicant is an individual:
(1) The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age.
(2) The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated
this chapter within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
B. If the applicant is a corporation:
(1) All officers, directors and stockholders required to be named under
§ 145-3B shall be at least 18 years of age.
§ 145-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-5
1:125
§ 145-6. Display of license or permit.
The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adultoriented
establishment.
§ 145-7. Renewal of license or permit.
Every license issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of issuance unless sooner revoked
and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year.
Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the
City Clerk. The application for renewal must be filed no later than 60 days
before the license expires. The application for renewal shall follow the same
procedure as an original application.
§ 145-8. Revocation of license.
(2) No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under
§ 145-3B shall have been found to have previously violated this
chapter within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
C. If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of
organization where two or more persons have a financial interest, all
persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or
other type of organization shall be at least 18 years of age.
A. The Common Council shall revoke a license or permit for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on
any application or material facts were omitted from any
application.
(2) The operator or any employee of the operator violates any provision
of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted by the Council
pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, that in the case of a
first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an
employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days if
the Council shall find that the operator had no actual or
constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the
exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive
knowledge.
(3) The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license or permit.
(4) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this chapter is not paid.
(5) Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or
consumed on the premises of the adult-oriented establishment.
§ 145-5 MONONA CODE § 145-8
1:126
§ 145-9. Physical layout of adult-oriented establishment.
Any adult-oriented establishment having available for customers, patrons or
members any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult
entertainment must comply with the following requirements:
§ 145-10. Responsibilities of operator.
B. The Common Council before revoking or suspending any license or
permit shall give the operator at least 10 days' written notice of the
charges against him or her and the opportunity for a public hearing
before the Council as hereinafter provided.
C. The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically
and immediately revoke the license.
D. Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a
license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or
premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as an adultoriented
establishment for six months from the date of revocation of the
license.
A. Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and
from aisles and public areas of the adult-oriented establishment and
shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type devices.
B. Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following
construction requirements:
(1) Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent
booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall.
(2) Each booth, room or cubicle shall have at least one side totally open
to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all
times of anyone occupying same.
(3) All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extending from
the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light-colored,
nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable.
(4) The floor must be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured
and easily cleanable.
(5) The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use,
shall be a minimum of 10 footcandles at all times as measured from
the floor.
C. Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at
any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual
activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No
individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth.
§ 145-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-10
1:127
§ 145-11. Administrative procedure and review.
Chapter 68, Wis. Stats., shall govern the administrative procedure and
review regarding the granting, denial, renewal, nonrenewal, revocation or
suspension of a license.
A. The operator shall maintain a register of all employees, showing the
name and aliases used by the employee, home address, age, birth date,
sex, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, phone numbers, social
security number, date of employment and termination and duties of
each employee. The above information on each employee shall be
maintained in the register on the premises for a period of three years
following termination.
B. The operator shall make the register of employees available
immediately for inspection by police upon demand of a member of the
City Police Department at all reasonable times.
C. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
D. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violating of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license
shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
E. No employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow any minor
to loiter around or to frequent an adult-oriented establishment or to
allow any minor to view adult entertainment, as defined herein.
F. The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary
manner at all times.
G. The operator shall maintain at least 10 footcandles of light in the public
portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if
a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a
patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle
adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in
such aisles; provided, however, at no time shall there be less than one
footcandle of illumination in such aisles as measured from the floor.
H. The operator shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its
patrons with the provisions of this chapter.
I. All employees of the establishment are to be at least 18 years of age.
§ 145-10 MONONA CODE § 145-12
1:128
§ 145-12. Exclusions.
All private and public schools, as defined in Chapter 115, Wis. Stats.,
located within the City are exempt from obtaining a license hereunder when
instructing pupils in sex education as part of their curriculum.
§ 145-13. Enforcement.
The City Police, Fire and Building Inspection Departments shall have the
authority to enter any adult-oriented establishment at all reasonable times
to inspect the premises and enforce this chapter.
Chapter 152
AMBULANCE TRANSPORTATION
§ 152-1. Fee for ambulance transportation. [Amended 6-17-2013 by
Ord. No. 6-13-646; 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689; 10-16-2017 by
Ord. No. 10-17-691]
§ 152-2. Ambulance standby fee. [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
10-17-691]
If a person or organization requests a dedicated ambulance or other EMS
unit for an event, or such unit is otherwise required for such event, the
requester or event organizer shall be charged an ambulance standby fee in
an amount established by the Public Safety Committee. The fee shall be paid
at least five days prior to the event and shall be in addition to any fees or
charges for services provided to any patient.
A. Individuals receiving transportation or services from the Monona
Emergency Medical Services shall be charged fees as follows:
(1) A fee shall be established by the Common Council; and
(2) Charges for mileage, medications, supplies and all other
consumable goods provided shall be in an amount established by
the Public Safety Committee.
B. If the ambulance fee is not covered by insurance, or partially covered,
and the person is unable to pay the fee, he or she may request a waiver
of the balance due.
C. An active member of the Monona Emergency Medical Services or the
Monona Fire Department or the active member's immediate family
living in the same household shall not be charged ambulance
transportation fees if transported within the City limits.
§ 145-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-2
1:129
Chapter 159
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 312.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 321.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 335.
§ 159-1. Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires:
ANIMAL — Mammals, reptiles and birds.
AT LARGE — A dog or cat to be off the premises of the owner and not under
the control of some person either by means of a leash or within a vehicle or
other enclosure shall be deemed to be at large.81
CAT — Any feline, regardless of age or sex.
CRUEL — Causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering or
unjustifiable injury or death.
DOG — Any canine, regardless of age or sex.
FARM ANIMAL — Any warm-blooded animal normally raised on farms in the
United States and used for food or fiber.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Has that meaning as appears in
§ 967.02(5), Wis. Stats., and includes a humane officer under § 173.03, Wis.
Stats., but does not include a conservation warden appointed under § 23.10,
Wis. Stats.
NEUTERED — As used herein as describing a dog or cat shall mean a dog
or cat having nonfunctional reproductive organs.
OWNER — Any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog or cat and the
occupant of any premises on which a dog or cat remains or to which it
customarily returns daily for a period of 10 days; such person is presumed
to be harboring or keeping the dog or cat within the meaning of this section.
PET — An animal kept and treated as a pet.
§ 159-2. Rabies vaccination required for dogs and cats.
A. Rabies vaccination. The owner of a dog or cat shall have the dog or cat
vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian. The owner of a dog or cat
shall have the dog or cat revaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian
before the date that immunization expires as stated on the certificate of
vaccination or, if no date is specified, within three years after the
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 152-2 MONONA CODE § 159-2
1:130
§ 159-3. Issuance of dog and cat licenses; kennel licenses.
previous vaccination. The certificate of vaccination shall meet the
requirements of § 95.21(2), Wis. Stats.82
B. Issuance of certificate of rabies vaccination. A veterinarian who
vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies shall complete and issue to the
owner a certificate of rabies vaccination bearing a serial number,
stating the owner's name and address, the name, sex, spayed or
unspayed, neutered or unneutered, breed and color of the dog or cat,
the date of the vaccination, the type of rabies vaccination administered
and the manufacturer's serial number, the date that the immunization
expires as specified for that type of vaccine by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention of the United States Department of Health and
Human Services.
C. Copies of certificate. The veterinarian shall keep a copy of each
certificate of rabies vaccination in a file maintained for this purpose
until the date that the immunization expires or until the dog or cat is
revaccinated, whichever occurs first.
D. Rabies vaccination tag. After issuing the certificate of rabies
vaccination, the veterinarian shall deliver to the owner a rabies
vaccination tag of durable material bearing the same serial number as
the certificate and the year the vaccination was given and the name,
address and telephone number of the supervising veterinarian.83
E. Tag to be attached. The owner shall attach the rabies vaccination tag or
a substitute tag to a collar, and a collar with the tag attached shall be
kept on the dog or cat at all times, but this requirement does not apply
to a dog or cat during competition or to a dog or cat securely confined
indoors. The substitute tag shall be of a durable material and contain
the same information as the rabies vaccination tag. The requirements of
this subsection do not apply to a dog or cat which is not required to be
vaccinated under Subsection A.
F. Duplicate tag. The veterinarian may furnish a new rabies vaccination
tag with a new serial number to an owner in place of the original tag
upon presentation of the certificate of rabies vaccination. The
veterinarian shall then indicate the new tag number on the certificate
and keep a record in the file.
A. Dog and cat licenses.
(1) No person shall own or keep any dog or cat more than five months
of age without obtaining a license therefor from the City Clerk.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 159-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-3
1:131
Sections 174.05 to 174.9, Wis. Stats., shall apply to licensing of
dogs. The licensing year shall be January 1 to December 31.
(2) The minimum license fees under this section shall be as prescribed
in the City's Fee Schedule. These amounts shall be reduced by 1/2 if
the animal became five months of age after July 1 during the
license year.84
(3) Upon payment of the required license tax and upon presentation of
evidence that the dog or cat is currently immunized against rabies,
as required by § 159-2 of this chapter, the City Clerk or his or her
designee shall complete and issue to the owner a license for such
dog or cat, containing all information required by state law. The
City Clerk shall also deliver to the owner, at the time of issuance of
the license, a tag of durable material bearing the same serial
number as the license, the name of the county in which issued and
the license year.
(4) The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar, and the collar
with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog or cat for which the
license is issued at all times, except as provided in § 159-2E.
(5) The fact that a dog or cat is without a tag attached to the dog or cat
by means of a collar shall be presumptive evidence that the dog or
cat is unlicensed. Any City law enforcement or animal control
officer shall seize, impound or restrain any dog or cat for which a
dog or cat license is required which is found without such tag
attached.
(6) Notwithstanding the foregoing, every dog specifically trained to
lead blind or deaf persons is exempt from the dog license tax, and
every person owning such a dog shall receive annually a free dog
license from the City Clerk upon application therefor.
B. Kennels.
(1) General. Licensed kennels shall be permitted, subject to zoning
restrictions as set forth in Chapter 466, Floodplain and Shoreland-
Wetland Zoning, and Chapter 480, Zoning, of this Code. "Kennel,"
as used in this subsection, means any establishment wherein dogs
are kept for breeding, selling or sporting purposes. No premises
shall be allowed as kennels if any buildings or enclosed dog yards
or portions thereof are located closer than 300 feet to the nearest
adjacent residential lot line.
(2) Kennel license applications. The application for a kennel license
shall state the name and address of the owner, the location at which
the proposed kennel is to be kept, and the number of dogs proposed
to be kept. Any person who keeps or operates a kennel may, in lieu
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 159-3 MONONA CODE § 159-3
1:132
§ 159-4. Late fees.87
The City Clerk shall assess and collect a late fee from every owner of a
dog or cat five months of age or over if the owner failed to obtain a license
prior to April 1 of each year or within 30 days of acquiring ownership of a
licensable dog or cat or if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before
the dog or cat reached licensable age. Said late fee shall be charged in
addition to the required license fee. The late fee shall be as prescribed in
the City's Fee Schedule.
§ 159-5. Compliance with quarantine order.
All owners shall comply with Chapter 47, Animal Control, of the Dane
County Code of Ordinances and with § 95.21(4) and (5), Wis. Stats.
§ 159-6. Restrictions on keeping of dogs, cats, fowl and other
animals.
of the individual license for each dog required by this section, apply
to the City Clerk for a kennel license for the operation of such
kennel. The license fee under this section shall be as prescribed
in the City's Fee Schedule. The license year shall commence on
January 1 and end on December 31.85
(3) Issuance of kennel tags. Upon payment of the required kennel
license fee and presentation of evidence that all dogs over five
months of age are currently immunized against rabies, the Clerk
shall issue a number of tags equal to the number of dogs authorized
to be kept in the kennel. Tags shall be made in such form that they
readily may be distinguished from the individual license tags for
the same year. The owner or keeper of a kennel shall at all times,
except during dog show competition or when the dog is securely
confined indoors or in a fenced area, keep a kennel license tag
attached to the collar of each dog over five months kept under a
kennel license. Such tags may be transferred from one dog to
another within the kennel whenever any dog is removed from the
kennel if the other dog is currently immunized against rabies. No
dog bearing a kennel tag shall be permitted to stray or to be taken
anywhere outside the limits of the kennel unless it is on a leash or
temporarily for the purpose of breeding, trial, show or training.86
A. Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person within the City of
Monona to own, harbor or keep any dog, cat or other animal in a
domesticated environment, which:
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 159-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-6
1:133
§ 159-7. Impoundment of animals.
(1) Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or
highway in the City.
(2) Assaults or attacks any person as described in Subsection C, or
destroys property.
(3) Is at large within the limits of the City.
(4) Habitually barks, crows, cries, screeches, howls or makes any other
loud or discordant sound which greatly disturbs the peace and
quiet of a neighborhood or any two or more persons within the City.
(5) Kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal.
(6) Is known by such person to be infected with rabies or to have been
bitten by an animal known to have been infected with rabies.
(7) In the case of a dog or cat, is unlicensed.
B. Confinement of offending or running animals. The Police Department or
any officer of any agency appointed by the Common Council may
apprehend any dog or other animal found running at large within the
City, or which does any of the things prohibited under Subsection A, and
confine the same in a suitable place.
C. Vicious dogs and animals.
(1) No vicious dog shall be allowed off the premises of its owner unless
muzzled or on a leash in charge of the owner or a member of the
owner's immediate family over 16 years of age. For purposes of
enforcing this section, a dog shall be deemed as being of a vicious
disposition if, within any twelve-month period, it bites two or more
persons or inflicts serious injury to one person in unprovoked
circumstances off the owner's premises.
(2) No person shall harbor or permit to remain on his or her premises
any animal that is habitually inclined toward attacking persons or
animals, destroying property, barking excessively or making
excessive noises or running after automobiles.
A. Animal control agency.
(1) The City of Monona may contract with or enter into an agreement
with such person, persons, organization or corporation to provide
for the operation of an animal shelter, impoundment of stray
animals, confinement of certain animals, disposition of impounded
animals and for assisting in the administration of rabies vaccination
programs.
§ 159-6 MONONA CODE § 159-7
1:134
§ 159-8. Duty of owner in case of dog or cat bite.
Every owner or person harboring or keeping a dog or cat who knows that
such dog or cat has bitten any person shall immediately report such fact to
the Chief of Police and shall keep such dog or cat confined for not less than
10 days or for such period of time as the animal control officer shall direct.
The owner or keeper of any such dog or cat shall surrender the dog or cat to
a law enforcement, health or humane officer upon demand for examination.
§ 159-9. Limitation on number of dogs and cats.
§ 159-10. Animal feces.
Any person owning, keeping, possessing or harboring dog(s) and/or cat(s)
shall promptly remove and dispose of all feces left by their dog(s) and/or
cat(s) on any public or private property which is not owned or occupied
by such person. This section shall not apply to a person who is visually or
physically handicapped.
§ 159-11. Violations and penalties.89
Any person violating sections of this chapter shall be subject to the general
penalty set forth in § 1-4 of the Code.
(2) The City of Monona does hereby delegate any such animal control
agency the authority to act pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
B. Impounding of animals. In addition to any penalty hereinafter provided
for a violation of this chapter, any animal control or law enforcement
officer may impound any dog, cat or other animal which violates any
provision of § 159-6. In order for an animal to be impounded, the
impounding officer must see or hear the violation of this chapter or
have in his or her possession a signed statement of a complaining
witness alleging the facts regarding the violation.
A. Purpose. The keeping of a large number of dogs and cats within the City
of Monona for a considerable period of time detracts from and, in many
instances, is detrimental to healthful and comfortable life in such areas.
The keeping of a large number of dogs and cats is, therefore, declared a
public nuisance.
B. Number limited. No household shall own, harbor or keep in its
possession a combined total of more than four dogs or cats over five
months of age in any residential unit unless a kennel license has been
issued.88
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 159-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-11
1:135
Chapter 168
BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 321. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 434.
§ 168-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals and
having wheels, any two of which are not less than 14 inches in diameter.
BICYCLE LANE — That portion of a roadway set aside for exclusive use
of bicycles and so designated by appropriate signs and markings by the
responsible governing body.
BICYCLE WAY — Any path or sidewalk, or portion thereof, designated for
the use of bicycles by the responsible governing body.
BIKE ROUTE — Any bicycle lane, bicycle way or highway which has been
duly designated by the responsible governing body and identified by
appropriate signs and markings.
CARRIER — Any device attached to a bicycle designed for carrying articles.
PLAY VEHICLES — Any coaster, skateboard, roller skates, sled, toboggan,
unicycle or toy vehicle upon which a person may ride.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching
under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise
to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
§ 168-2. General bicycle regulations.
A. Parental responsibility. No parent or guardian of any child shall
authorize or knowingly permit such child to violate any of the provisions
of this section.
B. Street operation.
(1) Unless preparing to make a left turn, every person operating a
bicycle upon a roadway carrying two-way traffic shall ride as near
as possible to the right edge of the unobstructed traveled roadway.
On one-way roadways, the operator of the bicycle shall ride as near
as possible to the right edge or left edge of the unobstructed
traveled roadway. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway
shall exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle or one
§ 159-11 MONONA CODE § 168-2
1:136
proceeding in the same direction, allowing a minimum of three feet
between his or her bicycle and the vehicle.
(2) Every person when operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride
such bicycle in single file.90
(3) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped. Infant seats are
permitted if securely attached to the frame at the top mount and to
the axle and frame at the rear bottom mount and if provided with
hand holds, foot rests, foot guards and safety belt. The use of a
backpack for carrying an infant is permitted. Persons are not
permitted to be located on a bicycle in front of the operator of the
bicycle.
(4) No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the safe operation of the bicycle with at least
one hand on the handlebars at all times.
(5) No rider of a bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars
or feet from the pedals or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding on
any street.
(6) Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to
a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the
roadway.
(7) No person may operate a bicycle or moped upon a roadway where a
sign is erected indicating that bicycle riding is prohibited.91
C. Display of license. Valid license sticker must be displayed on the bicycle
so that it is clearly visible.
D. Bicycles not to be pulled by moving vehicles. No person riding upon a
bicycle shall cling or attach himself/herself or his/her bicycle to any
other moving vehicle upon a street or highway, nor shall the operator of
any such bicycle tow or draw any coaster wagon, sled, person on roller
skates, toy vehicles or any other similar vehicle which is not designed to
be towed by a bicycle on such highway.
E. Operation on sidewalks.
(1) Bicycles shall not be operated on Monona Drive sidewalks from the
northern limits of the City to Winnequah Road and on the Yahara
Cove Boardwalk at River Place.
90.Editor's Note: Original Subsection B(3), pertaining to clinging to bicycle, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
91.Editor's Note: Original Subsection C, Required equipment, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II). See now Subsection I(3) below.
§ 168-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-2
1:137
(2) Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give
audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
F. Mopeds prohibited on bicycle ways. No person may ride a moped or
motor bicycle with the power unit in operation upon a bicycle way. Law
enforcement officers shall be exempt from this subsection while acting
in the performance of their official duties.
G. Riding bicycle on bicycle lane.
(1) Unless two-way traffic is authorized by the Common Council on any
portion of a roadway which it has set aside as a bicycle lane and
appropriate traffic signs are installed, every person operating a
bicycle upon a bicycle lane shall ride in the same direction in which
vehicular traffic on the lane of the roadway nearest the bicycle lane
is traveling.
(2) Entering and leaving bicycle lanes.
(a) Unless otherwise provided under Subsection H(2)(b) below, a
person operating a bicycle may enter or leave a bicycle lane
only at intersections or at driveways adjoining the bicycle lane.
(b) A person may leave a bicycle at any point by dismounting from
the bicycle and walking it out of the lane. A person may enter a
bicycle lane at any point by walking his or her bicycle into the
lane and then mounting it.
(3) Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle lane shall exercise
due care and given an audible signal when passing a bicycle rider
proceeding in the same direction.
(4) Every operator of a bicycle entering a bicycle lane shall yield the
right-of-way to all bicycles in the bicycle lane. Upon leaving a
bicycle lane, the operator of a bicycle shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles and pedestrians.
H. Riding bicycle on bicycle way.
(1) Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle way shall:
(a) Exercise due care and give an audible signal when passing a
bicycle rider or a pedestrian proceeding in the same direction.
(b) Obey each traffic signal or sign facing a roadway which runs
parallel and adjacent to a bicycle way.
(2) Every person operating a bicycle upon a bicycle way open to twoway
traffic shall ride on the right side of the bicycle way.
(3) Every operator of a bicycle entering a bicycle way shall yield the
right-of-way to all bicycles and pedestrians in the bicycle way.
§ 168-2 MONONA CODE § 168-2
1:138
§ 168-3. Registration and licensing of bicycles.
I. Lamps and other equipment on bicycles.
(1) No person may operate a bicycle upon a highway, bicycle lane or
bicycle way during hours of darkness unless such bicycle is
equipped with or the operator is wearing a lamp emitting a white
light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front of such
bicycle. Such bicycle shall also be equipped with a red reflector
that has a diameter of at least two inches of surface area so
mounted and maintained as to be visible from all distances from 50
to 500 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams
of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible
from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to
but not in lieu of the red reflector.
(2) No person may operate a bicycle upon a highway, bicycle lane or
bicycle way unless all braking equipment with which the bicycle
was originally provided is in good working order. No person may
operate a bicycle equipped with a coaster brake upon a highway or
bicycle lane unless such brakes will enable the operator to make
the rear wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any bicycle to be equipped with a siren or
whistle or for a rider to use any bell or horn otherwise than as a
reasonable warning to other users of the highway. Law
enforcement officers shall be exempt from this subsection while
acting in the performance of their official duties.92
J. Turns. Every person riding a bicycle upon any public street shall turn
only at intersections as permitted, signal for all turns and stops, and
pass to the left when passing vehicles or bicycles. Every person shall
keep both hands on the handlebars when operating a bicycle.
K. Rentals. A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent
unless the bicycle is licensed and a license sticker or plate is attached
thereto as provided herein and such bicycle is equipped with equipment
required in this chapter.
A. Registration of bicycles. No person shall ride or use a bicycle
customarily kept in the City of Monona upon any public street, highway
or alley in the City unless licensed and registered as herein provided.
B. Registration form. Every owner or operator of any bicycle within the
City shall, within 10 days of the acquisition of such bicycle, file and
register with the Police Department his or her name and address, the
name of the manufacturer of the bicycle, its identification number, style
and a general description of the bike.
92.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 168-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-3
1:139
§ 168-4. Bicycle penalties.94
§ 168-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by bicycle monitors appointed by and under
the jurisdiction of the Chief of Police and sworn police officers. The bicycle
C. Bicycle license. The Police Department shall provide and keep at the
City Hall a suitable record of applications and registrations under this
section. On receipt of payment of the license fee, the Department shall
provide a suitable identification sticker or plate upon which shall be
printed or stamped a distinguishing number. The owner shall affix and
keep affixed to the bicycle for which identification is issued the original
sticker or plate and shall keep the same clean and visible at all times.
An unregistered bicycle may be impounded by the Police Department
for a period of time not to exceed 30 days.
D. License fee. The fee for such sticker or plate shall be as prescribed by
the City's Fee Schedule. Such licenses are not transferable from person
to person or bicycle to bicycle.93
E. Safe condition. No bicycle shall be registered which is in unsafe
mechanical condition. The Chief of Police may suspend the registration
of and remove the identification sticker or plate from any bicycle
operated contrary to state law and City ordinance or operated while in
unsafe mechanical condition, such suspension and removal to continue
for not to exceed 30 days, provided such registration shall not be
reinstated or such identification sticker or plate replaced while such
bicycle is in unsafe condition. Such suspension and removal shall be in
addition to other penalties provided hereunder.
F. Cancellation or registration. The Police Department may cancel the
registration of and remove the identification license from, or impound
for a period of time not to exceed 30 days, any bicycle being operated
upon any street in the City in an unsafe manner or in violation of any
state law or local ordinance, and such cancellation of registration and
removal of license or impoundment shall be in addition to the other
penalties provided hereunder.
A. Any person 16 years of age or older who shall violate any provision of
this chapter may be issued a Uniform Traffic Citation and be subject to
the penalties provided by the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit
Schedule.
B. Any parent or guardian of any child who authorizes or knowingly
permits such child to violate any of the provisions of this chapter may
be subject to the provisions of §§ 346.77 and 346.82(1), Wis. Stats.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 168-3 MONONA CODE § 168-5
1:140
monitors need not be sworn police officers, but if they are not sworn
officers, their enforcement authority shall be limited to enforcement of this
chapter.
§ 168-6. Skateboards and in-line skates. [Added 9-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 08-09-599]
Chapter 175
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning Board of Appeals — See § 18-2.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 232.
Zoning — See Ch. 480.
A. No person shall operate skateboards or in-line skates on any private
property without written permission from the owner of the property or
business.
B. No person shall put down wax on any curb, edge or any other surface
upon which pedestrians or vehicles travel in the City of Monona.
C. Anyone found to have violated this section shall be subject to the
penalty as set forth in § 1-4 of the Code.
§ 168-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-6
1:141

ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 175-1. Purpose and intent of construction standards.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum regulations, provisions
and requirements in the City to ensure safety to persons and property, safe
and stable design, good workmanship in the methods of construction and
uses of materials in any buildings constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired,
moved, converted to other uses or demolished; to regulate the equipment,
maintenance, condition, use, occupancy and safety and general welfare.
This chapter shall apply in the City to new structures and to alterations and
additions to existing structures and, where practical, to existing structures.
§ 175-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Construction Standards Code" of the
City and shall encompass the Building Code and any other codes and special
regulations required to promulgate the purpose and intent of this Code.
§ 175-3. Scope and applicability.
§ 175-4. Definitions.
If not otherwise defined in this chapter, words used herein shall have their
ordinary and accepted meanings.
A. The sections contained in this chapter shall be binding alike on every
owner of a building, every person in charge of or responsible for or who
caused the construction, repair or alteration of any building or
structure, professional engineer or other person who shall prepare
plans for the construction, alteration or addition to any building
structure in the City.
B. All buildings and structures and all parts thereof shall be maintained in
a safe condition, and all devices or safeguards which are required at the
erection, alteration or addition or repair of any building shall be
maintained in good working order. This section shall not be construed
as permitting the removal or nonmaintenance of any existing devices or
safeguards unless authorized in writing by the Building Inspector. Such
maintenance requirements shall apply to all buildings now existing or
hereafter erected.
C. The intent of this chapter is to be a performance code. New materials
and methods may be used when approved by the Building Inspector.
Minor variances from the code may also be approved by the Building
Inspector, when those variances comply with the intent of the
Construction Standards Code.
§ 175-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-4
1:143

ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 175-5. Code enforcement officer.
There is hereby created the Department of Building Inspection, to which
a Building Inspector shall be appointed as provided in Chapter 103 of this
Code of Ordinances. The Building Inspector appointed by the City shall act
as the head of the Department, and as the chief code enforcement officer
for the Construction Standards Code.
§ 175-6. Records and reports.
The Building Inspector shall keep a record of all applications for building
permits in a book for such purpose and regularly number each permit in the
order of its issuance. He or she shall keep a record showing the number,
description and size of all buildings erected. The Inspector shall keep in his
or her office a proper record of all transactions of the office and file a yearly
report covering the same with the Common Council. The yearly report shall
cover the period closing December 31 of each year and shall be filed on
or before February 15 thereafter and shall show the total amount of fees
earned and a summary of the work of the office during such period.
§ 175-7. Authority of Building Inspector.
A. Power to make decisions. The Building Inspector may pass upon any
question arising under the provisions of this chapter relating to
buildings, subject to conditions contained herein.
B. Authority to enter upon all premises. The Inspector may, at all
reasonable times in performance of his or her duties, enter upon any
public or private premises and make inspections thereof and require
production of the building permit for any building, permanent building
equipment, electrical, heating, ventilating, air conditioning or plumbing
work.
C. Revocation of permit. If the Building Inspector finds at any time that the
ordinances, laws, orders, plans or specifications are not being complied
with, he or she shall revoke the building permit, and written notice of
such action shall be posted at the site of the work. When any such
permit is revoked, no further work shall be done upon such buildings
until the permit is reinstated, excepting such work as the Building
Inspector shall by written order require to be done as a condition
precedent to the reissuance of the permit.
D. Unsafe or unsightly buildings.
(1) Order to comply and notice. Whenever the Building Inspector finds
that any building or structure, or any part thereof, is dangerous to
life or adjoining property by lack of maintenance, defective
construction, overloaded floors, decay, lack of guards against fire,
§ 175-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-7
1:145
§ 175-8. Permits.
general dilapidation or other cause, he or she shall order the owner
or tenant thereof to cause the same to be made safe or to be
removed, as in the judgment of the Building Inspector may be
necessary. The owner or tenant of such building or structure shall
thereupon immediately cause the same to be made safe or to be
removed, as ordered.
(2) Inspector to remove if necessary. When the public safety requires
immediate action, the Building Inspector shall enter upon the
premises with such assistance as may be necessary and cause the
building or structure to be made safe or to be removed, and the
expense of such work may be recovered by the City in an action
against the owner or tenant.
A. Permits required. No building, structure or accessory structure, or any
part thereof, shall hereafter be built, enlarged, altered or demolished
within the City, or permanent building equipment installed, except as
herein provided, unless a permit therefor shall first be obtained by the
owner or his or her agent from the Building Inspector. The term
"building" as used herein shall include any building or structure and the
permanent building equipment thereof and any enlargement, alteration
or demolishing of any building or structure or of permanent building
equipment therein, also any material in any old building and the
installation and equipment of underground tanks, vaults and similar
structures. "Permanent building equipment" includes any provisions in
buildings for either water, light, heat, power or ventilation service
therein.
B. Building Inspector may waive a required permit. If in the opinion of the
Building Inspector a proposed alteration to any building or equipment
is insignificant, or the equipment or part is being replaced through
normal maintenance, the Building Inspector may waive the
requirement of a permit.
C. Application for permit. Application for a building permit shall be made
in writing upon a blank form furnished by the Building Inspector and
shall state the name and address of the owner of the building and the
owner of the land upon which it is to be erected, and the name and
address of the architect or designer, and shall describe the location of
the building and the purpose for which it is to be used, and shall contain
such other information as the Building Inspector may require. An
application shall also be deemed incomplete if it is not accompanied by
an approved zoning permit, where required. With such application
there shall be submitted to the Building Inspector a complete set of
plans and specifications covering the proposed building, alterations or
improvements, including a dimensional plan of the tract showing the
location of any proposed building with respect to the adjoining streets,
alleys, lot lines and buildings. If approval of plans submitted is required
under Chs. SPS 361 to 366, Wis. Adm. Code, one set of such plans shall
§ 175-7 MONONA CODE § 175-8
1:146
§ 175-9. Fees for permits and inspections.
bear the seal of inspection and approval of the Wisconsin Department
of Safety and Professional Services (DSPS) and all pertinent
correspondence at time of approval.95
D. Building Inspector may waive the filing of plans. If in the opinion of the
Building Inspector the character of the structure and work is
sufficiently described in the application, he or she may waive the filing
of plans, provided approval is not required by DSPS as required under
Chs. SPS 361 to 366, Wis. Adm. Code, but the location plan must be
filed in any case.
E. Issuance of permit. If the Building Inspector finds that the proposed
building will comply with all ordinances of the City and all laws and
lawful orders of the state, he or she shall officially approve the same
and shall issue a building permit therefor, which shall be kept at the site
of the proposed building. If adequate plans are presented to the
Building Inspector, he or she may at his or her discretion issue a permit
for part of the building before receiving the plans and specifications for
the entire building, but work on any building shall not be commenced
unless a permit or waiver of plans has been issued.
F. Issuing and posting of building permit card. With every permit issued,
the Building Inspector shall issue to the applicant a card properly filled
out. The applicant shall place such card in a conspicuous place on the
premises where the building is to be erected, the card to be
unobstructed from the public view and not more than 15 feet above
grade of the building.
G. Work to be started within six months and finished within 24 months. A
building permit shall have lapsed and be void unless building
operations are commenced within six months from the date thereon and
shall be completed within one year of commencement of building
operations unless otherwise extended by the Building Inspector, to a
maximum of 24 months. Any exterior portion of a building project which
is visible to the public and is not completed within the allotted twentyfour-
month permit period shall constitute a public nuisance. It is
unlawful for a person to commence but fail to complete all repairs
during the time in which the building permit is valid.
A. The Common Council shall establish a fee for processing building
permits and inspections. An applicant for a building permit shall pay the
required fee upon final submission of the application. An application
shall not be deemed complete until the required fee is paid. A copy of
the current fees established by the Common Council shall be kept on
file by the City Clerk.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 175-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-9
1:147
§ 175-10. Inspection and certification.
§ 175-11. Conformance for additions, alterations and change of use.
B. Inspections.
(1) All fees for required inspections are included in the schedule of
fees above. The Inspector shall determine the number of required
inspections, based on the complexity of the project.
(2) Fees for additional inspections or reinspections shall be assessed
as set by the Common Council in the City's Fee Schedule. All fees
for additional inspections or reinspections shall be paid prior to
approval of occupancy.96
(3) Projects commenced without first securing necessary permits shall
be charged double fees.
C. Renewal of permits. Any building permit may be renewed within 90
days after its expiration date in accordance with the procedures for
original issuance of such permit. The fee for reissuance of a building
permit shall be 50% of the original permit cost, and the period of
renewal shall be for the same length as the original permit from the
date of expiration of the original permit. Renewal shall be limited to one
time only.
A. Inspection by Building Inspector. Buildings shall be inspected at such
times and in such manner as may be necessary to secure compliance
with the laws, ordinances, rules and orders applicable thereto. After
inspection, the Building Inspector may issue a certificate of compliance
or prescribe any changes necessary to such compliance, upon the
making of which changes the certificate may be issued.97
B. Certificate of occupancy. Buildings shall have a final inspection before
occupancy, except as herein provided. If on final inspection by the
Building Inspector, the Electrical Inspector, the Plumbing Inspector, the
Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning (HVAC) Inspector, no
violation of this or any other ordinance, law or order is found, the fact
may be so certified to by the Building Inspector, who may thereupon
issue a certificate of occupancy. No building or part thereof shall be
occupied until such certificate has been issued, except with the consent
of the Building Inspector, nor shall any building be occupied which
conflicts with the conditions set forth in the certificate.
C. Inspection warrants. If the Building Inspector is denied access to
inspect a property, he or she may request the City Attorney to seek an
inspection warrant pursuant to § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 175-9 MONONA CODE § 175-11
1:148
§ 175-12. Appeal from orders of Building Inspector.
§ 175-13. Liability for damages.
This chapter shall not be construed as assuming any liability on the part of
the City for damages to anyone injured or for any property destroyed by a
defect in any building or equipment.
A. Building to conform to code after major alteration or repair. The
following specified requirements in this section shall apply to existing
buildings which do not conform to the requirements of this chapter for
new buildings. If alterations or repairs are made to any existing
building, where deemed practical by the Building Inspector, the entire
building shall be made to conform to the requirements given herein for
new buildings.
B. Changed use or occupancy. If the existing use or occupancy of any
existing building is changed to a use or occupancy which would not be
permitted in a similar building hereafter erected, the entire building
shall be made to conform to the requirements given for new buildings,
provided that the use or occupancy of only a portion or portions of the
buildings need to be made to comply with such requirements; and
provided, further, that the Building Inspector may approve any such
change in the use or occupancy of any existing building even though
such building is not made fully to conform to the requirement of this
chapter, if in his or her judgment such a change in the use or occupancy
of the existing building will not extend or increase any nonconformity or
hazard of the building.
C. Alteration and repairs. Every alteration or repair to any structural part
or portion of any existing building shall, when deemed necessary in the
opinion of the Building Inspector, be made to conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
A. Any person aggrieved by an order or ruling of the Building Inspector
may appeal such order to the Board of Appeals as provided in the City's
Zoning Code.
B. At any time the Building Inspector determines that any person is
proceeding in violation of any provision of this chapter relating to
erection, alteration, addition, repair or maintenance of any building or
structure or part thereof or any permit issued hereunder, the Building
Inspector may issue an order directing that actions immediately cease
and may suspend any permit issued to the owner of the property on
which such noncompliance is discovered. Any person who fails to
comply with an order of the Building Inspector issued under this
subsection shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 175-15.
§ 175-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-14
1:149
§ 175-14. Inspection disclaimer.
The findings of inspection are intended to report conditions of apparent
noncompliance with code standards that are readily apparent at the time
of inspection. The inspection does not involve a detailed examination of the
mechanical systems or the closed structural and nonstructural elements of
the building and/or premises. No guarantee or warranty of the premises,
operation, use or the durability of equipment or materials not specifically
cited herein is expressed or implied.
§ 175-15. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to a
penalty as provided in § 1-4 of the Code.
B. Any building or structure hereafter erected, enlarged, altered or
repaired or any use hereafter established in violation of the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed an unlawful building, structure or use.
The Building Inspector or other authorized inspectors may enjoin the
erection, enlargement, alteration, repair or moving of such building or
structure or the establishment of such use of buildings in violation of
this chapter or to cause such building, structure or use to be removed,
and such violation may also be subject to a penalty as provided in the
general penalty provisions of the Code. In any such action, the fact that
a permit was issued shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any error,
oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the Building Inspector or
other City officials constitute a defense. Compliance with the provisions
of this chapter may also be enforced by injunctional order at the suit of
the owner or owners of any real estate within the jurisdiction of this
chapter.
C. Notice of noncompliance.
(1) If an inspection reveals a noncompliance with this chapter or the
Uniform Dwelling Code, the Building Inspector shall notify the
applicant and the owner, in writing, of the violation to be corrected.
All cited violations shall be corrected within 15 days after written
notification unless an extension of time is grated pursuant to § SPS
320.21(c), Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) If after written notification the violation is not corrected within 15
days, a stop-work order may be served on the owner or his or her
representative, and a copy thereof shall be posted at the
construction site. Such stop-work order shall not be removed
except by written notice of the Building Inspector after satisfactory
evidence has been supplied that the cited violation has been
corrected.
(3) Each day each violation continues after the fifteen-day written
notice period has run shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing
in this chapter shall preclude the City from maintaining any
§ 175-14 MONONA CODE § 175-15
1:150
appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision
of this chapter or the Uniform Dwelling Code.
(4) If any construction or work governed by the provisions of this
chapter or the Uniform Dwelling Code is commenced prior to the
issuance of a permit, double fees shall be charged.
D. Any person feeling aggrieved by an order or a determination of the
Building Inspector may appeal from such order or determination to the
Board of Appeals. Those procedures customarily used to effectuate an
appeal to the Board of Appeals shall apply.
E. Except as may otherwise be provided by the statute or ordinance, no
officer, agent or employee of the City of Monona charged with the
enforcement of this chapter shall render himself or herself personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties
under this chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or
employee of the City as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his or her duties under this chapter shall be defended by
the legal representative of the City until the final determination of the
proceedings therein.
§ 175-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-15
1:151

ARTICLE III
Building Codes
§ 175-16. One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code adopted.
§ 175-17. Building and Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning,
Electrical and Plumbing Code adopted.98
Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS 302, Fees; SPS 305,
Credentials; SPS 316, Electrical; SPS 341, Boilers and Pressure Vessels;
SPS 361 to 366, Commercial Building Code; SPS 380 to 387, Plumbing,
both inclusive, and all amendments thereto, are hereby made a part of this
Construction Standards Code by reference with respect to those classes of
buildings and structures, whether presently existing or constructed after
the effective date of this chapter. The City has adopted the "certified
municipality status" as described in § SPS 361.60 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
§ 175-18. Reference standards.
Conformance of construction with the "Basic Building Code," a publication
of the Building Officials and Code Administrators, Inc., and its appendicized
references, as well as the Wisconsin Uniform Building Code, shall be prima
facie evidence of safe construction. Only those standards of workmanship
and safety which are within the scope of but are not clearly described in
the City and state codes are more clearly detailed or described in reference
codes shall be considered recognized standards of good workmanship and
safety. No requirement of reference more stringent than or in conflict
with this chapter shall be in force, nor shall any definition or term in
conflict with those of the City or state codes be applicable to the Monona
Construction Standards Code. Where any requirements of the reference
code are less stringent than the standards of workmanship and safety
described or implied in the state or Monona codes, the state and Monona
A. One- and Two-Family Uniform Dwelling Code adopted. Chapters SPS
320, Administration and Enforcement; SPS 321, Construction
Standards; SPS 322, Energy Conservation Standards; SPS 323,
Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Standards; SPS 324,
Electrical Standards; SPS 325, Plumbing Standards, as amended, are
hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference as if fully set forth
herein and shall be applied to all buildings and structures presently
existing or constructed after the effective date of this section.
B. Building Inspector to enforce. The Building Inspector or his or her
delegated representatives certified by the Department of Safety and
Professional Services are hereby authorized and directed to administer
and enforce all of the provisions of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling
Code incorporated herein by reference.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 175-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-18
1:153
code requirements on the particular item shall apply. Major topics
appearing in the reference code and not appearing in either the Monona or
state codes may be considered recognized standards of workmanship and
safety at the discretion of the Building Inspector.
§ 175-18 MONONA CODE § 175-18
1:154
ARTICLE IV
Accessory Structures Code
§ 175-19. Applicability.
This article shall apply to any structure not considered a habitable building
or structure and not under the auspices of Article III, Building Codes, of this
chapter.
§ 175-20. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — One which:
§ 175-21. Construction standards.
All accessory structures shall be constructed in accordance with Article III,
Building Codes, except:
§ 175-22. Fences and hedges.
A. Is customary and clearly incidental to the principal building or use.
B. Is subordinate in use, area, extent and purpose to the principal building
or use.
C. Is located on the same property as the principal building or use served.
D. May include, but is not exclusively, structures such as boathouses,
sheds, signs and fences.
A. Where the Building Inspector deems it impractical to comply with the
Construction Standards Code in this chapter.
B. Where the accessory structure is manufactured (e.g., metal sheds) to a
recognized standard or listing.
A. Residential fences. Fences or hedges for residential one- and two-family
dwellings shall be erected or planted within the lot lines. All fences and
hedges shall be erected or planted so as to not depreciate any
immediate property or endanger any lives, as determined by the
Building Inspector. Residential fences shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
FENCES or HEDGES — Any partition, structure, wall, gate or
planted materials (excluding trees), of masonry, posts and boards,
palings or woven wire, or wrought iron, used as a dividing marker,
barrier or enclosure.
§ 175-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-22
1:155
(2) Dimensional requirements.
(a) The maximum dimension of wood posts shall be six inches
nominal.
(b) The maximum dimension of boards shall be one by eight inches
nominal.
(c) The maximum diameter of individual poles of a stockade fence
shall be three inches nominal.
(d) The use of doors or plywood sheets is prohibited.
(e) Subject to the terms of this section, all structural elements of
the fence shall face the interior of the lot on which the fence is
erected unless otherwise exempted by the Building Inspector.
(f) Barbed wire and electrical fences are prohibited.
(g) Street yards, side yards, rear yards and shore yards, for
purposes of the section, are determined as provided by the
City's Zoning Code (Chapter 480).
(3) Fence height.
(a) Fences or hedges in side and rear yards shall not exceed six
feet in height. Fences or hedges in side yards shall not extend
beyond the front building line of the dwelling.
(b) Fences or hedges on lots with water frontage shall comply with
all requirements of this section, except that, on the shore yard,
the fences or hedges shall be limited to a maximum height of
42 inches and shall not be closer than 10 feet from the ordinary
high-water mark.
(4) Fences or hedges in street yards. Only decorative fences or hedges
may be erected in street yards, subject to the following
requirements:
(a) Decorative fences or hedges shall be defined as a barrier which
utilizes natural materials such as wood or stone and includes
such plant materials as hedges. Wire, chain-link or cyclonetype
fencing materials are prohibited.
(b) In no case may a fence be closer than six inches to the property
line. Hedges may be planted no closer than 18 inches to the lot
line and must be maintained within the lot lines. No fencing
shall be allowed in a right-of-way or easement. No fence or
hedge shall be erected on any corner lot less than 10 feet from
the traveled portion of any public highway. Fences or hedges
are also prohibited in any location where such barrier creates a
potentially hazardous sight-line situation, as determined by the
Building Inspector. In making such determination, the Building
§ 175-22 MONONA CODE § 175-22
1:156
§ 175-23. Antennas and towers.
Antennas and towers shall be permitted and shall be erected in compliance
with state codes and § 480-18.
§ 175-24. Boathouses, shelters, piers.
Inspector shall utilize the "vision triangle formula" of the City
Engineer.
(c) No such decorative fence or hedge shall exceed 42 inches in
height.
(5) Fence permit required. No fence shall be erected in the City until a
permit for the same has been granted by the Building Inspector.
Specifications or a design sketch shall be submitted to the Building
Inspector at the time of application for his or her approval. A
permit fee as required by § 175-9 shall accompany the application
for permit.
(6) Maintenance. All fences or hedges shall be maintained in a neat,
sightly manner. The Building Inspector may condemn any fence or
hedge not so maintained. The determination to condemn a fence or
hedge under this subsection shall be made in accordance with the
definitions and procedures outlined in this chapter.
(7) Nonconforming fences. All nonconforming fences or hedges
existing on the effective date of this section or any amendment of
this section may be continued, provided that only fences or hedges
that are in actual use, maintained, and do not create or continue a
hazard may be so continued. No such fence or hedge shall be
extended, enlarged, reconstructed or altered.
(8) Fence gates. All gates shall swing in toward the lot on which the
fence is erected.
B. Fences or hedges for commercial, industrial or multiple-family
dwellings. All of the requirements of Subsection A shall apply to zoning
districts other than one- and two-family dwellings, except that barbed
tops are permitted in commercial and industrially zoned areas on
fences of not less than six feet in height, with approval of the Building
Inspector. Rolled or concertine-type barbed wire is prohibited. The
Building Inspector and the Zoning Administrator shall consult with the
Plan Commission as necessary in determining whether to issue a permit
for a fence in a commercial, industrial or multifamily district.
A. Permit required. Boathouses, shelters and piers shall require a building
permit and shall be erected as required by the Building Inspector. A
pier may be removed and reinstalled on a yearly basis without
additional permits, provided that it is not reconstructed or altered and
that it is relocated in the location as originally permitted.
§ 175-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-24
1:157
B. Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this section:
LAGOON — Shall be synonymous with "river" and be defined as any
body of water less than 150 feet in width between two adjacent land
masses.
MARINA — Any pier or pier-like structure built out into or over the
water as a landing place for boats owned by other than the riparian
property owner, and for which such consideration has been tendered.
PIER — Any structure built out into or over the water as a landing place
for boats owned by the riparian property owner.
RIVER — Shall be synonymous with "lagoon" and be defined as any
body of water less than 150 feet in width between two adjacent land
masses.
C. Setback requirements.
(1) Boathouses or shelters built on property adjoining lagoons or the
Yahara River within the boundaries of the City shall not extend
beyond the mean water level of these waters.
(2) Piers and boat landings erected on any lagoon or river within the
boundaries of the City shall not extend more than six feet over the
water, unless a conditional use permit has been issued by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) All piers and boat landings shall be set back a minimum of seven
feet from the side yard lot lines and shall be erected so as to not
impede or endanger boat traffic.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection C(3), a joint pier
between adjacent properties may be erected within the side yard
setback lines of those properties under the following conditions:
(a) The joint pier complies with all other requirements for an
individual pier;
(b) No other piers exist on the properties adjoining at the lot line
to which the setback applies;
(c) The joint pier extends from shore at only one location;
(d) All owners of the adjacent properties between which the pier
shall be erected shall sign the pier permit application.
D. Marinas restricted.
(1) No marina shall be erected in a one- or two family district, unless a
conditional use permit has been issued by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
§ 175-24 MONONA CODE § 175-24
1:158
§ 175-25. Swimming pools and in-ground hot tubs. [Amended
8-6-2018 by Ord. No. 7-18-706]
(2) Marinas may be erected in multifamily districts for use by the
tenants. The maximum number of boat slips shall not exceed the
number of living units.
(3) Marinas may be erected in other districts but shall require a zoning
permit and shall be erected as required by the Plan Commission.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate permanent
swimming pools in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
B. Definition. A private or residential swimming pool is an outdoor
structure containing a body of water in a receptacle or other container
having a depth for water at any point greater than 1 1/2 feet located
above or below the surface of ground elevation, used or intended to be
used solely by the owner, operator or lessee thereof and his family, and
by friends invited to use it, and includes all structural facilities,
appliances and appurtenances, equipment and other items used and
intended to be used for the operation and maintenance of a private or
residential swimming pool. The regulations herein shall also be
applicable to in-ground hot tubs.
C. Exempt pools. The following are exempt from the provisions of this
section:
(1) Covered, aboveground hot tubs.
(2) Portable pools with a maximum wall height at any point no greater
than 24 inches, and a dry total weight no greater than 40 pounds.
D. Permit required. Before work is commenced on the construction or
erection of private or residential swimming pools or on any alterations,
additions, remodeling or other improvements, an application for a
swimming pool building permit to construct, erect, alter, remodel or
add must be submitted in writing to the Department of Inspection.
Plans and specifications and pertinent explanatory data should be
submitted to the Department of Inspection at the time of application.
No work or any part of the work shall be commenced until a written
permit for such work is obtained by the applicant. A fee as set forth in
the official City fee schedule on file in the City Clerk's office shall
accompany such application.
E. Construction requirements. In addition to such other requirements as
may be reasonably imposed by the Building Inspector, the Building
Inspector shall not issue a permit for construction as provided for in
this section, unless the following construction requirements are
observed:
§ 175-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-25
1:159
(1) All materials and methods of construction in the construction,
alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvements and pool
installation shall be in accord with all state regulations and code
and with any and all ordinances of the City now in effect or
hereafter enacted.
(2) All plumbing work shall be in accordance with all applicable
ordinances of the city and all state codes. Every private or
residential swimming pool shall be provided with a suitable
draining method, and in no case shall waters from any pool be
drained into the sanitary sewer system, or onto lands of other
property owners adjacent to that on which the pool is located on in
the general vicinity.
(3) All electrical installations, including lighting and heating but not
limited thereto, which are provided for, installed and used in
conjunction with a private swimming pool shall be in conformance
with the state laws and city ordinances regulating electrical
installations.
F. Setbacks and other requirements.
(1) Private swimming pools shall be erected or constructed on rear or
side lots only and only on a lot occupied by a principal building. No
swimming pool shall be erected or constructed on an otherwise
vacant lot. A lot shall not be considered vacant if the owner owns
the contiguous lot and said lot is occupied by a principal building.
(2) No swimming pool shall be located, constructed or maintained
closer to any side or rear lot line than is permitted in this chapter
for an accessory building, and in no case shall the waterline of any
pool be less than five feet from any lot line.
G. Fence requirement.
(1) Pools within the scope of this section which are not enclosed with a
permanent building shall be completely enclosed by a fence of
sufficient strength to prevent access to the pool, or shall have a
cover or other protective device over such swimming pool of such a
design and material that the same can be securely fastened in place
and when in place shall be capable of sustaining a person weighing
250 pounds. Such cover or protective device shall be securely
fastened in place at all times when the swimming pool is not in
actual use for swimming or bathing purposes. Such fence or wall
shall not be less than four feet in height and so constructed as not
to have voids, holes or openings larger than four inches in one
dimension. Gates or doors shall be kept locked while the pool is not
in actual use.
(2) The pool enclosure may be omitted where portable pools are
installed above ground and have a raised deck around the entire
pool perimeter with an attached enclosed railing which complies
§ 175-25 MONONA CODE § 175-25
1:160
with the International Building Code requirements as adopted by
the state.
(3) All swimming pools existing as of the effective date of this chapter
not satisfactorily fenced shall comply with the fencing
requirements of this section or when water is placed in the pool.
H. Draining and approval thereof. No private swimming pool shall be
constructed so as to allow water therefrom to drain into any sanitary
sewer or septic tank nor to overflow upon or cause damage to any
adjoining property. Provisions may be made for draining the contents of
any swimming pool into a storm sewer, but such installation shall be
subject to prior approval by the Building Inspector. In all cases where a
private swimming pool is to be constructed on premises served by a
private sewage disposal system, approval of the State Board of Health
shall be necessary before the construction of any such pool may
commence.
I. Filter system required. All private swimming pools within the meaning
of this chapter must have, in connection therewith, some filtration
system to assure proper circulation of the water therein and
maintenance of the proper bacterial quality thereof.
J. Dirt bottoms prohibited. All swimming pools of a permanent nature
shall have the sides and bottom of a smooth finish, and no sand or dirt
bottom shall be permitted.
§ 175-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-25
1:161

ARTICLE V
Special Regulations
§ 175-26. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to create special regulations
relating to the Construction Standards Code, for the following reasons:
§ 175-27. Housing and property maintenance.
A. To promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare
of the community, with due consideration of the needs of the region
affected by the City's land and building construction and use policies.
B. To conserve the value of buildings and the quality of neighborhood and
environmental amenities.
C. To secure safety from fire, panic, environmental hazards and other
dangers.
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this section.
DRIVEWAY — The area leading directly from the public street to a
garage or carport (or if no garage or carport exists, a parking area
immediately in front of the dwelling unit) intended for vehicles to travel
to and from those two locations and park thereon.
DWELLING — A place of abode, a residence or a house for use by one
or more persons, excluding hotels or motels.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provisions for living,
cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for habitation by one
family.
FAMILY — An adult, or two adults regardless of gender and any
individuals related to either such individual by blood, marriage or
adoption, including foster children; all of which are living together in a
single housekeeping unit.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — An area surfaced with concrete, asphalt,
brick or a similar hard surface.
OCCUPANT — Any person who occupies or has actual possession of a
property, structure or dwelling, or part thereof.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a property,
structure or dwelling, or part thereof, whether with or without the
knowledge and consent of the owner.
OWNER — Every individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
limited liability partnership, limited liability company, or similar entity,
having a legal or equitable interest in a property, structure or dwelling.
"Owner" shall also include the representative, officer, agent or other
person having the ownership, control, custody or management of any
building. "Owner" does not include any person whose legal or equitable
§ 175-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-27
1:163
interest in the building is a security interest derived solely from the
extension of credit to permit construction, purchase or remodeling of
the property, structure or dwelling by a third party.
REAR YARD — The area of a lot as defined as either a rear yard or shore
yard in § 480-24D(8) of this Code.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — The area located in a Single Family
Residence District, Two Family Residence District, or Multifamily
Residence District under Chapter 480, Zoning, of the Code of the City
of Monona.
SIDE YARD — The area of a lot as defined as a side yard in § 480-24D(8)
of this Code.
STORE — To place an item in a location with no intent to immediately
use it. An item will be rebuttably presumed to be stored at a location
if it remains at that location without being moved for a period of 21
consecutive days.
STREET YARD — The area of a lot as defined as a street yard in
§ 480-24D(8) of this Code.
UNSECURED — Means there exists an opening into a building through
which a person or animal may enter that is not maintained by the
owner, operator or legal occupant in a manner that controls access
thereto.
VEHICLE — Any device designed for transportation which is capable of
self-propulsion, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, jeeps,
vans, motorcycles, motorbikes, go-karts, motorized three-wheeled
vehicles, all-terrain vehicles ("ATVs"), utility task vehicles ("UTVs"),
neighborhood electric vehicles ("NEVs"), golf carts, mopeds,
snowmobiles, dune buggies, tractors, motorboats (with or without a
motor attached), sailboats, iceboats, personal watercraft. The phrase
also includes all utility trailers, trailers designed for transporting any of
the above-listed vehicles and devices designed for transportation which
are not capable of self-propulsion but which are greater than six feet in
length, including but not limited to canoes, kayaks and paddle boards.
B. Health and safety. Every owner, operator or occupant who has assumed
responsibility for maintaining the property pursuant to a written lease
shall remove therefrom and dispose of within a reasonable time all
articles or materials visible to the public which are reasonably
detrimental to the health or safety of the neighborhood or the City in
general.
C. Property maintenance responsibilities of owners, operators and
occupants. Every owner, operator and occupant who has assumed
responsibility for maintaining the property pursuant to a written lease
shall improve and maintain all property under his or her control so as to
comply with the following minimum requirements:
§ 175-27 MONONA CODE § 175-27
1:164
(1) All exterior areas of the property shall be graded to divert water
away from all buildings.
(2) The interior of all vacant buildings and structures and all exterior
areas of all property shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary
condition, free from accumulation of debris, rubbish, garbage,
physical hazards, rodent and varmint harborages and infestations,
and animal feces. All animal feces shall be removed within 24
hours.
(3) Fences, structures, walks, driveways, parking areas and similar
paved areas shall be properly maintained in a safe condition.
(4) The exterior surfaces of all buildings and structures not inherently
resistant to or chemically treated to prevent deterioration shall be
treated with a protective coating of paint or other suitable
preservative which will provide adequate resistance to weathering.
(5) Every interior floor, wall and ceiling including door and window
assemblies shall be kept in good repair and shall be capable of
affording privacy from public view.
(6) Every inside and outside stair, porch, platform, balcony and
appurtenance thereto shall be maintained in good repair, safe to
use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause
to be placed thereon.
(7) Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be
maintained in good repair and free from defects, leaks and
obstructions.
(8) Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor
surface shall be maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to
water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a sanitary
condition.
(9) No owner shall allow an accumulation of rocks, trees, stumps,
waste building material or other debris on the property; except
such debris resulting from land development, building
construction, street grading, or installation of underground utilities
may remain on the property for a period of not more than 10 days,
unless a valid building permit has been issued, in which case such
accumulation be disposed of as set forth in the building permit.99
(10) All private storm sewers and building storm sewers shall be
properly installed and maintained in good repair, free from defects,
leaks and obstructions.
(11) All rain gutters, downspouts, including extensions, and the
discharge systems for sump pumps shall be maintained in good
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 175-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-27
1:165
repair and shall minimize the effect of runoff onto adjacent
properties.
(12) All structures shall be constructed and maintained so that the
exterior is reasonably weathertight and inaccessible to rodents,
vermin and insects.
(13) The exterior of all property shall be maintained in a reasonably
litter-free condition. All litter that is subject to movement by the
elements shall be promptly removed so as to reasonably prevent it
being blown onto other property by the elements.
D. Paved driveways. All driveways on properties in a residential district
shall be paved with concrete, asphalt, brick, pervious paver or a similar
surface within one year of:
(1) Construction;
(2) Remodeling or expansion of the garage so as to require a building
permit; or
(3) Expansion of the driveway.
E. Vacant and damaged buildings.
(1) Vacant buildings.
(a) Requirement to secure vacant buildings. Any building which is
vacant and unsecured for any reason constitutes a public
nuisance. No owner, operator or occupant may maintain or
permit a public nuisance within the City. The owner shall abate
the nuisance by securing the building, including any shed or
outbuilding, against entry by persons or animals. This may
include, with prior written approval of the Building Inspector,
adequately boarding up doors, windows and other openings in
a workmanlike manner so as to prevent entry, vandalism or
damage. Trespassers, garbage, animals, animal nests and
animal nesting materials shall be removed prior to securing
the building.
(b) Other requirements. The owner of a vacant building shall
ensure that the following requirements are met with respect to
the vacant building:
[1] The utilities, plumbing, electrical and heating systems
shall be maintained at all times in a safe condition,
inactivated or drained so as to prevent the possibility of
damage to the structure by the failure of such utilities and
so as to prevent hazardous and dangerous conditions.
[2] At least one door boarded at the grade level shall be
maintained with locks and hinges to permit entry for
inspection purposes.
§ 175-27 MONONA CODE § 175-27
1:166
[3] Access to the building for inspection purposes is required
to be provided to the Building Inspector.
[4] Screening or alternate methods of boarding may be
permitted upon prior written approval by the Building
Inspector.
[5] The Building Inspector shall be notified in writing no later
than 10 days prior to the sale, transfer of possession, or
the unboarding of the property.
(2) Damaged buildings. When any building has been damaged by fire
or other cause, such that hazardous or dangerous conditions exist,
and the building cannot be secured by conventional locking or
boarding up of windows and doors, such building shall be fenced off
so as to prevent access and entry to the structure and the area
immediately surrounding the structure.
F. Outdoor storage. No owner, operator or occupant of property in a
residential district shall store or accumulate outdoors on such property
any of the following items unless such property is expressly zoned to
permit such storage or accumulation:
(1) Vehicles. No owner, operator or occupant shall store outdoors any
vehicle in the street yard of any property in any residential district,
except as follows: [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 672]
(a) The number of vehicles in the street yard does not exceed the
following number:
[1] For properties on which three or more dwelling units exist,
the number of vehicles shall not exceed the number of
parking spaces provided on the site.
[2] For purposes of this subsection, one or two vehicles on a
single trailer designed for the transportation of those
vehicles shall be considered one vehicle.
(b) All such vehicle(s) shall comply with all of the following:
[1] They are parked with all points of contact on a surface
preventing the item(s) from sinking into the ground, with
no part extending over a public sidewalk or public street.
[2] They are owned by and lawfully registered to at least one
of the residents of the dwelling unit, with the exception of
temporary guests staying at the dwelling unit.
[3] They remain at that location without being moved for no
longer than nine consecutive months.
[4] They are lawfully licensed and properly display license
plates and current registration.
§ 175-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-27
1:167
[5] They are in operating condition, except vehicles which are
actively being repaired.
[6] They are not used for dwelling purposes, except for
overnight sleeping for a maximum of 14 days in any one
calendar year.
[7] They are not connected to sewer lines, waterlines, except
temporary electrical connections for charging batteries.
[8] They are not used to store goods, materials or equipment
other than those items considered to be part of the unit or
essential for its immediate use.
(c) Except as provided in Subsection F(1)(a) or (b) above, all
vehicles shall be stored inside a garage or outside in the back
yard or side yard of the property. Vehicles may be stored on the
side yard of a property and shall be parked with all points of
contact on a surface preventing the item(s) from sinking into
the ground, with no part extending over a public sidewalk or a
public street.
(d) Notwithstanding any other provision in this subsection, no
owner, operator or occupant of property in a residential district
shall park or store outdoors on such property any semitractor
or semitrailer for a period longer than 24 consecutive hours.
(2) Nonvehicular items. No owner, operator or occupant shall store
outdoors any nonvehicular personal property in the street yard of
any property in a residential district for a period longer than seven
days, except as follows:
(a) Items may be stored in not more than two storage containers,
each no greater than 75 gallons in size, which possess four
complete sides and a lid, all of which are opaque.
(b) Items may be placed within a closed and locked temporary
storage container (commonly referred to as a "POD®") located
on the driveway of the dwelling unit and which does not
encroach on the sidewalk or public street. No such storage
container shall be located on a property for more than 90 days
in any twelve-month period.
(c) Equipment and construction material necessary for
construction being performed upon the property may be stored
on the property for the duration of a building permit issued by
the City, if one is issued, otherwise for a period not to exceed
60 days.
(d) All construction debris and trash shall be placed within a
dumpster or other suitable container. Only one such dumpster
or container shall be located on the property at one time and
§ 175-27 MONONA CODE § 175-27
1:168
§ 175-28. Moving buildings.
§ 175-29. Demolition of buildings; excavations.
shall be promptly removed upon completion of the construction
or renovation project, but in no case longer than 90 days,
unless extended by the Building Inspector for good cause.
G. Penalty. Any owner, operator or occupant who violates any provision of
this section is subject to the penalties and provisions provided in
§ 175-15.
A. Bond required. Before a permit to move any building is granted by the
Building Inspector, the party applying therefor shall give a bond in the
sum of $5,000 with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the
Building Inspector, conditioned among other things that such party will
save and indemnify judgments, costs and expenses which may in any
way accrue against the City and keep the City harmless against all
liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses in consequence of granting
such permit.
B. Contents of permit. Every permit to move a building shall state all
conditions to be complied with, designate the route to be taken and
limit of time for removal.
C. Regulations for building in transit. The removal of a building shall be
continuous during all hours of the day, and day by day, and at night if
the Building Inspector so orders, until completed, with the least
possible obstruction to thoroughfares. Proper lighting shall be kept in
conspicuous places at each end of the building during the night.
D. Inspection and repair of streets and highways after transit. Every
person receiving a permit to move a building shall, within one day after
reaching its destination, report the fact to the Building Inspector, who
shall report the same to the City Administrator, who shall thereupon
inspect the streets and highways over which the building was moved
and ascertain their condition. If the removal of the building has caused
any damage to the streets or highways over which it moved, the house
mover shall forthwith place them in as good repair as they were before
the permit was granted. Upon failure of the house mover to do so within
10 days thereafter to the satisfaction of the City Administrator, the
Administrator shall order the repair of the damage done to such streets
and highways and hold sureties of the bond given by the house mover
responsible for the payment.
A. Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the Building Inspector
before any building is razed or demolished within the City. Razing
permits shall lapse and be void unless the work authorized thereby is
commenced within six months from the date thereof or completed
within 30 days from the date of commencement of said work. Any
§ 175-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-29
1:169
unfinished portion of work remaining beyond the required 30 days must
have special approval from the Building Inspector.
B. Restoration of site.
(1) Whenever a building is razed or demolished hereunder, all debris
and materials resulting from such demolition shall be removed
from the premises, all basements or other excavations or
depressions revealed or caused by such demolition shall be filled to
the general grade of the premises, and all surfacing on such
premises shall be removed unless intended to be used in
connection with the proposed use of the premises.
(2) All debris must be hauled away at the end of each week for the
work that was done during that week. No combustible material
shall be used for backfill but shall be hauled away. There shall not
be any burning of materials on the site of the razed building.
(3) If any rezoning or removal operation under this section results in,
or would likely result in, an excessive amount of dust particles in
the air, creating a nuisance in the vicinity thereof, the permittee
shall take all necessary steps by use of water spraying or other
appropriate means to eliminate such nuisance. The permittee shall
take all necessary steps prior to the razing of a building, through
the employment of a qualified person in the field of pest control or
by other appropriate means, to treat the building as to prevent the
spread and migration of rodents and insects therefrom during and
after the razing operations.
(4) All appurtenant structures on the premises no longer useful for the
intended use of the premises shall likewise be razed or demolished
and the resulting debris removed from the premises.
(5) All resulting vacant areas shall be seeded or planted as required by
the Building Inspector.
C. Excavations.
(1) Fencing of excavations. The owner of any premises on which there
exists an opening or excavation which is located in close proximity
to a public sidewalk or street right-of-way as to constitute a hazard
to pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall erect a fence, wall or railing
at least four feet high between such opening or excavation and the
public right-of-way.
(2) Closing of abandoned excavations. Any excavation for building
purposes or any uncovered foundation which shall remain open for
more than three months shall be deemed abandoned and a
nuisance, and the Building Inspector shall order that, unless the
erection of the building or structure on the excavation or
foundation shall commence or continue forthwith, suitable
safeguards shall be provided to prevent accidental injury to
§ 175-29 MONONA CODE § 175-29
1:170
§ 175-30. Fire regulations.
Neither fire limits nor fire regulations are included in this chapter. It is the
responsibility of the owner or designer to comply with the requirements of
the City Fire Code.
§ 175-31. Basement doors with locks required in multiple-family
dwellings.
In all multiple-family dwelling units containing four or more dwelling units,
all entrances to basements shall be provided with self-closing doors with
locks, which doors and locks shall be designed to prevent access to such
basements without unlocking such doors.
§ 175-32. Locking mechanisms required.
children or other frequenters or that the excavation or foundation
be filled to grade. Such order shall be served upon the owner of
record or the owner's agent, where an agent is in charge of the
premises, and upon the holder of an encumbrance of record in
the manner provided for service of a summons in circuit court.
If the owner or the holder of an encumbrance of record cannot
be found, the order may be served by posting it on the premises
and publishing it in the official newspaper for two consecutive
publications at least 10 days before the time for compliance stated
in the order commences to run. Such time shall be not less than 14
days nor more than 20 days after service. If the owner of the land
fails to comply with the order within the time required, the Building
Inspector shall cause the excavation or foundation to be filled to
grade. The cost of such abatement shall be charged against the
real estate and entered on the next succeeding tax roll as a special
charge and shall bear interest at a rate established by the Common
Council from the date of the report by the Building Inspector on the
cost thereof, pursuant to the provisions of § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.100
A. Multifamily rental units. All rental housing unit doors exiting to the
building exterior or interior common areas in multifamily dwelling units
shall be equipped with deadbolt locks and operable locking
mechanisms on all windows. Patio-type doors shall be equipped with
locking bars, and all entry doors shall be equipped with door viewers.
B. Requirements for locking mechanisms. Deadbolt locks shall have a
minimum one-inch throw bolt and have a minimum of two No. 8 threeinch
screws installed in the striker plat. Locks may not be installed so as
to require use of a key to operate from the interior of the rental units.
Deadbolt locks shall not be installed more than 48 inches above the
floor. Door viewers shall be installed at 62 inches off the floor, except
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 175-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-32
1:171
§ 175-33. Sauna construction.
that in dwelling units designed for handicapped occupancy there shall
be an additional door viewer installed 47 inches above the floor.
C. Single-family rental units. In single-family rental units Subsection A
hereof shall apply, but only at the request of the tenant. All lessors of
single-family housing units in the City shall provide notice to their
tenants in writing of the tenant's rights to require installation of the
locking mechanisms as set forth in Subsection A hereof. Such notice
shall be given thereafter prior to execution or renewal of any lease
governing a single-family dwelling unit. Upon written request by the
tenant to install locking mechanisms, the lessor shall have 40 days to
install such locking mechanisms.
A. Purpose. Recognizing the inherent dangers of high-temperature saunas
and the lack of suitable reference codes, the following standards are
adopted to address the safe installations of saunas.
B. General construction; residential and commercial installations.
(1) Walls and ceiling shall be covered with wood (redwood or cedar
preferred) and the interior surfaces shall not be finished with any
stains, lacquers or paints. All interior wood shall be nailed with
stainless steel, copper or aluminum nails.
(2) Ceiling height shall be six feet eight inches to seven feet.
(3) Only foil-faced fiberglass insulation shall be used in or around
sauna areas.
(4) Doors shall swing out from the sauna, and a window is
recommended in the door.
C. Plumbing.
(1) Residential. No plumbing is allowed in the sauna.
(2) Commercial. A floor drain is required. No other fixtures or spigots
are allowed.
D. Heating, ventilating.
(1) Ventilation. A fresh-air intake is recommended near the sauna
heater in both residential and commercial installations, as well as
an exhaust vent with a fire damper for commercial saunas.
(2) Sauna heaters.
(a) All heaters in habitable buildings shall be listed and approved
and installed per the listing.
§ 175-32 MONONA CODE § 175-33
1:172
(b) Heaters in accessory buildings may be unlisted appliances if
approved by the Building Inspector and meet the following
requirements:
[1] Gas equipment shall have an additional shutoff valve
located in the space immediately adjacent to the sauna
entry and be clearly labeled.
[2] Any unlisted appliances shall maintain a minimum thirtysix-
inch clearance to combustibles.
(3) Controls.
(a) Sauna heaters shall have dual controls, one manually
adjustable thermostat and a manufacturer's preset maximum
temperature control with automatic shutoff and manual reset.
(b) Residential heaters shall have a sixty-minute timer.
(c) All temperature-sensing devices shall be located within eight
inches of the ceiling.
(d) Maximum temperatures shall not exceed 210°.
E. Electrical.
(1) An insulated-type listed lighting fixture may be used in the sauna,
with the switch located adjacent to the entry door on the outside of
the sauna. No other electrical devices are allowed within the sauna.
(2) The heater shall be wired in accordance with its listing.
(3) All other wiring shall be in accordance with state, local and NEC
codes.
F. Fire protection systems.
(1) An ABC-type fire extinguisher is recommended to be placed outside
of the sauna immediately adjacent to the entry.
(2) Sprinkler heads (250° to 300° F., blue color coded) are
recommended, to be located in an accessible area above the sauna
ceiling and insulation.
§ 175-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-33
1:173

ARTICLE VI
Plumbing Code
§ 175-34. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOUSE SEWERS — That part of the drainage system extending from three
to five feet outside of the building to the connection at the curb or other
disposal terminal.
PLUMBING —
SEWER SERVICE LATERAL — That part of the drainage system extending
from the lot line to the connection with the main sewer.
§ 175-35. Adoption of State Plumbing Code.101
The provisions and regulations of the Wisconsin State Plumbing Code, Chs.
SPS 381 to 387, Wis. Adm. Code, are hereby made a part of this chapter
by reference as though set forth herein, and together with such additional
regulations as may be adopted by the Council, shall extend over and govern
the installation of all plumbing installed, altered or repaired in the City.
§ 175-36. Plumbing Inspector.
All piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with
the water supply and drainage systems with a building.
A.
The construction and connection of any drain or waste pipe carrying
domestic sewage to the sewer service lateral at the curb or other
disposal terminal, including private domestic sewage treatment and
disposal systems and the alteration of any such system, drain or waste
pipe, except minor repairs to faucets, valves, pipes, appliances and
removing of stoppages.
B.
The water service piping outside of the foundation walls of any building
to the mains in the streets, alley or other terminal and the connecting
of domestic hot water storage tanks, water softeners and water heaters
with the water supply system.
C.
D. The water pressure system other than municipal systems.
A plumbing and drainage system so designed and vent piping so
installed as to keep the air within the system in free circulation and
movement, and to prevent with a margin of safety unequal air pressures
of such force as might blow, siphon or affect trap seals or retard the
discharge from plumbing fixtures, or permit sewer air to escape into
the building.
E.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 175-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-36
1:175
A. Authority granted. The Plumbing Inspector shall, under the direction of
the Building Inspector, be responsible for the inspection of plumbing,
water supply and drainage installations from the right-of-way line or
other terminal and installations inside and in connection with any
building as set forth in this article.
B. Qualifications and appointment. The Plumbing Inspector shall be State
of Wisconsin certified as a Plumbing I Inspector. The Plumbing
Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by
the Common Council. The compensation to be paid the Plumbing
Inspector shall be determined by the Council. The Plumbing Inspector
shall also take and subscribe an oath, which together with the
certificate of his or her appointment shall be filed with the City Clerk.
The Plumbing Inspector may be removed from office for cause only
after a full hearing by the Council at which he or she shall be entitled to
appear and produce evidence.
C. Alternate for plumbing inspection work. The Plumbing Inspector shall
not inspect his or her own plumbing work. The Council may appoint an
alternate plumbing inspector, provided he or she shall not make
inspections except during the absence of the regular Plumbing
Inspector or when the regular Plumbing Inspector is unable to carry out
the duties of the office. The alternate plumbing inspector shall also
inspect plumbing work done by the regular inspector.
D. Duties. The Plumbing Inspector, under the direction of the Building
Inspector, shall be responsible for the supervision and inspection of
plumbing and drainage work within or in connection with buildings in
the City. He or she shall make periodic reports to the Building Inspector
on pertinent matters related to the office. The Plumbing Inspector shall
make or cause to be made all inspections of house sewers and shall
faithfully enforce all laws, ordinances and rules in relation thereto. The
Plumbing Inspector shall see that construction, reconstruction and
alteration of all plumbing, drainage and plumbing ventilation hereafter
installed in all of the buildings in the City shall conform with the laws
and the rules and regulations laid down by the State Department of
Health and Social Services and the Common Council and that the work
be done by licensed plumbers as provided by law and this chapter and
amendments hereof, and to make all inspections required thereby and
in the manner therein set forth.
E. Authority of Plumbing Inspector.
(1) The Plumbing Inspector may enter all buildings in the City in the
performance of his or her duties, and any person who willfully or
knowingly resists or obstructs the Plumbing Inspector in the
performance of his or her duties shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
(2) The Plumbing Inspector may refuse to approve any application for
a plumbing permit by any person who has not complied with a
§ 175-36 MONONA CODE § 175-36
1:176
§ 175-37. All plumbing installation to be inspected.
lawful order of the Plumbing Inspector. The issuing and approving
of a plumbing permit may be withheld until such time as a lawful
order has been complied with. The person refused such permit
may appeal within 10 days to the State Plumbing Inspector, whose
decision in the controversy shall govern.
A. All plumbing within City limits to be inspected. All plumbing systems or
installations within the City and those connections with City water and
sewerage systems beyond the City boundaries are subject to inspection
as required in this chapter.
B. System of inspection. Whenever any work is ready for inspection, the
Inspector shall be notified either by the plumber in charge or the
person holding the permit. The person requesting inspection shall
specify the street and number and also when possible the permit
number under which the work is being done. Unless otherwise
permitted by the Inspector, all work, either plumbing, water supply
piping, house sewers or drains, shall be left uncovered for examination
until examined and approved by the Inspector. When necessary, the
Inspector shall notify the plumber in charge or the owner of the
property at what time the inspection will be made. The plumber in
charge shall make such arrangements as will enable the Inspector to
reach all parts of the building safely and readily and shall have present
the proper apparatus and appliances for making the test and shall
furnish all materials and shall perform all labor in making such tests as
required by the Inspector to make the necessary property inspection.
C. Inspection of installations from curb to plumbing.
(1) The Inspector shall be notified whenever any house sewer work is
ready for inspection, and all work except when otherwise permitted
by the Inspector shall be left uncovered for examination until
examined and approved. All notifications of this kind must specify
the correct location of the premises.
(2) In all cases where house sewers or drains are laid and the master
plumber claims that he or she cannot leave the trench open for
inspection, such claim shall be determined by the Inspector. Timely
notice to that effect shall be left at the office of the Inspector, and
an Inspector will be placed on the work to see that the same is
properly done to the end of such drain. The contractor shall pay the
City for such Inspector's service at the Inspector's prevailing wage
rate or at the rate of a journeyman plumber, whichever is greater,
and such fees shall be chargeable to the contractor.
D. Failure to report for inspection is a violation. Failure of a master
plumber to report for inspection all work done by him or her other than
repair work will subject the master plumber to a penalty as provided in
§ 175-15.
§ 175-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-37
1:177
§ 175-38. Plumbing permits.
§ 175-39. Schedule of permit fees.
E. Installation of water meter. At the time of the rough inspection, the
plumber or person holding the permit shall obtain the water meter at
the City Water Utility offices and shall install the same according to the
regulations of the Water Utility.
A. Permit required. Any licensed master plumber or any person permitted
by the Wisconsin Statutes to do plumbing work, except in the case of
repairs, shall, before doing any plumbing work in a building or making
any extension with any house sewer or drain, make application to the
Building Inspector on an application form furnished by the Building
Inspector for a plumbing permit. When deemed advisable by the
Inspector, the applicant shall also file plans and specifications showing
the size and kind of pipes, size and kind of traps and number and kind of
fixtures to be used for approval or rejection of the Inspector. No
plumbing work shall be commenced until a permit has been obtained.
B. Definition of repairs. "Repairs" are defined as the stoppage of leaks in
supply or waste pipes, clearing stoppages in waste pipes, thawing out
frozen supply or waste pipes, and repairing valves or faucets.
C. To whom issued; exception. No permit shall be issued to any one not
licensed or who has failed to renew a license. However, a permit may be
issued to the owner of a single-family residence to do his or her own
plumbing work within the building and laying of the house sewer and
building supply pipe, subject to the same rules and regulations as
govern licensed plumbers, provided that the connection of the house
sewer to the sewer service lateral, and also the building supply pipe to
the water lateral, must be made by a licensed plumber.
D. Bad faith or unreasonable delay in performance of work is a violation.
Bad faith or unreasonable delay in the performance of plumbing work
or failure to respond promptly to official communications shall be a
sufficient reason for withholding permits, and the master plumber shall
be responsible for the violation of these regulations by him or her and
any of his or her employees.
E. Revocation. The Building Inspector may revoke any permit issued
hereunder subject to appeal for violation of any provision of this
chapter or the State Plumbing Code.
A. The Common Council shall establish a fee for processing building
permits and inspections. An applicant for a building permit shall pay the
required fee upon final submission of the application. An application
shall not be deemed complete until the required fee is paid. A copy of
the current fees established by the Common Council shall be kept on
file by the City Clerk.
§ 175-37 MONONA CODE § 175-39
1:178
§ 175-40. City Engineer to have supervision of sewers.
All sewers shall be under the supervision of the City Engineer, and no sewer
service lateral shall be laid, and no opening into or connection with a sewer
service lateral shall be made, except under the Engineer's direction and
supervision.
§ 175-41. Record of sewers and connections.
The City Engineer shall keep a record, showing the location of the lot, the
name of the owner of the premises desiring to make connection with the
public sewers and of the master plumber proposing to lay the drain or sewer
or extension thereof. The Engineer shall keep a record of the exact location
of the connection with the public sewer of each drain or sewer so laid.
§ 175-42. Use of sewers regulated.
§ 175-43. House connection to public sewer and water systems
required.
B. Inspection fees.
(1) All fees for required inspections are included in the schedule of
fees. The Inspector shall determine the number of required
inspections based on the complexity of the project.
(2) Additional inspections or reinspections shall be assessed fees as set
by the Common Council in the City's Fee Schedule. All fees for
additional inspections or reinspections shall be paid prior to final
approval of the project.102
A. No connection for privies. No privy vault shall be connected with public
sewers in the City.
B. No connection of downspouts. No person shall connect or be permitted
to connect the downspouts of any building or cistern overflow with any
sanitary sewer or cause or permit rain or surface water to drain directly
or indirectly into any sanitary sewer.
C. Injuries to sewers, drains, plumbing fixtures, etc. No person shall injure
or obstruct any sewer, house drain, cesspool, catch basin or any
plumbing fixture or apparatus, pipes or other parts of any plumbing in a
public building, or any sewer, water or gas pipes or any parts or
apparatus connected therewith, laid or constructed in the alleys,
streets or other public places, or under any sidewalks in the City.
A. Connection required. To assure preservation of public health, comfort
and safety, every building within the City used for human habitation and
located adjacent to the City sewer and water system or in a block in
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 175-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-43
1:179
§ 175-44. Unsanitary plumbing conditions.
Whenever it shall be reported to the City Clerk or Plumbing Inspector that
the plumbing in any building is contrary to the ordinances of the City or
is of faulty construction and liable to breed disease or sickness or is a
menace to health, the Plumbing Inspector shall examine all the plumbing
in such building and direct the occupant or owner to make changes as
are necessary to put the same in proper sanitary condition. Any temporary
connection, when in use for a period exceeding seven days, shall be
considered unsanitary.
§ 175-45. Discharging of drains and sewers into streets or alleys
prohibited.
No person shall permit any drain or sewer to discharge into any open sewer
or gutter or upon any street or public alley or upon or over any sidewalk.
which both such systems extend shall be connected with such public
system. If such building is adjacent to or in a block in which the City
water system only extends, such building shall be connected with the
City water system.
B. City may install connections. If the occupant or owner fails to comply
with Subsection A for more than 10 days after notice in writing is given
to him or her, the City shall cause such connection to be made, and the
expense thereof shall be assessed as a special tax against the benefited
property. Such failure shall also be a violation of this section punishable
as provided in § 175-15.
C. Payment for installation by installments. If the City causes connection
to be made, the owner may, within 30 days after completion of the work,
file a written request with the City Clerk stating that he or she cannot
pay such amount in one sum and asking that it be levied in not to exceed
two annual installments. The unpaid balance, in such instance, shall be
a special tax lien on the property and shall bear interest at the rate of
8% per year.
D. No person shall continue to use outdoor toilet. No person shall use an
outdoor toilet on any premises within the City nor any cesspool, septic
tank or other contrivance located thereon for collecting and disposing
of sewage after the time a public utility water supply and sewer service
becomes available to such premises by connection to mains lying in the
street or alley or public grounds or across a dedicated easement
abutting such premises.
E. Private defective sewer system a public nuisance. The operation of any
defective septic tank, dry well or cesspool constitutes a public nuisance
and as such is a violation of this chapter.
§ 175-43 MONONA CODE § 175-46
1:180
§ 175-46. Sewage not to be discharged into lakes or streams.
No owner or occupant of any real estate shall discharge domestic sewage or
industrial wastes therefrom into the waters of Lake Monona or any stream
within the jurisdiction of the City or into any sewer connected with or
discharging into such lake or stream or permit the same to be so discharged
from such premises.
§ 175-47. Groundwater not to be discharged into sewer.
§ 175-48. Duty to report violations.
Police officers, the Plumbing Inspector and the Building Inspector shall
inquire into the causes of violation of this chapter and report the same to
the proper officer for investigation and prosecution.
A. Prohibition against. The connection of basement drains, sump pump
drains, drain tile or any other drain system the purpose of which is to
alleviate a groundwater problem or condition or which may contribute
groundwater at any time of the year to the sewerage system of the City
is prohibited.
B. Builder of new houses to see that no discharge into sewers occurs. The
builder and owner of any new house shall take necessary precautions to
effectively prevent any groundwater from entering the basement, floor
drain, or lateral and, subsequently, the main sewers of the sewerage
system of the City.
C. Houses not to discharge into sewer. If after inspection it is found that
groundwater is being discharged from a house or other building into
the sewerage system of the City, the owner of the house or building
shall, after notice by the Building Inspector, within a reasonable time,
make the necessary repairs, alterations or modifications of the drainage
system so as to prevent the entrance of any groundwater into the
system and thence into the main sewers of the City. By "reasonable
time" is meant as soon as possible after the high-water table of the
ground has receded sufficiently to allow repairs to be made, but in no
case more than six months from the time of serving of the notice. Such
notice shall specify what repairs, alterations or modifications, in the
opinion of the Building Inspector, City Engineer or a registered
professional engineer, must be made to correct the groundwater
drainage.
D. Building Inspector or Engineer may enter houses for inspection. The
Building Inspector or City Engineer may enter upon any public or
private premises and make inspection thereof at any reasonable time.
Any person who resists or obstructs any lawful exercise of authority by
the Building Inspector or City Engineer is subject to a penalty as
provided in § 175-15.
§ 175-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-48
1:181

ARTICLE VII
Electrical Code
§ 175-49. Application of provisions of this article.
§ 175-50. Electrical Inspector; qualifications and appointment.
A. Provisions applicable. The provisions of this article shall apply to all
installation of electrical conductors, fittings, devices and fixtures,
herein referred to as "electrical equipment," within or on public and
private buildings and premises, with the following general
exceptions:103
(1) The provisions of this article shall not apply to installations used by
electrical supply or communications agencies in the generation,
transmission or distribution of electricity or for the operation of
signals or the transmission of intelligence and located within or on
buildings or premises used exclusively by such an agency or in
public thoroughfares.
(2) The provisions of this article shall not apply to the installation of
equipment employed by a railroad utility in the exercise of its
functions as a utility and located outdoors or in buildings used
exclusively for that purpose.
B. Definition. As used in this article, the following phrase shall have the
meaning indicated:
REASONABLY SAFE TO PERSONS AND PROPERTY — As applied to
electrical installations and electrical equipment means safe to use in
the service for which the installation or equipment is intended without
unnecessary hazard to life, limb or property.
A. Qualifications. There is created the office of Electrical Inspector
(hereinafter referred to as "Inspector"). The Inspector shall:
(1) Be a State of Wisconsin certified electrical inspector and
commercial electrical inspector; and
(2) Have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and methods
used in the installation of electrical equipment; shall be well versed
in approved methods of construction for safety of persons and
property, the statutes of the state relating to electrical work and
any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof, and
the National Electrical Code, as approved by the American
Standards Association.
B. Appointment. The Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the Council. The Inspector shall also take and subscribe
an oath, which together with the certificate of appointment shall be
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 175-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-50
1:183
§ 175-51. Duties of Electrical Inspector.
§ 175-52. Authority of Electrical Inspector.
§ 175-53. Standards for installation of electrical equipment.
filed with the City Clerk. The Inspector may be removed from the office
for cause.
A. Generally. The Inspector shall enforce the provisions of this article. The
Inspector shall, upon application, grant permits for the installation or
alteration of electrical equipment and shall make inspections of
electrical installations, all as provided in this article. The Inspector shall
keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections and
reinspections made and other official work performed in accordance
with the provisions of this article. He or she shall also keep on file a list
of inspected electrical equipment issued by or for Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., which list shall be accessible for public reference
during regular office hours.
B. May employ additional assistants. The Inspector may employ, subject to
approval of the Council, any Assistant Inspector and clerical assistants
necessary for the proper conduct of the office and the inspection of
electrical installations as provided for in this article.
C. Inspector not to be in electrical business. The Inspector shall not
engage in the sale, installation or maintenance of electrical equipment,
either directly or indirectly, and the Inspector shall have no financial
interest in any concern engaged in such business in the City at any time
while holding such office as herein provided.
A. Generally. The Inspector may during reasonable hours enter any
building or premises in the discharge of official duties or for the
purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test of the electrical
equipment contained therein or its installation. When any electrical
equipment is found by the Inspector to be dangerous to persons or
property because it is defective or defectively installed, the person
responsible for the electrical equipment shall be notified in writing and
shall make any changes or repairs required in the judgment of the
Inspector to place such equipment in safe condition, and if such work is
not started as soon as possible and not completed within 15 days or any
longer period that may be specified by the Inspector in such notice, the
Inspector may disconnect or order discontinuance of electric service to
such electrical equipment. In cases of emergency, where necessary for
safety to persons or property, or where electrical equipment may
interfere with the work of the Fire Department, the Inspector may
disconnect or cause the disconnection immediately for any electrical
equipment.
B. Delegation. The Inspector may delegate any of his or her powers or
duties to any assistant.
§ 175-50 MONONA CODE § 175-53
1:184
§ 175-54. Electrical permits.
No electrical equipment shall be installed within or on any building,
structure or premises, publicly or privately owned, nor shall any alteration
or addition be made in any such existing equipment without first securing
a permit therefor from the Inspector, except as provided in § 175-49 and
except that no permit will be required to execute any of the following
classes of electrical work:
§ 175-55. Fees for permits and inspections.
§ 175-56. Inspection and certificates.
A. Conform to laws and standards. All installations of electrical equipment
shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with
the provisions of this article and the applicable state statutes and all
orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof.
B. Adoption of state code. All installations of electrical wiring and
equipment shall comply with the rules of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code Electrical Code, including any amendments thereto. The
Inspector may authorize installations of special wiring methods.
A. Minor repair work, the replacement of lamps or the connection of
portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed
receptacles.
B. The installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment for the
operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence.
C. The installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment installed by
or for an electricity supply agency for the use of such agency in the
generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electricity.
D. Any work involved in the manufacturing, testing, servicing, altering or
repairing of electrical equipment or apparatus, except that this
exemption shall not include any permanent wiring other than that
required for testing purposes.
A. The Common Council shall establish a fee for processing electrical
permits and inspections. An applicant for an electrical permit shall pay
the required fee upon final submission of the application. An application
shall not be deemed complete until the required fee is paid. A copy of
the current fees established by the Common Council shall be kept on
file by the City Clerk.
B. All fees for required inspections are included in the schedule of fees.
The Inspector shall determine the number of required inspections,
based on the complexity of the project.
C. Additional inspections or reinspections shall be assessed as set by the
Common Council in the City's Fee Schedule.104
§ 175-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-56
1:185
§ 175-57. Connection to installations.
No person shall make connection from a supply of electricity or supply
electricity to any electrical equipment for the installation of which a permit
is required, or which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected
by the Inspector, until such connection has been authorized by the
Inspector.
A. Notice to be given. Upon completion of any installation of electrical
equipment which has been made under a permit, the person making the
installation shall notify the Inspector, who shall inspect the installation
within 24 hours (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the
time such notice is given or as soon thereafter as practicable.
B. Certificate of approval. Where the Inspector finds the service
installation to be in conformity with the provisions of this article, he or
she shall issue a certificate of approval, authorizing the use of the
installation and connection to the supply of electricity and shall send
written notice of such authorization to the agency supplying the electric
service.
C. Expiration of temporary certificate of approval. When a certificate of
approval is issued authorizing the connection or use of a temporary
installation, such certificate shall be issued to expire at a time to be
stated therein and shall be revocable by the Inspector for cause.
D. Where installation will be hidden from view. When any electrical
equipment is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of
parts of the building, the person installing the equipment shall notify
the Inspector, and such equipment shall not be concealed until it has
been inspected and approved by the Inspector or until 24 hours
(exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays or holidays) shall have lapsed from the
time of such notification, provided that on large installations, where
concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the person installing
the electrical equipment shall give the Inspector due notice, and
inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work.
E. Regular inspections. At regular intervals the Inspector shall visit all
premises where work may be done and shall inspect all electrical
equipment installed since the date of last inspection and shall issue a
certificate of approval for such work as is found to be in conformity with
the provisions of this article, after the fee required above has been paid.
If upon inspection the installation is not found to be fully in conformity
with the provisions of this article, the Inspector shall at once forward to
the person making the installation a written notice stating the defects
which have been found to exist.105
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 175-56 MONONA CODE § 175-57
1:186
ARTICLE VIII
HVAC Code
§ 175-58. Purpose and scope.
This article shall apply to the heating, ventilating and air conditioning of
all new buildings and to all alterations of improvements, including the
replacement of any major apparatus or device in existing buildings. The
provisions of this article shall apply to every building, or portion of a
building, devoted to a new use for which the requirements are in any way
more stringent than the requirements covering the previous use.
§ 175-59. HVAC Inspector.
§ 175-60. Duties of Inspector.
A. Qualifications. There is created the office of Heating, Ventilating and
Air Conditioning (HVAC) Inspector (herein referred to as the
"Inspector"). The Inspector shall be of good moral character, shall be
possessed of such executive ability as is requisite for the performance
of the duties of the office, and shall have a thorough knowledge of the
standards, materials and methods used in the installation of HVAC
equipment, shall be well versed in approved methods of construction
for safety of persons and property, the state statutes relating to HVAC,
and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof, and
Ch. SPS 364, Wis. Adm. Code (HVAC).
B. Appointment. The Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the Council. The Inspector shall also take and subscribe
an oath, which together with the certificate of appointment shall be
filed with the City Clerk. The Inspector shall be removed from office for
cause only after a hearing by the Council, at which he or she shall be
entitled to appear and produce evidence.
A. Enforcement. The Inspector shall enforce the provisions of this article.
He or she shall, upon application, grant permits for the installation or
alteration of equipment and shall make inspections of installations as
provided in this chapter. The Inspector shall keep complete records of
all permits issued, inspections and reinspections made and other
official work performed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Assistants. The Inspector may employ, subject to approval of the
Council, any assistant inspectors and clerical assistants necessary for
the proper conduct of the office and the inspection of installations as
provided for in this article.
C. Conflicting business prohibited. The Inspector and his or her assistants
shall not engage in the business of the sale of, installation or
maintenance of HVAC equipment, either directly or indirectly, and they
shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business
in the City at any time while holding such office.
§ 175-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-61
1:187
§ 175-61. Authority of Inspector.
§ 175-62. Standards for installation of equipment.
§ 175-63. Equipment standards.
§ 175-64. Gas valve identification.
Where there is an underground valve provided for piping systems for fuel
gases such as natural gas, manufactured gas, undiluted liquefied petroleum
gases, liquefied gas-air mixtures or mixtures of any of these gases, installed
in the City, the valve location shall be plainly identified by an approved
metal marker provided by the supplier and attached to the exterior of the
A. Authorized inspections. The Inspector may during reasonable hours
enter any building or premises in the discharge of official duties or for
the purpose of making any inspections, reinspections or tests of the
equipment contained therein or its installation. When any equipment is
found by the Inspector to be dangerous to persons or property because
it is defective or defectively installed, the person responsible for the
equipment shall be notified in writing and shall make any changes or
repairs required in the judgment of the Inspector to place such
equipment in safe condition, and if such work is not started as soon as
possible and not completed within 15 days or any longer period that
may be specified by the Inspector in such notice, the Inspector may
order the discontinuance of the use of the HVAC equipment.
B. Delegation. The Inspector may delegate any of the powers of the office
or duties to any assistant.
A. Conformance to state law. All installations shall be reasonably safe to
persons and property and in conformity with this chapter and the
applicable state statutes and all orders, rules and regulations issued by
authority thereof.
B. Conformance to other standards. Conformity of installation of HVAC
equipment with applicable regulations or nationally recognized
institutes and organizations shall be prima facie evidence that such
installations are reasonably safe to persons and property. The HVAC
Inspector may authorize use of special installation methods.
A. All HVAC equipment installed or used shall be reasonably safe to
persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this
article and the applicable statutes of the state and any orders, rules or
regulations issued by authority thereof, and conformity of HVAC
equipment with applicable standards as set forth in § 175-62B shall be
prima facie evidence that such equipment is reasonably safe to persons
and property.
B. The Inspector may authorize the installation of special equipment.
§ 175-61 MONONA CODE § 175-64
1:188
outside wall of the occupancy by the owner directly above where the piping
system enters the building so as to be visible at all times.
§ 175-65. HVAC permits.
§ 175-66. Fees for permits and inspections.
A. Permit required. No HVAC equipment shall be installed within or on any
building, structure or premises, publicly or privately owned, nor shall
any alteration or an addition be made in any such existing equipment
without first securing a permit therefor from the Inspector, including
any electrical permit for all field-installed control wiring, except as
provided in Subsections B and C.106
B. Emergency work. Permits shall be obtained as soon as possible after
emergency work has been done on installations which would otherwise
require a permit in advance. No emergency work shall be done during
the Inspector's regular office hours without notifying the Inspector.
C. Minor repair work. Any work involved in the manufacturing, testing,
servicing, altering or repairing of HVAC equipment or apparatus,
except that this exemption shall not include any permanent changes
other than those required for testing purposes.
D. Applications. Application for a permit, describing the work to be done,
shall be made in writing to the Inspector by the person installing the
work. The application shall be accompanied by such calculations, plans,
specifications and schedules as may be necessary to determine whether
the installations as described will be in conformity with the
requirements of this article. If the installations as described will
conform with all legal requirements and if the applicant has complied
with this article, a permit for such installation shall be issued. No
deviation may be made from the installation described in the permit
without written approval of the Inspector.
A. The Common Council shall establish a fee for processing HVAC permits
and inspections. An applicant for a HVAC permit shall pay the required
fee upon final submission of the application. An application shall not be
deemed complete until the required fee is paid. A copy of the current
fees established by the Common Council shall be kept on file by the City
Clerk.
B. Number of inspections.
(1) All fees for required inspections are included in the schedule of
fees. The Inspector shall determine the number of required
inspections, based on the complexity of the project.
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 175-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-66
1:189
§ 175-67. Inspection and certificates.
§ 175-68. Connection to installations.
No person shall make installations, additions or alterations to any heating,
ventilating and air-conditioning equipment for the installation of which a
permit is required or which has been discontinued or ordered disconnected
by the Inspector, until such installation, addition or alteration has been
authorized by the Inspector.
§ 175-69. Minimum standards for heating.
(2) Additional inspections or reinspections shall be assessed as set by
the Common Council in the City's Fee Schedule. All fees for
additional inspections or reinspections shall be paid prior to final
approval of the project.107
A. Notice to be given. Upon completion of any installation of HVAC
equipment under a permit the person making the installation shall
notify the Inspector, who shall inspect the installations within 24 hours
(exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the time such notice
is given or as soon thereafter as practicable.
B. Certificate of approval. Where the Inspector finds the installation to be
in conformity with this article, he or she shall issue to the person
making the installation a certificate of approval with duplicate copy for
delivery to the owner, authorizing the use of the installation.
C. Expiration of temporary certificate of approval. When a certificate of
approval is issued authorizing the use of a temporary installation, such
certificate shall be issued to expire at a time to be stated therein and
shall be revocable by the Inspector for cause.
D. Concealed installations. When any HVAC equipment is to be hidden
from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building, the
person installing the equipment shall notify the City Hall, and such
equipment shall not be concealed until it has been inspected and
approved by the Inspector or until 24 hours (exclusive of Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays) shall have elapsed from the time of such
notification, provided that on large installations, where the
concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the person installing
the heating or ventilating or air-conditioning equipment shall give the
Inspector due notice, and inspections shall be made periodically during
the progress of the work.
A. No person shall let to another for occupancy any space in a residential
building for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein,
which does not comply with the following minimum heating standards:
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 175-66 MONONA CODE § 175-69
1:190
§ 175-70. Appeals.
Any person may register an appeal with the Board of Appeals for a review
of any decision of the Inspector, provided such an appeal is made in writing
within five days after such person shall have been notified of such decision
of the Inspector. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Board shall proceed to
determine whether the action of the Inspector complies with this article and
within five days shall make a decision in accordance with its findings. Three
members of the Board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business, but any action taken at any meeting shall
require the affirmative vote of at least three members. The Chair of any
meeting of the Board shall vote.
(1) All habitable rooms shall be provided with a permanently
connected heating system complying with this article.
(2) The heating system shall be maintained in a safe and efficient
condition by a qualified person and a record kept at the premises
showing the date of service and the person performing service. A
heating system must be capable of maintaining a minimum
temperature of 67° F.
B. In addition to the penalties provided in § 175-15, any person violating
this section shall be deemed to have caused a public nuisance and shall
be liable for the cost of abatement thereof.
§ 175-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-70
1:191
Chapter 191
CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
§ 191-1. License fee.
Any person desiring to sell Christmas trees within the City shall first pay to
the City Treasurer the required license fee for each calendar year during
which such sales are or will be made. The Treasurer's receipt constitutes
the license.
§ 191-2. Deposit.108
In addition to the license fee as set by the Common Council in the City's
Fee Schedule, the licensee shall deposit with the City Treasurer, at the
same time the above license fee is paid, an amount as set by the Common
Council in the City's Fee Schedule for each location in the City where
such sales will be conducted by or in behalf of the licensee or at which
location trees will be kept for sale purposes. Such deposit will be refunded
on the licensee's discontinuance of such sales and on the written approval
of the City Building Inspector. Such deposit is required to insure the proper
cleaning up of the location after sales have been discontinued and in order
to prevent unsightliness and fire hazards. Upon termination of sales, the
licensee must promptly clean up the sales location. Otherwise, the City will
cause the necessary cleanup work to be done by the City and will deduct the
reasonable cost thereof from the deposit. If the cost exceeds the deposit,
the excess will be charged to the licensee.
Chapter 198
CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
§ 198-1. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall, in any manner, directly or indirectly,
upon any premises or by any device, sell, exchange, barter, dispose of
or give away, or keep for sale any cigarette, cigarette paper or cigarette
wrappers, or any substitute therefor, without first obtaining a license as
hereinafter provided.
§ 198-2. Application for license; fee. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 9-17-689]
Every person, firm or corporation desiring a license under this section shall
file with the City Clerk a written application therefor, stating the name of
the person and the place for which such license is desired. Each license
shall be filed by the City Clerk and shall name the licensee and the place
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 175-70 MONONA CODE § 198-2
1:192
wherein licensee is authorized to conduct such business, and the same shall
not be delivered until the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a license fee
as prescribed in the City's Fee Schedule.
§ 198-3. Investigation.
The Chief of Police or designee within the Police Department shall make an
investigation of the applicant to determine whether the applicant possesses
the qualifications necessary for issuance of the license under this chapter.
§ 198-4. Issuance and term of license. [Amended 10-16-2017 by
Ord. No. 9-17-689]
Licenses for the sale, exchange, barter, disposition of, or giving away or
keeping for sale of cigarettes and tobacco products, cigarette paper or
cigarette wrappers or any substitute therefor shall be issued by the City
Clerk. Each license shall be issued on the first day of July in each year,
or thereafter whenever applied for, and shall continue in force from date
of issuance until the succeeding June 30 unless sooner revoked for any
violation of this section.
§ 198-5. Minors. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
No person shall sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or give away any cigarette
or tobacco product in any form, cigarette papers or wrappers to any persons
18 years of age or younger.
§ 198-6. Prohibition of smoking and vaping in educational facilities.
[Added 8-6-2018 by Ord. No. 7-18-702]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any educational facility
or outside on the property of any educational facility between the
facility and the public sidewalks.
B. Any person violating this section shall be subject to the general penalty
set forth in § 1-4 of the Code.
C. Definitions. In this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
given:
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY — Any building used principally for
educational purposes in which a school is located or a course of
instruction or training program is offered that has been approved or
licensed by a state agency or board.
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE — Any product containing or
delivering nicotine or any other substance intended for human
consumption that may be used by a person to simulate smoking through
inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. This includes any such
device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an ecigarette,
e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or any other product
name or descriptor.
§ 198-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-6
1:193
Chapter 207
DAY-CARE CENTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 263. Zoning — See Ch. 480.
§ 207-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings given
DAY-CARE CENTER — Any place which receives at any one time for
compensation four or more children under the age of seven years for care
and supervision, for less than 24 hours a day for more than 10 days a month,
without the attendance of a parent, relative or legal guardian.
DAY-CARE OPERATOR — A person who for compensation provides care and
supervision for four or more children under the age of seven for less than
24 hours a day, but not including:
§ 207-2. Operation of day-care centers regulated.109
No day-care center shall be operated within the City unless the facilities
thereof are in compliance with the provisions of Chs. DCF 250 and 251, Wis.
Adm. Code, which is hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter and
referenced with the same effect as if it were fully set forth herein. A copy of
SMOKE — Burning or holding, or inhaling or exhaling smoke from any
of the following:
(1) A lighted cigar.
(2) A lighted cigarette.
(3) A lighted pipe.
Any other lighted smoking equipment. Smoking also includes the
use of an electronic delivery device which creates an aerosol or
vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking
device.
(4)
A relative or guardian of a child who provides care and supervision for
the child;
A.
B. A public or parochial school or the Y.M.C.A.; or
A person employed to come to the home of a child's parent or guardian
for less than 24 hours a day.
C.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 198-6 MONONA CODE § 207-2
1:194
such regulations, as from time to time amended, shall be kept permanently
on file in the office of the City Clerk. The owner, lessor, lessee, operator
and person in charge of any day-care center shall be mutually and severally
responsible for compliance with the provisions of this subsection.
§ 207-3. State license required for day-care centers.110
No person shall engage in the business of day-care center operator within
the City who does not hold a valid day-care center operator's license issued
by the Wisconsin Department of Children and Families.
§ 207-4. Fence required.
To assure the safety of those children who are cared for at a day-care center,
all such centers which are not located on a corner lot shall have all or an
adequate portion of the rear yard fenced so as to help assure the safety
of the children while playing outside. Centers located on corner lots shall
maintain such a fenced area on a side yard.
§ 207-5. Violations as public nuisance.
Any violations of the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be a
public nuisance.
§ 207-6. Building Inspector to inspect and enforce.111
The City Building Inspector shall have the power and duty to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, including the powers of access and abatement
provided in § 263-2 of the Code of the City of Monona. The Building
Inspector shall have the power to determine compliance of day-care centers
with the provisions of Chs. DCF 250 and 251, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 207-7. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the penalties provided in § 1-4 of the Code of the City of
Monona, any person owning the premises on which a day-care center is
operated in violation of this chapter shall be deemed to have caused a public
nuisance and shall be liable for the cost of abatement thereof.
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 207-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-7
1:195
Chapter 216
EROSION AND STORMWATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland
Zoning — See Ch. 466.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 473.
Zoning — See Ch. 480.
§ 216-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Erosion and
Stormwater Runoff Control Ordinance."
§ 216-2. General provisions.
§ 216-3. Authority.
This chapter is adopted by the City of Monona under the authority of
§ 62.234 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 216-4. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter certain words used herein are defined as
follows:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The governmental employee designated
by the Common Council to administer this chapter, and includes any other
governmental employees who are supervised by the said authority, for the
implementation and enforcement of this chapter. The Common Council has
designated the City of Monona Director of Public Works ("Director") to
administer this chapter.[Amended 6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 6-17-688]
AFFECTED — Means a regulated activity has significantly:
AGRICULTURAL — Related to or used for the commercial production of
food and fiber, including but not limited to general farming, livestock and
poultry enterprises, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck
A. Applicability. This chapter applies to the use of lands within the
incorporated boundaries of the City, and the use of lands subject to
extraterritorial review as provided by § 236.10, Wis. Stats.
B. Performance time requirement. All action required in this chapter shall
be conducted as soon as possible as determined by the administrative
authority.
Caused negative impacts on water quality or the use or maintenance of
one's property or business; or
A.
B. Endangered one's health, safety or general welfare.
§ 207-7 MONONA CODE § 216-4
1:196
farming, forestry, sod production, cranberry productions and wild crop
harvesting and includes lands used for on-site buildings and other
structures necessary to carry out such activities.
AGRICULTURAL LAND USES — Alterations or disturbances of the land
used for the commercial production of food and fiber.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — The rainfall information for an average
year as determined by the information in the following rainfall file: WisReg-
Madison WI 1981. RAN. This file represents a synthetic rainfall record for
the Madison area of 1981. from March 12 through December 2.[Added
6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 6-17-688]
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — A practice, technique or measure that
is an effective, practical means of preventing or reducing soil erosion or
water pollution, or both, from runoff both during and after land
development activities. These can include structural, vegetative or
operational practices.
CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A means of giving notice to the permittee or
violator that the Director believes that the permittee or violator has violated
one or more provisions of this chapter. Notice is given by posting upon the
lands where the disturbing activity occurs one or more copies of a poster
so stating the violation and by mailing a copy of this poster by certified
mail to the permittee or violator at the address shown on the permit or to
the violator at any address of record.[Amended 6-19-2017 by Ord. No.
6-17-688]
CHECKLIST PLAN — An erosion control plan available from the Director,
which is designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from
land-disturbing activities on sites less than 20,000 square feet and less than
six-percent slopes.[Amended 6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 6-17-688]
CITY — The City of Monona.
CONNECTED IMPERVIOUSNESS — An impervious surface that directly
drains to a separate storm sewer or water of the state via an impervious
flow path.[Added 6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 6-17-688]
CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL — Preventing or reducing soil
erosion and sedimentation from land-disturbing activity.
CONTROL PLAN — (Erosion and sediment control plan and runoff control
plan) A plan approved by the Director of methods for controlling soil
erosion, surface water runoff and sediment deposition caused by or
resulting from land-disturbing activities.[Amended 6-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 6-17-688]
DETENTION STORAGE — The temporary detaining or storage of
stormwater in reservoirs under predetermined and controlled conditions,
with the rate of discharge therefrom regulated by installed devices.
DIRECTOR — The City of Monona Director of Public Works or appointed
designee.
§ 216-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-4
1:197
EROSION (SOIL EROSION) — The detachment and movement of soil or
rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock
or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the resulting conditions.
EXISTING DEVELOPMENT — Buildings and other structures and
impervious areas existing prior to ordinance adoption.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the existing ground surface
prior to excavation or filling.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved
to a new location and shall include the resulting conditions.
FINANCIAL SECURITY INSTRUMENT — A surety bond, performance bond,
maintenance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees
submitted to the City to assure that requirements of the chapter are carried
out in compliance with the stormwater management plan.
GRADING — Altering the elevation of the land surface by stripping,
excavating, filling, stockpiling of soil materials or any combination thereof
and shall include the land from which the material was taken or upon which
it was placed.
GULLY EROSION — A severe loss of soil caused by or resulting in
concentrated flow of sufficient velocity to create a defined flow channel.
HEAVILY DISTURBED SITE — A site where an area of land is subjected
to significant compaction due to the removal of vegetative cover or
earthmoving activities, including filling.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Has the meaning used in the runoff
calculation methodology promulgated by the United States Natural
Resources Conservation Service Engineering Field Manual for Conservation
Practices.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any land cover that prevents rain or melting
snow from infiltrating into the ground, such as roofs (including overhangs),
roads, sidewalks, patios, driveways and parking lots. For purposes of this
chapter, all road, driveway or parking surfaces, including gravel surfaces,
shall be considered impervious, unless specifically designed to encourage
infiltration and approved by the Director.
INFILTRATION — The process by which rainfall or runoff seeps into the soil.
LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITIES — Any land alterations or disturbances
that may result in soil erosion, sedimentation or change in runoff, including
but not limited to removal of ground cover, grading, excavating and filling
of land.
LAND TREATMENT MEASURES — Structural or vegetative practices, or
combinations of both, used to control erosion and sediment production,
including areas to be protected by fencing.
§ 216-4 MONONA CODE § 216-4
1:198
LIGHTLY DISTURBED SITE — A site where an area of land is subjected
to minor compaction due to the limited removal of vegetative cover or
earthmoving activities.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP) — A level of implementing best
management practices in order to achieve a performance standard specified
in this chapter which takes into account the best available technology, costeffectiveness
and other competing issues such as human safety and welfare,
endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and geographic
features. MEP allows flexibility in the way to meet performance standards
and may vary based on the performance standard and site
conditions.[Added 6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 6-17-688]
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
NONEROSIVE VELOCITY — A rate of flow of stormwater runoff, usually
measured in feet per second, that does not erode soils. Nonerosive
velocities vary for individual sites, taking into account topography, soil type,
and runoff rates.
NRCS MSE4 STORM DISTRIBUTION — The rainfall distribution and
twenty-four-hour rainfall depths for storms of varying reoccurrence
intervals as published by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
for Dane County, Wisconsin, using precipitation data from NOAA Atlas 14,
Precipitation Frequency Atlas of the United States, Volume 8 (Midwestern
United States).[Added 6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 6-17-688]
PEAK FLOW — The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a
channel, watercourse, or conduit resulting from the predetermined storm
or flood.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any land cover that permits rain or melting snow
to soak into the ground.
PLAN — An erosion control plan required by § 216-7 or a stormwater
management plan required by § 216-8.
PLAN REVIEW AGENCY — The Plan Commission.
PLAT REVIEW OFFICER — The Director or his or her designee.
POST-DEVELOPMENT — Refers to the extent and distribution of land cover
types anticipated to occur under conditions of full development of the
submitted plan. This term is used to match predevelopment and postdevelopment
stormwater peak flows as required by the chapter.
Structural development, including construction of a new building or
other structures;
A.
Expansion or alteration of an existing structure that results in an
increase in the surface dimensions of the building or structure;
B.
C. Land-disturbing activities; or
D. Creation or expansion of impervious surface.
§ 216-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-4
1:199
PREDEVELOPMENT — Refers to the extent and distribution of land cover
types present before the proposed land development activity of the
submitted plans, assuming that all land uses prior to land-disturbing activity
are in "good" condition as described in the Natural Resources Conservation
Service Technical Release 55, "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds"
(commonly known as TR-55). This term is used to match predevelopment
and post-development stormwater peak flows as required by the chapter. In
a situation where cumulative impervious surface created after the adoption
of this chapter exceeds the twenty-thousand-square-foot threshold, the
predevelopment conditions shall be those prior to the proposed land
disturbance.
PUBLIC LANDS — All government-owned lands which are subject to
regulation by the City, including but not limited to:
REDEVELOPMENT — Any construction, alteration or improvement
exceeding 3,000 square feet of land disturbance performed on sites where
the entire existing site is predominantly developed to commercial,
industrial, institutional or multifamily residential uses.
RETENTION STORAGE — A temporary detaining of stormwater in
engineered facilities, under controlled conditions.
RUNOFF — The portion of rainfall, melted snow or irrigation water that
flows across the ground surface.
RUNOFF CURVE NUMBER (RCN) — Has the meaning used in the runoff
calculation methodology promulgated by the United States Natural
Resources Conservation Service Engineering Field Manual for Conservation
Practices.
SEDIMENT — Solid earth material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water, gravity or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface at a
different site.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of eroded soils at a site different from
the one where the erosion occurred.
SHEET AND RILL EROSION — A loss of soil caused by sheet flow or shallow
concentrated flow and characterized by an absence of channeling or a
relatively uniform loss across the exposed upper layer of the soil or shallow
irregular scouring of the soil surface.
SITE — The bounded area described in an erosion control plan or
stormwater management plan.
SLOPE — The net vertical rise over horizontal run, expressed as a
percentage, which represents a relatively homogeneous surface incline or
decline over the area disturbed.
A. All lands owned or controlled by the City.
B. All lands which are owned by another unit of government.
§ 216-4 MONONA CODE § 216-4
1:200
SOIL LOSS — Soil moved from a given site because of land-disturbing
activities or by the forces of erosion and redeposited at another site on land
or in a body of water.
SOIL LOSS RATE — The rate, usually measured in tons per acre per year,
at which soil is transported beyond the perimeter of a given control site and
which occurs as a result of sheet and rill erosion. This term does not apply
to soil movement resulting from concentrated flow such as gully or bank
erosion.
STORM EVENTS — The precipitation amounts that occur over a twentyfour-
hour period that have a specified recurrence interval for Dane County,
Wisconsin. For example, one-, two-, ten- and one-hundred-year storm events
mean the precipitation amounts that occur over a twenty-four-hour period
that have a recurrence interval of one, two, 10 and 100 years, respectively.
STORMWATER — The flow of water which results from, and which occurs
during and immediately following, a rainfall, snow- or ice-melt event.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — Any measures taken to permanently
reduce or minimize the negative impacts of stormwater runoff quantity and
quality after land development activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The waters derived from rains falling or
snowmelt or icemelt occurring within a drainage area, flowing over the
surface of the ground and collected in channels, watercourses or conduits.
STREET RECONSTRUCTION — Removal and replacement of the road
subgrade, where existing stormwater conveyance systems are modified.
STRUCTURAL MEASURES — Works of improvement for land stabilization
to prevent erosion, sediment or runoff.
STRUCTURE — Any human-made object placed upon or set into the ground,
streambed or lake bed.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — That circumstance where special conditions,
which were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict
conformity with regulations unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in
light of the purposes of this chapter.
§ 216-5. Legislative findings.
A. The City Council of the City of Monona finds that construction site
erosion and uncontrolled stormwater runoff from land-disturbing and
land development activities have significant adverse impacts upon
regional water resources and the health, safety, property and general
welfare of the community and diminish the public enjoyment and use of
natural resources. Specifically, soil erosion and stormwater runoff can:
(1) Carry sediment, nutrients, pathogens, organic matter, heavy
metals, toxins and other pollutants to regional lakes, streams and
wetlands;
§ 216-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-5
1:201
§ 216-6. Purpose and intent.
(2) Diminish the capacity of water resources to support recreational
and water supply uses and a natural diversity of plant and animal
life;
(3) Clog existing drainage systems, increasing maintenance problems
and costs;
(4) Cause bank and channel erosion;
(5) Increase downstream flooding;
(6) Reduce groundwater recharge, which may diminish stream base
flows and lower water levels in regional lakes, ponds and wetlands;
(7) Contaminate drinking water supplies;
(8) Increase risk of property damage and personal injury; and
(9) Cause damage to agricultural fields and crops.
B. The City Council of the City of Monona also finds that effective sediment
and stormwater management depends on proper planning, design and
timely installation of conservation and management practices and their
continued maintenance.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the minimum requirements
for construction site erosion control and stormwater management that
will diminish threats to public health, safety, public and private
property and natural resources of the City of Monona.
B. This chapter is intended to regulate construction site erosion and
stormwater runoff, to accomplish the following objectives:
(1) Promote regional stormwater management by watershed;
(2) Minimize sedimentation, water pollution from nutrients, heavy
metals, chemical and petroleum products and other contaminants,
flooding and thermal impacts to the water resources of the City of
Monona;
(3) Promote infiltration and groundwater recharge;
(4) Protect functional values of natural watercourses and wetlands;
(5) Provide a set of performance standards that are consistent with the
standards set forth by Dane County;
(6) Achieve an eighty-percent reduction in sediment load rates to Dane
County waters compared to no controls for all parcels where new
development occurs, a forty-percent reduction in sediment load
rates compared to no controls for all redeveloped parcels and
§ 216-5 MONONA CODE § 216-6
1:202
§ 216-7. Applicability of requirement for erosion control permits.
Unless expressly exempted by § 216-9, an erosion control permit under
§ 216-11 shall be required, and all construction site erosion control
provisions of this chapter shall apply, to any of the following activities in the
City of Monona:
§ 216-8. Applicability of requirement for stormwater control
permits.
Unless otherwise exempted by § 216-9 a stormwater control permit under
§ 216-11 shall be required, and all stormwater management provisions of
street reconstructions, and a twenty-percent reduction in sediment
load rates compared to no controls for existing developments;
(7) Ensure no increase in the rate of surface water drainage from sites
during or after construction; and
(8) Protect public and private property from damage resulting from
runoff or erosion.
A. Land-disturbing activity in excess of 3,000 square feet;
B. Land-disturbing activity on a slope of greater than 12%;
C. Land-disturbing activity that involves the excavation or filling, or a
combination of excavation and filling, in excess of 400 cubic yards of
material;
D. Land-disturbing activity that disturbs more than 100 lineal feet of road
ditch, grass waterway or other land area where surface drainage flows
in a defined open channel; including the placement, repair or removal
of any underground pipe, utility or other facility within the cross section
of the channel;
E. Any public or private roads or access drives longer than 125 feet;
F. Development that requires a subdivision plat, as defined in the
applicable local land division ordinance(s);
G. Land-disturbing activity that disturbs less than 3,000 square feet of
land, including the installation of access drives, that the Director
determines to have a high risk of soil erosion or water pollution or that
may significantly impact a lake, stream or wetland area. Examples of
activities with a high risk of soil erosion or water pollution may include,
but are not limited to, land disturbance on erodible soil or disturbance
adjacent to lakes, rivers, streams or wetlands. All such determinations
made by the Director shall be in writing, unless waived by applicant.
H. All land-disturbing activities in excess of 3,000 square feet and within
500 feet of navigable water as defined by the Wisconsin DNR.
§ 216-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-8
1:203
this chapter shall apply, to any of the following activities within the City of
Monona:
§ 216-9. Exemptions and clarifications.
A. Any development(s) after the adoption date of this chapter (December
15, 2014) that result(s) in the cumulative addition of 20,000 square feet
of impervious surface to the site;
B. Any development that requires a subdivision plat, as defined in
applicable local land division ordinance(s);
C. Any development that requires a certified survey map, as defined in the
applicable local land division ordinance(s); for property intended for
commercial or industrial use;
D. Redevelopment, as defined in § 216-4, shall meet the following
stormwater management performance standards: § 216-13B;
E. Other land development activities, including but not limited to
redevelopment or alteration of existing buildings and other structures,
that the Director determines may significantly increase downstream
runoff volumes, flooding, soil erosion, water pollution or property
damage, or significantly impact a lake, stream or wetland area. All such
determinations shall be made in writing unless waived by the applicant.
A. The following activities are exempt from all requirements of this
chapter:
(1) Any activity directly related to the planting, growing and
harvesting of agricultural crops except the construction of a
building or other structure;.
B. The following activities are exempt from the construction site erosion
control provisions of § 216-7:
(1) One- and two-family dwelling units regulated under the Wisconsin
Uniform Dwelling Code; the City of Monona shall regulate these
sites during the period that residential building permits are in
effect, consistent with then-existing Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling
Code requirements. Land-disturbing activities in excess of one acre
or not associated with the construction of a dwelling are not
exempt from this chapter.
(2) Construction of public buildings and buildings that are places of
employment relating to activities specifically regulated by the
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services, during
the period that the Department of Safety and Professional Services
authorized building permits are in effect and specific erosion
control procedures on these construction sites are effective,
pursuant to § 101.1206, Wis. Stats.
§ 216-8 MONONA CODE § 216-9
1:204
(3) State building projects subject to § 13.48(13) Wis. Stats. and state
highway projects subject to Wisconsin Administrative Code
Chapter Trans 401.
C. Notwithstanding the language of Subsection B(2), activities unrelated
to actual building construction shall be subject to all the requirements
of this chapter. These activities shall include but are not limited to:
(1) Land-disturbing activity prior to excavation for foundation work;
(2) Landscaping;
(3) Installation of driveways, parking areas and sidewalks;
(4) Earthwork on an area greater than 3,000 square feet on sites not
directly related to structural concerns; and
(5) Development of ponds and channelized watercourses, commercial
parks, and landing strips or airport runways.
D. Notwithstanding the language of Subsection B(3), the following
activities are subject to the requirements of this chapter:
(1) Buildings and activities of municipalities;
(2) Buildings and activities of school districts;
(3) Any public (federal, state or local) street, road or highway is to be
constructed, enlarged, relocated or substantially reconstructed; or
(4) Any use by a unit of government or by public or private utilities in
which underground pipe or facilities will be laid, repaired, replaced
or enlarged for a distance of over 125 feet.
E. The following activities are exempt from the infiltration standards
described in § 216-13B(6):
(1) New development sites with less than 10% connected
imperviousness based on complete development of the postconstruction
site, provided the cumulative area of all impervious
surface is less than one acre.
(2) Agricultural facilities and practices.
(3) Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.6 inches/
hour measured at the bottom of the proposed infiltration system
where the soil layer is not easily removed or manipulated.
(4) Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for
commercial and industrial development.
(5) Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land uses and
arterial roads.
§ 216-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-10
1:205
§ 216-10. Preliminary review conference.
Purpose and intent. A preliminary review conference provides a potential
permit applicant with an initial simple evaluation of whether erosion and
stormwater control standards can be met for a proposed site, lot layout,
construction design. This review is intended to assist applicants in
preparing general site plans and other submittals necessary to obtain an
erosion control and stormwater permit. A preliminary review conference
does not guarantee that an erosion or stormwater control plan will be
approved or that a permit will be issued. Erosion and stormwater control
plans and permit applications must meet all applicable standards and
criteria for approval. A preliminary review conference is recommended for
all large sites and small sites with complex design, implementation and
maintenance issues.
§ 216-11. Erosion and stormwater control permits and
administration.
A. No activity meeting the criteria described in § 216-7 or 216-8 shall
occur and no zoning permit may be issued until an erosion control and
stormwater control permit is issued by the Director.
B. The applicant must provide the following when requesting a permit:
(1) Completed application form;
(a) The application must be signed by the landowner or include a
notarized statement signed by the landowner authorizing the
applicant to act as the landowner's agent and bind the
landowner to the terms of this chapter.
(b) If a landowner appoints an agent to submit an application
pursuant to Subsection B(1)(a), the landowner shall be bound
by all of the requirements of this chapter and the terms of any
permit issued to the agent.
(2) Fees as required by § 216-20;
(3) Attendance at the preliminary review conference, as described in
§ 216-10, if applicable;
(4) If required by § 216-7, an erosion control plan meeting all the
standards of § 216-12 or a simplified checklist as described in
§ 216-12.
(5) If required by § 216-8, a stormwater management plan meeting all
of the standards of § 216-13 and a draft maintenance agreement as
described in § 216-13A(7).
(6) Copies of permits or permit applications or approvals required by
any other governmental entity.
§ 216-10 MONONA CODE § 216-11
1:206
(7) A proposed timetable and schedule for completion and installation
of all elements of approved erosion control and stormwater
management plans and a detailed schedule for completion of
construction.
(8) An estimate of the cost of completion and installation of all
elements of the approved erosion control and stormwater
management plans.
(9) Evidence of financial responsibility to complete the work proposed
in the plan. The Director may require a financial security
instrument sufficient to guarantee completion of the project.
C. Approval process.
(1) The Director or appointed designee shall verify that the permit
application is complete under § 216-11B. The plan(s) shall be
reviewed for compliance with the standards identified in §§ 216-12
and 216-13.
(2) Within a thirty-day time frame, the Director shall either approve
the submitted plan or notify the applicant of any deficiencies.
(3) The Director shall notify the applicant in writing of any deficiency
in the proposed plan, and the applicant shall be given an
opportunity to correct any deficiency. Staff engaged in this review
and approval process shall be certified where appropriate by the
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services for this
purpose.
(4) Where installed stormwater practices will be privately owned, an
affidavit which describes the property by legal description,
notifying future prospective purchasers of the existence of a
stormwater permit issued under this chapter and applicable plan,
timetables and potential liability imposed by Subsection I(3) for
failure to bring the property into compliance with this chapter after
notification shall be recorded with the Dane County Register of
Deeds prior to issuance of an erosion and stormwater control
permit. The foregoing information shall also be noted on every plat
and certified survey map.
(5) The erosion control or stormwater management permit shall be
issued by the Director after the applicant has met all other
requirements of this chapter.
D. Permit conditions.
(1) The plan shall be implemented prior to the start of any landdisturbing
activity and shall be maintained over the duration of the
project. Stormwater components of the plan shall be maintained in
perpetuity.
§ 216-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-11
1:207
(2) The permittee is responsible for successful completion of the
erosion control plan and the stormwater management plan. The
permittee shall be liable for all costs incurred, including
environmental restoration costs, resulting from noncompliance
with an approved plan.
(3) Application for a permit shall constitute express permission by the
permittee and landowner for the Director to enter the property for
purposes of inspection under Subsection E or curative action under
Subsection I(3). The application form shall contain a prominent
provision advising the applicant and landowner of this
requirement.
(4) All incidental mud-tracking off site onto adjacent public
thoroughfares shall be cleaned up and removed by the end of each
working day using proper disposal methods.
(5) A copy of the approved permit and erosion control plan shall be
kept on the project site, in a place readily accessible to contractors,
engineers, City inspection staff and other authorized personnel.
E. Inspections.
(1) Application for a permit under this chapter shall constitute
permission by the applicant and landowner for the Director to enter
upon the property and inspect during the construction phase prior
to the inspections pursuant to Subsection E(4) and (8), as
necessary to confirm compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) As part of the plan approval process, the Director shall determine
the minimum number of inspections required to assure compliance.
(3) Within 10 days after installation of all practices in an approved
erosion control plan and achievement of soil stabilization, the
permittee shall notify the Director.
(4) The Director shall inspect the property to verify compliance with
the erosion control plan after notification of soil stabilization.
(5) During construction the permittee shall inspect the site weekly,
after every rainfall event of 0.5 inches or greater and within 24
hours after a precipitation event of 0.5 inches or greater. A
precipitation event may be considered to be the total amount of
precipitation recorded in any continuous twenty-four-hour period.
(6) The format and content of inspection reports used by the permittee
shall be approved by the Director.
(7) Within 30 days after installation of all practices in an approved
stormwater management plan, the permittee shall notify the
Director and submit drawings documenting construction. The
professional engineer who designed the stormwater management
§ 216-11 MONONA CODE § 216-11
1:208
plan for the permittee shall submit as-built certification to ensure
that constructed stormwater management practices and
conveyance systems comply with the details and specifications
included in the approved plans. At minimum, as-built certification
shall include a set of drawings comparing the approved stormwater
management plan with what was constructed. Other information
shall be submitted as required by the Director.
(8) The Director shall inspect the property to verify compliance within
10 days after receiving notification of the stormwater management
facilities installation.
(9) Maintenance is the responsibility of the owner, and facilities are
subject to inspection and orders for repairs.
F. Permit transfers.
(1) When a permittee and landowner act to transfer an interest in
property subject to an approved plan prior to completion of the
proposed steps to attain soil stabilization, the permittee must
secure approval from the Director.
(2) When a permittee and landowner transfers ownership, possession
or control of real estate subject to either or both an uncompleted
erosion control stormwater management plan, the successor in
interest to any portion of the real estate shall be responsible to
control soil erosion and runoff and shall comply with the minimum
standards provided in this chapter.
(3) When ownership, possession or control of property subject to an
uncompleted erosion control or stormwater management plan, or
both, is transferred, the former owner (seller) shall notify the new
owner (buyer) as to the current status of compliance with notice to
the authority and provide a copy of the erosion control plan or
stormwater management plan, or both.
(4) Transfers of interest in real estate subject to an approved
uncompleted plan may be conducted consistent with this chapter
under any of the following arrangements:
(a) The transferee shall file a new approved erosion control or
stormwater management plan, or both, with the authority;
(b) The transferee shall obtain an approved assignment from the
authority as subpermittee to complete that portion of the
approved plan regulating soil erosion and runoff on the
transferee's property.
(c) The permittee shall provide the authority with a duly
completed and executed continuing surety bond or certified
check in an amount sufficient to complete the work proposed in
the approved plan; at the time of transfer the permittee may
§ 216-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-11
1:209
seek to reduce the surety bond or certified check to the
appropriate amount to complete remaining work. If the
transferor enters into escrow agreements with transferees to
complete an approved plan, these funds shall be available to
the authority to attain plan compliance. When an approved
erosion control plan and, if required, a stormwater
management plan is or are not completed as proposed, the
authority may use the surety bond to complete remaining work
to achieve plan compliance.
G. Plan or permit amendments. Any proposed modifications to approved
plans, construction schedules or alterations to accepted sequencing of
land-disturbing site activities shall be approved by the Director prior to
implementation of said changes.
H. Permit application durations.
(1) Erosion control plan timetables and construction schedules must
begin within one year of the date the permit application is filed.
(2) All permit applications shall expire upon the earlier of:
(a) One year from the date the applicant is notified of an
application deficiency, if the applicant has not submitted
additional information to adequately address the deficiency
within the year; or
(b) Three years from the date of application.
I. Enforcement.
(1) Stop-work order.
(a) Whenever the Director finds any noncompliance with the
provisions of this chapter, the Director shall attempt to
communicate with the owner or person performing the work to
obtain immediate and voluntary compliance if such person is
readily available. If the owner or person performing the work is
not readily available, that person refuses to voluntarily comply
immediately or the noncompliance presents an imminent
danger or will cause or threatens to cause bodily injury or
damage to off-site property, including, but not limited to off-site
runoff, the Director shall post in a conspicuous place on the
premises, a stop-work order, which shall cause all activity not
necessary to correct the noncompliance to cease until
noncompliance is corrected.
(b) The stop-work order shall provide the following information:
date of issuance, street address, reason for posting, and the
signature of the inspector posting the card.
(c) It shall be a violation of the chapter for the unauthorized
removal of the stop-work order from the premises.
§ 216-11 MONONA CODE § 216-11
1:210
(2) In addition to posting a stop-work order, the Director shall provide
notification to the owner or contractor by personal service, written
notice by certified mail, or facsimile transmission.
(a) The permittee, landowner and contractor shall have 24 hours
from the time and date of notification by the Director to correct
any noncompliance with the plan when notification is by either
personal communication of noncompliance to owner or
contractor or their respective agents or written notice is sent
by certified mail to owner or contractor.
(b) If notice is not provided under Subsection I(2)(a), the
permittee and landowner shall have 72 hours to correct any
noncompliance with the plan when notification is by posting
notice in a conspicuous place on the site or sending notice by
facsimile transmission to owner or contractor.
(3) If any noncompliance is not corrected within the time periods
specified in Subsection I(2)(a) or (b), the permittee and landowner
authorize the Director to take any action, to perform any work, or
to commence any operations necessary to correct conditions upon
the subject property where notice of noncompliance has been
issued to bring the property into conformance with plan
requirements. The permittee and landowner further consent to
reimburse the authority for the total costs and expenses of the
aforementioned actions, said reimbursement may be collected as a
special charge upon the property for current services rendered, as
provided by law.
(4) If the permittee has filed an appeal under § 216-17A(1) prior to the
expiration of the time for compliance under Subsection I(2)(a) or
(b), the Director may take action, perform work or correct
conditions only to the extent necessary to protect against or correct
an imminent hazard or a condition that will cause or threatens to
cause personal injury or damage to off-site property.
J. Penalties.
(1) Any person or persons, firm, company or corporation, owner,
occupant or other user of the premises who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a forfeiture as listed in the City's Schedule of Fees, Fines and
Forfeitures.112
(2) Any person who has the ability to pay any forfeiture entered against
him or her under this chapter but refuses to do so may be confined
in the County Jail until such forfeiture is paid, in accordance with
§ 800.095, Wis. Stats.113
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 216-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-11
1:211
§ 216-12. Erosion control plan requirements.
(3) As a substitute for or as an addition to forfeiture actions under
Subsection J(1) or corrective action under Subsection I(3), the
Monona City Attorney is authorized to seek enforcement of any
part of this chapter by court action seeking injunctive relief. It shall
not be necessary for the City of Monona to take corrective action or
prosecute for forfeiture before resorting to injunctive relief.
K. Fees. The permit fee shall be payable at the time an application for
either an erosion control or a stormwater management permit, or both,
is submitted.
A. Plan materials. Erosion control plans required under § 216-7 may
include consideration of adjoining landowners' cooperative efforts to
control transport of sediment and, except as specifically exempted
below, shall include at a minimum the following information:
(1) Property lines, lot dimensions and limits of disturbed area;
(2) Limits of impervious area, including, but not necessarily limited to,
buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, and indicate type of
paving and surfacing material;
(3) All natural and artificial water features, including, but not limited
to, lakes, ponds, streams (including intermittent streams) and
ditches; and areas of natural woodland or prairie. The plan must
show ordinary high-water marks of all navigable waters, onehundred-
year flood elevations and delineated wetland boundaries.
A certified flood zone determination and/or wetland delineation
may be required at the applicant's expense;
(4) Cross sections of and profiles of channels, swales and road ditches;
(5) Culvert sizes;
(6) Direction of flow of runoff;
(7) Watershed size for each drainage area;
(8) Design discharge for ditches and structural measures;
(9) Runoff velocities;
(10) Fertilizer and seeding rates and recommendations;
(11) Time schedules for stabilization of ditches and slopes;
(12) Description of methods by which sites are to be developed and a
detailed land disturbance schedule including time schedules for
stabilization of ditches and slopes;
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 216-11 MONONA CODE § 216-12
1:212
(13) Provision for sequential steps mitigating erosive effect of landdisturbing
activities to be followed in appropriate order and in a
manner consistent with accepted erosion control methodology
suitable to proposed sites and amenable to prompt revegetation
including runoff calculations as appropriate;
(14) Provisions to prevent mud-tracking off site onto public
thoroughfares during the construction period;
(15) Provisions to disconnect impervious surfaces, where feasible;
(16) Provisions to prevent sediment delivery to, and accumulation in,
any proposed or existing stormwater conveyance systems;
(17) Copies of permits or permit applications required by any other unit
of government or agency;
(18) Existing and proposed elevations (referenced to the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988, where available) and existing
and proposed contours in the area, where deemed necessary; and
(19) Any other information necessary to reasonably determine the
location, nature and condition of any physical or environmental
features of the site.
B. Simplified plan checklist.
(1) Applicants may submit erosion control proposals using simplified
checklists of standard erosion control practices on a standard form
approved by the Director, wherever all of the following conditions
exist:
(a) The site does not exceed 20,000 square feet in area;
(b) Soil on slopes steeper than 6% will be disturbed for less than
15 days; and
(c) Soil on slopes less than 6% will be exposed for less than six
months.
(2) Simplified plan checklists shall be reviewed by the Director for
completeness and accuracy.
C. Erosion control performance standards.
(1) Proposed design, suggested location and phased implementation of
effective practicable erosion control measures for plans shall be
designed, engineered and implemented to achieve the following
results:
(a) Prevent gully and bank erosion; and
(b) Limit total off-site permissible annual aggregate soil loss for
exposed areas resulting from sheet and rill erosion to an
§ 216-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-12
1:213
annual, cumulative soil loss rate not to exceed 7.5 tons per
acre annually.
(c) Discharges from new construction sites must have a stable
outlet capable of carrying designed flow as required in
§ 216-13B(4), at a nonerosive velocity. Outlet design must
consider flow capacity and flow duration. This requirement
applies to both the site outlet and the ultimate outlet to
stormwater conveyance or water body.
(2) Plan compliance under Subsection C(1) shall be determined using
the United States Natural Resources Conservation Service
Technical Guide or another commonly accepted soil erosion
methodology approved by the Dane County Conservationist that
considers season of year, site characteristics, soil erodibility and
slope.
(3) Erosion control measures for plan approval need not attempt to
regulate soil transportation within the boundaries of the applicant's
site.
(4) Except as authorized in this section, the topography within five feet
of any property line at the commencement of any development shall
remain unchanged.
(a) When land-disturbing activities associated with development
occur within five feet of any property line, finished grades in
that area shall be restored to the topography in existence
before the land-disturbing activity begins. A positive slope of 1/
2 inch vertical per one foot horizontal within five feet of the
property line is allowed to provide proper drainage away from
a one- or two-family residence.
(b) The established grade of the adjoining property shall
determine the finished grade at the property line for any
development. The owner of the property under development
bears the burden of proof as to the established grade at the
property line and the topography within five feet of the
property line. The Director may require detailed site grading
plans of existing and proposed conditions to be submitted
before commencement of land-disturbing activities.
(5) Upon written application, the Director may authorize exceptions
resulting in changes to the existing topography at and within five
feet of any property line that would promote the purposes stated in
this chapter. An exception authorized under this subsection may
not direct additional stormwater runoff toward adjacent properties.
Proposed exceptions may include, but are not limited to, retaining
walls, berms and other structures, and other changes to existing
grade at and within five feet of a property line. The Director may
require the submittal of detailed site grading plans of existing and
proposed conditions, including, but not limited to, detailed
§ 216-12 MONONA CODE § 216-12
1:214
§ 216-13. Stormwater management plan requirements.
Plan materials. Stormwater management plans shall satisfy all of the
requirements in Subsection B and shall address at a minimum the following
information:
topographical information of the subject and adjoining properties,
before land-disturbing activities commence.
(6) Existing drainageways and drainage easements along property
lines shall be maintained, including, but not limited to, natural
watercourses and stormwater management areas shown on
subdivision plats and certified survey maps.
A. A narrative describing the proposed project, including implementation
schedule for planned practices:
(1) Identification of the entity responsible for long-term maintenance
of the project;
(2) A map showing drainage areas for each watershed area;
(3) A summary of runoff peak flow rate calculations by watershed area,
including:
(a) Predevelopment peak flow rates, (two-, ten-year);
(b) Post-development peak flow rates with no detention, (two-, tenand
one-hundred-year);
(c) Post-development peak flow rates with detention, (two-, tenand
one-hundred year);
(d) Assumed runoff curve numbers (RCNs); and
(e) Time of concentration (Tc) used in calculations.
(f) Demonstrate ability to safely pass one-hundred-year postconstruction
storm without inundating buildings or causing
damage to structures.
(4) A complete site plan and specifications, signed by the person who
designed the plan. All plans shall be drawn to an easily legible
scale, shall be clearly labeled, and shall include, at a minimum, all
of the following information:
(a) Property lines and lot dimensions;
(b) All buildings and outdoor uses, existing and proposed,
including all dimensions and setbacks;
(c) All public and private roads, interior roads, driveways and
parking lots. Show traffic patterns and type of paving and
surfacing material;
§ 216-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-13
1:215
(d) All natural and artificial water features, including, but not
limited to, lakes, ponds, streams (including intermittent
streams), and ditches. Show ordinary high-water marks of all
navigable waters, one-hundred-year flood elevations and
delineated wetland boundaries, if any. If not available,
appropriate flood zone determination or wetlands delineation,
or both, may be required at the applicant's expense;
(e) Depth to bedrock;
(f) Depth to seasonal high-water table;
(g) The extent and location of all soil types as described in the
Dane County Soil Survey, slopes exceeding 12%, and areas of
natural woodland or prairie;
(h) Existing and proposed elevations [referenced to the North
American Vertical Datum (USGS) of 1988] and existing and
proposed contours in the area requiring a grading and filling
permit with a maximum of two-foot contour intervals;
(i) Elevations, sections, profiles and details as needed to describe
all natural and artificial features of the project;
(j) Soil erosion control and overland runoff control measures,
including runoff calculations as appropriate;
(k) Detailed construction schedule;
(l) Copies of permits or permit applications required by any other
governmental entities or agencies;
(m) Any other information necessary to reasonably determine the
location, nature and condition of any physical or environmental
features;
(n) Location of all stormwater management practices;
(o) All existing and proposed drainage features;
(p) The location and area of all proposed impervious surfaces; and
(q) The limits and area of the disturbed area.
(5) Engineered designs for all structural management practices.
(6) A description of methods to control oil and grease or written
justification for not providing such control.
(7) A maintenance plan and schedule for all permanent stormwater
management practices as recorded on the affidavit required in
§ 216-11C(4).
(8) A summary of infiltration calculations, including:
§ 216-13 MONONA CODE § 216-13
1:216
(a) Predevelopment infiltration volume.
(b) Calculated infiltration volume goal.
(c) Achieved post-development infiltration volume.
B. Stormwater management performance standards. Proposed design,
suggested location and phased implementation of effective practicable
stormwater management measures for plans shall be designed,
engineered and implemented to achieve the following results:
(1) Sediment control.
(a) For new construction, design practices to retain soil particles
greater than five microns on the site (eighty-percent reduction)
resulting from a one-year twenty-four-hour storm event,
according to approved procedures and assuming no sediment
resuspension;
(b) For redevelopment resulting in exposed surface parking lots
and associated traffic areas, design practices to retain soil
particles greater than 20 microns on the entire site (fortypercent
reduction) resulting from a one-year twenty-four-hour
storm event, according to approved procedures
and assuming no sediment resuspension. Under no
circumstances shall the site's existing sediment control level
or trapping efficiency be reduced as a result of the
redevelopment.
Table 1. Maximum Predevelopment Runoff Curve
Numbers
Runoff Curve
Number Hydrologic Soil Group*
A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Grassland 39 61 71 78
Cropland 51 68 78 83
* When dual HSG are specified, the drained condition shall
be assumed.
(2) Oil and grease control. For all stormwater plans for commercial or
industrial developments and all other uses where the potential for
pollution by oil or grease, or both, exists, the first 0.5 inches of
runoff will be treated using the best oil and grease removal
technology available. This requirement may be waived by the plan
reviewer only when the applicant can demonstrate that installation
of such practices is not necessary.
§ 216-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-13
1:217
(3) Runoff rate control - hydrologic calculations. All runoff calculations
shall be according to the methodology described in the Natural
Resources Conservation Service's Technical Release 55, "Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds" (commonly known as TR-55), or
other methodology approved by the Director. The maximum runoff
curve number (RCN) used in such calculations shall be those shown
in Table 1. The TR-55-specified curve numbers for other land uses
shall be used. Heavily disturbed sites will be lowered one
permeability class for hydrologic calculations. Lightly disturbed
areas require no modification. Where practices have been
implemented to restore soil structure to predeveloped conditions,
no permeability class modification is required.
(4) Runoff rate control - design standards. All stormwater facilities
shall be designed, installed and maintained to effectively
accomplish the following:
(a) Redevelopment. [Amended 6-19-2017 by Ord. No.
6-17-688]
[1] Maintain preredevelopment peak runoff rates for the twoyear,
twenty-four-hour storm event (2.84 inches over 24
hours' duration using the NRCS MSE4 storm distribution).
[2] Maintain preredevelopment peak runoff rates for the tenyear,
twenty-four-hour storm event (4.09 inches over 24
hours' duration using the NRCS MSE4 storm distribution).
[3] Safely pass the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm
event (6.66 inches over 24 hours' duration using the NRCS
MSE4 storm distribution) without inundating buildings or
causing damage to structures.
(b) New development. [Amended 6-19-2017 by Ord. No.
6-17-688]
[1] Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the oneyear,
twenty-four-hour storm event (2.49 inches over 24
hours' duration using the NRCS MSE4 storm distribution).
[2] Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the twoyear,
twenty-four-hour storm event (2.84 inches over 24
hours' duration using the NRCS MSE4 storm distribution).
[3] Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the tenyear,
twenty-four-hour storm event (4.09 inches over 24
hours' duration using the NRCS MSE4 storm distribution).
[4] Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour storm event (6.66 inches
over 24 hours' duration using the NRCS MSE4 storm
distribution).
§ 216-13 MONONA CODE § 216-13
1:218
(5) Outlets. Discharges from new construction sites must have a stable
outlet capable of carrying designed flow as required in Subsection
B(4), at a nonerosive velocity. Outlet design must consider flow
capacity and flow duration. This requirement applies to both the
site outlet and the ultimate outlet to stormwater conveyance or
water body.
(6) Infiltration.
(a) Redevelopment. All downspouts, driveways and other
impervious areas shall be directed to pervious surfaces, where
feasible, or unless the applicant can demonstrate that the
practice is likely to result in groundwater contamination.
(b) New development.
[1] For both residential and nonresidential developments,
design practices to infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so
that post-development infiltration volume shall be at least
90% of the predevelopment infiltration volume, based
upon average annual rainfall.
[2] The maximum predevelopment runoff curve number
(RCN) used in such calculations shall be those as specified
in § 216-13B(1)(b), Table 1.
[3] If when designing appropriate infiltration systems more
than 2% of the site is required to be used as effective
infiltration area, the applicant may alternately design
infiltration systems and pervious surfaces to meet or
exceed the annual predevelopment recharge rate. The
annual predevelopment recharge rate shall be determined
from the Wisconsin Geological and Natural History
Survey's 2009 report, Groundwater Recharge in Dane
County, Estimated by a GIS-Based Water-Balanced Model,
or subsequent updates to this report, or by a site-specific
analysis using other appropriate techniques. If this
alternative design approach is taken, at least 2% of the site
must be used for infiltration.
[4] Pretreatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment
shall be required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from
new road construction in commercial, industrial and
institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system.
The pretreatment shall conform to the design standards in
§ 216-16 and be designed to protect the infiltration system
from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to
protect groundwater quality.
[5] Prohibitions. Notwithstanding Subsection B(6)(b)[1]
through [3], infiltration systems may not be installed in any
of the following areas:
§ 216-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-13
1:219
[a] Areas associated with Tier 1 industrial facilities
identified in § NR 216.21(2)(a), Wis. Adm. Code,
including storage, loading, rooftop and parking.
[b] Storage and loading areas of Tier 2 industrial facilities
identified in § NR 216.21(2)(b), Wis. Adm. Code.
[c] Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas.
[d] Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet
downgradient of direct conduits to groundwater.
[e] Separation distances. Infiltration practices shall be
located so that the characteristics of the soil and the
separation distance between the bottom of the
infiltration system and the elevation of seasonal high
groundwater or the top of bedrock are in accordance
with Table below:
Table 2. Separation Distances and Soil
Characteristics
Source Area
Separation
Distance
Soil
Characteristics
Industrial,
commercial,
institutional
parking lots and
roads
5 feet or more Filtering layer
Residential
arterial roads
5 feet or more Filtering layer
Roofs draining to
subsurface
infiltration
practices
1 foot or more Native or
engineered soil
with particles
finer than
coarse sand
Roofs draining to
surface infiltration
practices
Not applicable
All other
impervious source
areas
3 feet or more Filtering layer
[f] Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and
institutional parking lots and roads and residential
arterial roads with less than five feet of separation
distance from the bottom of the infiltration system to
the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top
of bedrock.
§ 216-13 MONONA CODE § 216-13
1:220
§ 216-14. Off-site stormwater management.
Off-site stormwater management is allowed, provided that all of the
following conditions for the off-site facility are met:
[g] Areas within 400 feet of a community water system
well as specified in § NR 811.16(4), Wis. Adm. Code,
for runoff infiltrated from commercial, industrial and
institutional land uses or regional devices for
residential development.
[h] Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in
§ NR 720.03(2), Wis. Adm. Code, are present in the
soil through which infiltration will occur.
[6] Alternate use of runoff. Where alternate uses of runoff are
employed, such as for toilet flushing, laundry or irrigation,
such alternate use shall be given equal credit toward the
infiltration volume required by this section.
[7] Minimizing groundwater pollution. According to Ch. NR
151, Wis. Adm. Code, infiltration systems designed in
accordance with this section shall, to the extent
technically and economically feasible, minimize the level
of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain
compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of
standards application in accordance with Ch. NR 140, Wis.
Adm. Code. However, if site-specific information indicates
that compliance with the preventive action limit is not
reasonably achievable, the infiltration system may not be
installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the
maximum extent practicable.
C. Stormwater management goals. The following standards shall be met
whenever possible, and proposed design, suggested location and
implementation of practices to meet these goals shall be included in
plans:
(1) For existing development, design practices to retain soil particles
greater than 40 microns on the site (twenty-percent reduction)
resulting from a one-year twenty-four-hour storm event, according
to approved procedures and assuming no sediment resuspension.
(2) For street reconstruction, design practices to retain soil particles
greater than 20 microns on the site (forty-percent reduction)
resulting from a one-year, twenty-four-hour storm event, according
to approved procedures and assuming no sediment resuspension.
A. The facility is in place.
B. The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of
stormwater control that at least meets the ordinance standards.
§ 216-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-14
1:221
§ 216-15. [Added 6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 6-17-688]
C. The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long-term
operation and maintenance.
D. All required fees have been paid to the operator of the off-site
stormwater management.
A. Each applicant who is granted a stormwater management permit, and
who has signed and recorded the required maintenance agreement,
shall submit to the Director a report on the condition of the site's
stormwater management facilities. This report shall be submitted by
June 30 in each of the first two years following the Director's inspection
and approval of the stormwater management facilities per
§ 216-11E(8). Following the first two years' reports, subsequent report
submittals shall be due every even-numbered year thereafter.
B. The report shall be completed and sealed by a professional engineer
currently licensed in the State of Wisconsin on forms provided by the
Director. The Director, at his or her discretion, may allow other
appropriately credentialed professionals to complete and seal this
work. The requirement that the report be sealed by a professional
engineer or other approved credentialed professional may be omitted in
the case of a stormwater management plan consisting solely of storm
sewer inlet filters and/or catch basin sumps, provided that the applicant
can provide the appropriate documentation and dated photos
acceptable to the Director as outlined in § 216-15D(1) and (2).
C. Sites which include detention and/or infiltration basins require
completion and submittal of a topographic survey every four years. The
Director, at his or her discretion, may allow the topographic survey to
be submitted less frequently, or may allow that the survey be satisfied
through the submittal of adequate photographic documentation as
outlined in § 216-15D(2).
D. The report shall include the following:
(1) Documentation of the completion of the required periodic
maintenance, as required by the stormwater management
maintenance agreement for the site, including copies of receipts
(actual prices paid need not be reported) from agents hired to
perform the work and the date the work was completed.
(2) Photos of the stormwater management facilities at the time of
inspection. This shall include photos of the existing conditions and
photos after completion of any required maintenance.
E. If the report identifies any shortcomings in required stormwater facility
maintenance, the responsible for the maintenance shall complete the
maintenance within 90 days of the date the report is filed. Such
maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, dredging and
vegetative restoration, as applicable.
§ 216-14 MONONA CODE § 216-15
1:222
§ 216-16. Technical standards and specifications.
The design of all best management practices designed to meet the
requirements of this chapter shall comply with the following technical
standards:
§ 216-17. Appeals and variances.
F. If an applicant fails to timely submit any required report, or fails to
complete any required maintenance, the Director shall authorize
completion of the report or required maintenance, with the cost to
complete the report or maintenance charged back against the real
property under § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
A. Natural Resources Conservation Service's Field Office Technical Guide,
Chapter 4, or its successor;
B. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources' Wisconsin Construction
Site Best Management Practice Handbook, or its successor.
C. Any other technical methodology approved by the Director.
A. Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Director pursuant to
this chapter may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such
appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the challenged decision.
Notice of appeal setting forth the specific grounds for the appeal
shall be filed with the Director and the Zoning Board of Appeals.
The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning
Board of Appeals the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal and publish a class 2 notice thereof under Ch.
985, Wis. Stats., as well as give due notice to the parties in interest,
and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing any
party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
(3) The Zoning Board of Appeals may, in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and
may make such order, requirement decision or determination as
ought to be made, and shall have all the powers of the officer from
whom the appeal is taken.
(4) The concurring vote of four members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be necessary to reverse the decision of the Director.
(5) A person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals
may appeal that decision to the Common Council by filing a notice
§ 216-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-17
1:223
§ 216-18. Permit duration.
of appeal with the Director and City Clerk within 30 days of the
decision.
B. Variances.
(1) An applicant may include in the application a request for a variance
from the requirements of § 216-12 or 216-13. No variance shall be
granted unless applicant demonstrates that all of the following
conditions are present:
(a) Enforcement of the standards set forth in this chapter will
result in unnecessary hardship to the landowner;
(b) The hardship is due to exceptional physical conditions unique
to the property;
(c) Granting the variance will not adversely affect the public
health, safety or welfare, nor be contrary to the spirit, purpose
and intent of this chapter;
(d) The applicant has proposed an alternative to the requirement
from which the variance is sought that will provide equivalent
protection of the public health, safety and welfare, the
environment and public and private property;
(e) The net cumulative effect of the variance will not impact
downstream conditions; and
(f) Existing regional facilities are shown to meet the performance
standards of this chapter.
(2) If all of the conditions set forth in Subsection B(1) are met, a
variance may only be granted to the minimum extent necessary to
afford relief from the unnecessary hardship, with primary
consideration to water quality.
(3) A variance from the provisions of § 216-13B may only be granted if:
(a) The applicant has met the requirements of § 216-17B(1); and
(b) The applicant will be denied all reasonable and beneficial use
of the property if the variance is denied.
(4) A person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals
regarding a variance may appeal that decision to the Common
Council by filing a notice of appeal with the Director and City Clerk
within 30 days of the decision.
A. Erosion control permits shall expire:
§ 216-17 MONONA CODE § 216-18
1:224
§ 216-19. Administration.
§ 216-20. Permit fees.
(1) Upon the stabilization date included in the approved plan and
included in the analysis provided to meet the requirements of
§ 216-12C(1)(b).
(2) A maximum of 12 months after the permit is issued.
B. The Director is authorized to extend the expiration date of the erosion
control permit if such a request is received in writing and to require
modifications of the plans to prevent any increase in sedimentation,
erosion or runoff resulting from the extension.
A. Delegation of administrative authority.
(1) The Director or appointed designee shall administer, approve plans
and enforce the provisions of this chapter on private lands within
the City of Monona.
(2) The Director or appointed designee shall administer, approve plans
and enforce the provisions of this chapter on public lands and, upon
request, shall review and approve erosion and runoff control plans
for private property in the City of Monona.
(3) The Director or appointed designee shall administer, approve plans
and enforce the provisions of this chapter on lands being
subdivided by plat or certified survey within the extraterritorial
limits for plat review in accordance with § 236.10, Wis. Stats., for
erosion and runoff control, including both public lands and private
land.
B. Administrative duties. The administration and enforcement of this
chapter shall include the following duties:
(1) Keep an accurate record of all plan data received, plans approved,
permits issued, inspections made and other official records.
(2) Review all plans and permit applications received when
accompanied with the necessary information and the appropriate
fee, and issue the permits.
(3) Investigate all complaints made to the application of this chapter.
(4) Revoke any permit granted under this chapter if the holder of the
permit has misrepresented any material fact in the permit
application or plan, or has failed to comply with the plan as
originally approved or as modified in writing, or has violated one of
the other conditions of the permit as issued to the applicant.
A. Permits are subject to a fee as prescribed in the Schedule of Fees, Fines
and Forfeitures adopted by the Common Council.114
§ 216-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-20
1:225
§ 216-21. Additional standards.
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, every person required to
obtain a permit hereunder shall comply with all applicable regulations
promulgated by state or federal agencies governing construction site
erosion control and stormwater runoff, as they may be amended from time
to time, including, but not limited to, the regulations contained in Chapter
NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code. Should the requirements of this chapter conflict
with the applicable state or federal requirements, the more restrictive
standard shall apply. Every application for a permit under this chapter shall
demonstrate compliance with all applicable standards.
Chapter 225
FAIR HOUSING
§ 225-1. Adoption of statute by reference.
The Common Council of the City of Monona hereby adopts § 106.50, Wis.
Stats., as amended, and all subsequent amendments thereto. The officials
and employees of the City of Monona shall assist in the orderly prevention
and removal of all discrimination in housing within the City of Monona
by implementing the authority and enforcement procedures set forth in
§ 106.50, Wis. Stats. The City Clerk shall maintain forms for complaints to
be filed under § 106.50, Wis. Stats., and shall assist any person alleging a
violation thereof in the City of Monona to file a complaint thereunder with
the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development for enforcement of
§ 106.50, Wis. Stats.
B. Impervious area adjustment factor:
Impervious Area Fee Reduction
85 to 100% 0%
60 to 84% 15%
45 to 59% 25%
30 to 44% 35%
0 to 29% 40%
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 216-20 MONONA CODE § 225-1
1:226
Chapter 232
FIRES AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 175.
Outdoor furnaces — See Ch. 245.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 256.
Zoning — See Ch. 480.
§ 232-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable in this chapter:
APPROVED — When applied to any material, device or mode of
construction, means approval by the Fire Chief or other person charged
with the enforcement of this chapter. When applied to all suppression
and detection system devices, means approval by a recognized testing
laboratory.
APPROVED WATER HYDRANT — A water hydrant approved by the Fire
Chief as conforming to City specifications, connected to a municipal water
main, with four-and-one-half-inch hose connection and two-and-on-half-inch
connections.
AREA — The space on any one floor or story, stated in terms of square feet,
within the exterior walls of a building or structure between approved fire
walls and within a building or structure.
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION — The City of Monona.
AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM — An integrated system of
underground and overhead piping designed in accordance with fireprotection
and engineering standards. The system includes a suitable water
supply, such as a gravity tank, fire pump, reservoir or pressure tank, or
connection beginning at the supply side of an approved gate valve located
at or near the property line where the pipe or piping system provides
water used exclusively for fire protection and related appurtenances and
to standpipes connected to automatic sprinkler systems. The portion of
the sprinkler system above the ground is a network of specially sized or
hydraulically designed piping installed in a building, structure or area,
generally overhead, and to which sprinklers are connected in a systematic
pattern. The system includes a controlling valve and a device for actuating
an alarm when the system is in operation. The system is usually activated
by heat from a fire and discharges water over the fire area.
AUTOMATIC FIRE-SUPPRESSION SYSTEM — A mechanical system
designed and equipped to detect a fire, actuate an alarm and suppress
or control a fire using water, water spray, foam, carbon dioxide, or other
approved suppression agent.
§ 225-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-1
1:227
BASEMENT — Any story where less than half the height between floor and
ceiling is above the average level of street, sidewalk or finished grade.
CHIEF — The Chief of the Monona Fire Department.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Monona Fire Department.
DWELLING — Any building that contains one or two dwelling units.
DWELLING STRUCTURE — Any structure containing one or more rooms
providing sleeping and sanitary facilities, but not including a hotel, hospital,
nursing home, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house.
DWELLING UNIT — A structure or that part of a structure which is
designed, intended to be used, or is used as a home, residence or sleeping
place by one person or by two or more persons maintaining a common
household to the exclusion of others.
ELEVATOR — As defined within the Department of Safety and Professional
Services, Ch. SPS 318, Elevator Code, Wis. Adm. Code.
FALSE ALARM — The reporting of an emergency and/or the activation of
an alarm box and/or reporting an emergency to any public official with the
intent to deceive the Department, when no emergency exists.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Monona Fire Department and its associated
emergency medical services.
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTION (FDC) — A connection through which
the Fire Department can pump an auxiliary supply of water into the
sprinkler system for the purpose of maintaining sufficient volume and
pressure.
FIRE INSPECTOR — The Chief shall hold the office of Fire Inspector and
shall appoint one or more inspectors from within the Department who shall
perform the same duties and have the same powers as the Fire Inspector.
The Fire Inspector(s) is responsible for the enforcement of the state codes
adopted within this chapter, as well as the enforcement of this chapter.
FIRE PREVENTION INSPECTION — An examination of public buildings and
places of employment for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be
corrected any conditions reasonably likely to cause fire, or any violation of
any law or ordinance relating to fire hazards or the prevention of fire. Fire
inspections shall be conducted at least once in each nonoverlapping sixmonth
period per calendar year, at the time that occupancy of a building or
tenant space is requested, or upon special request.
FIRE-RESISTIVE CONSTRUCTION — That type of construction in which
the structural members of the building, including walls, partitions, columns,
floor and roof consist of noncombustible materials.
FIRE WALL — A wall that has a fire-resistance rating of not less than one
hour and which divides or separates a building or buildings and restricts
the spread of fire. The term includes a three-foot parapet wall.
FIREFIGHTER/PARAMEDIC/EMT — Any member of the Monona Fire
Department or its associated emergency medical services.
§ 232-1 MONONA CODE § 232-1
1:228
FIREWORKS —
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL(S) — A substance (solid, liquid or gas) capable of
posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety, the environment or property.
HIGH-HAZARD OCCUPANCY — Any building which by reason of its
construction or highly combustible occupancy involves a severe life hazard
to its occupants, as classified by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services.
INCIDENT COMMANDER — The Chief or other officer or other member
of the Department who is in charge of a fire, emergency medical or other
emergency scene to which the services of the Department have been
requested.
KEY BOX — A secure box placed upon a building that contains the keys to
said building. The Fire Department is able to access that box using standard
operating procedures.
MABAS — The Mutual Aid Box Alarm System, which is an organized method
of providing mutual aid between departments located in both of the states
of Wisconsin and Illinois.
Anything manufactured, possessed or packaged for exploding, emitting
sparks or combustion, which does not have another common use,
including but not limited to any of the following:
Any device designed to produce an audible sound, whether or not
it explodes, sparks, moves or emits an external flame.
(1)
Any device that emits smoke, whether or not it emits an external
flame and whether or not it leaves the ground.
(2)
(3) Any cylindrical fountain which emits sparks or smoke.
(4) Any cone fountain which emits sparks or smoke.
(5) Toy snakes, whether or not they contain mercury.
Such other devices which are defined as fireworks under § 167.10,
Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time.
(6)
A.
The definition of "fireworks" in this section does not include any the
following:
(1) Fuel or a lubricant.
(2) Firearm cartridge or shotgun shell.
A flare used, possessed or sold for use as a signal in an emergency
or in the operations of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or motor
vehicle.
(3)
A match, cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space
heater.
(4)
B.
§ 232-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-1
1:229
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — An apartment building, row house,
townhouse, condominium or manufactured building that does not exceed
60 feet in height or six stories and that consists of three or more attached
living units, or two or more living units with a business occupancy attached,
the initial construction of which is begun on or after January 1, 1993.
"Multifamily dwelling" does not include a facility licensed under State of
Wisconsin Ch. Comm 50, Wis. Adm. Code. For the Commercial Building
Code, see Chs. SPS 361 to 366.
MUTUAL AID — The providing of and receiving fire or emergency medical
services to and from other municipalities within the States of Wisconsin and
Illinois with which the City has signed agreements.
NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION (NFPA) — An organization
that facilitates the development and distribution of firesafety codes and
standards.
OCCUPANCY INSPECTION — An inspection performed after the initial
construction of a building or tenant space and prior to occupancy of same,
or an inspection performed within an existing building or tenant space after
a change in owner or occupant or after any modification or renovation.
OPEN BURNING — The act of starting a fire by means of igniting
combustible materials by a match, torch or accelerant.
OUTDOOR COOKING — Any cooking activity which occurs in a grill or
barbecue kettle or cooker designed expressly for cooking meals outside.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any structure, including exterior parts of such
building, such as a porch, exterior platform or steps providing means of
ingress or egress, used in whole or in part as a place of resort, assemblage,
lodging, trade, traffic, occupancy, or used by the public or by three or more
tenants.
PUBLIC RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Any public building which is used
for sleeping or lodging purposes including any apartment house, rooming
house, hotel, children's home, community-based residential facility or
dormitory, but does not include a hospital or nursing home.
RE-INSPECTION — The need to perform one or more additional inspections
after the initial fire prevention inspection was performed.
REMODEL — To change any building or structure which affects the
structural strength, fire hazard, internal circulation, or exits of the existing
building or structure. This definition does not apply to reroofing, or
alterations to the heating and ventilating or electrical systems.
SLEEPING AREA — The area of the unit in which the bedrooms or sleeping
rooms are located. Bedrooms or sleeping rooms separated by another use
area, such as a kitchen or living room, are separated sleeping areas, but
bedrooms or sleeping rooms separated by a bathroom are not separate
sleeping areas.
SMOKE DETECTOR — A device that detects the visible or invisible products
of combustion.
§ 232-1 MONONA CODE § 232-1
1:230
SPECIAL INSPECTION — An inspection performed at the request of an
owner, occupant, another City department or court order.
SPS — The Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services,
formerly known as the Wisconsin Department of Commerce (Comm), the
fire code writing agency of the state, and prior to Comm, formerly known as
the DILHR, Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations.
STANDPIPE — An arrangement of piping, valves, hose connections, and
allied equipment installed in a building or structure with the hose
connections located in such a manner that water can be discharged in
streams or spray patterns through attached fire hose and nozzles for the
purpose of extinguishing a fire and so protecting a building or structure and
its contents in addition to protecting the occupants. This is accomplished
by connections to water supply systems or by pumps, tanks and other
equipment necessary to provide an adequate supply of water to the hose
connections.
STORY — That part of a building situated between a floor and a floor or roof
above.
UNIT — A residential building or that part of a residential building which is
intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one person or
by two or more persons maintaining a common household to the exclusion
of all others.
WATER-FLOW ALARM — A device that is listed for the service and so
constructed and installed that any flow of water from a sprinkler system
equal to or greater than that from a single automatic sprinkler of the
smallest orifice size installed on the system will result in an audible or visual
alarm and send such notification to a central station within one minute after
such flow begins.
§ 232-2. General provisions.
A. Intent of code. It is the intent of this Fire Prevention Code ("code" or
"chapter") to prescribe regulations consistent with nationally
recognized good practice for the safeguarding to a reasonable degree
of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from
the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and
devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or
occupancy of buildings or premises. Compliance with standards of the
American Insurance Association or the National Fire Protection
Association, or other approved nationally recognized safety standards,
as later referred to and as listed in § 232-5 shall be deemed to be prima
facie evidence of compliance with this intent.
B. Application of code.
(1) The provisions of this chapter apply equally to new and existing
conditions, except that existing conditions not in strict compliance
with the terms of this chapter shall be permitted to continue where
§ 232-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-2
1:231
the exceptions do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or property
in the opinion of the Chief.
(2) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as applying to
the transportation of any article or thing shipped under the
jurisdiction of and in compliance with the regulations prescribed by
the United States Department of Transportation, nor as applying to
the military forces of the United States.
(3) The Chief may delegate any or all of his or her authority under this
chapter to such subordinates in the Fire Department as the Chief
may designate, and the actions of such authorized subordinates
shall be construed as valid actions of the Chief.
C. Authority to enter premises.
(1) The Chief may, at reasonable hours, request permission of the
owner or occupant to enter any building or premises for the
purpose of making an inspection or investigation, which under the
provisions of this chapter the Chief may deem necessary to be
made. No person shall deny the Chief free access to any property
within the City at any reasonable time for the purpose of making
fire inspections. No person shall hinder or obstruct the Fire
Inspectors in the performance of their duties or refuse to observe
any lawful direction given by them.
(2) The Chief may obtain a special inspection warrant under § 66.0119,
Wis. Stats., when necessary for the purpose of making an
inspection or investigation of any building or premises where the
owner or occupant has refused admission.
(3) No person, having been advised of the existence of a special
inspection warrant to inspect the premises owned or occupied by
him or her, shall refuse to permit such inspection to be made. Each
day, or part thereof, during which such refusal continues shall be
deemed a separate violation.
D. Inspection of buildings and premises. It is the duty of the Chief to
inspect all buildings and premises except the interiors of dwelling units
as often as may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and
causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, endanger life
from fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of this chapter and
any other ordinance affecting a fire hazard.
E. Order to eliminate dangerous or hazardous condition. Whenever the
Chief shall find in any building or upon any premises dangerous or
hazardous conditions or materials as follows, the Chief shall order such
dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or remedied:
(1) Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive or
otherwise dangerous materials.
§ 232-2 MONONA CODE § 232-2
1:232
(2) Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly
installed equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive
or otherwise hazardous materials.
(3) Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes, shavings
or other highly combustible materials.
(4) Accumulations of dust or waste material in air-conditioning or
ventilating systems or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts
or inadequate clearances to unprotected combustible materials
from hoods, grease extractors and ducts.
(5) Obstructions to or on fire escapes, designated access openings in
exterior walls for Fire Department use, stairs, passageways, doors
or windows liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire
Department or egress of occupants in case of fire.
(6) Any building or other structure which for want of repairs, lack of
adequate exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus, or
fire-extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated
condition, or from any other cause, creates a hazardous situation.
F. Issuance of orders.
(1) Order requiring replacement of fire prevention, detection or
suppression system due to recurring violations. Whenever the
Chief shall find in any building or upon any premises during any
three inspections or reinspections a fire prevention, detection or
suppression system which is defective, inoperative, improperly
maintained or improperly operated, the Chief may order the
following remedies:
(a) If the system includes one or more exit light(s) which have not
been illuminated during inspections, the Chief may order that
all of the exit lights in such premises be equipped with selfilluminating
lights or lights equipped with light-emitting diodes
(LED).
(b) If the system includes one or more self-closing fire door(s) any
of which have been found to have been held open with
nonapproved hold-open devices during inspections, the Chief
may order that all of the fire doors in such premises be
equipped with a door holder/release device.
(c) If the system includes emergency exit doors which, during
hours of occupancy, have been found to be secured or locked
with bolts, bars, chains, padlocks or locking devices other than
the primary door lock, the Chief may order that all emergency
exit doors within the premises be equipped with panic door
release hardware.
§ 232-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-2
1:233
(d) This subsection shall not be construed as a limitation upon the
powers of the Chief to issue orders for corrections of violations
under this chapter, nor shall this subsection be construed as a
limitation upon any of the powers of the Chief under any other
applicable provision of the Monona Code of Ordinances,
Wisconsin Administrative Codes or Wisconsin State Statutes.
(2) Corrective action. Whenever the Chief may find a violation of this
chapter, Wisconsin State Statutes or the Wisconsin Administrative
Code, the Chief may order corrective action to cause the violation
to be eliminated.
(3) Authority to abate hazard. The Chief shall have the authority to
order the immediate abatement of any hazard deemed by the Chief
to be an imminent hazard to the life, safety and well-being of any
individual. Whenever the owner shall refuse or neglect to abate
said hazard, the Chief may cause the same to be abated, and the
City shall recover the expenses incurred thereby from the owner.
The Chief shall keep an accurate account of all unpaid expenses
incurred by the City for hazard abatement rendered and report the
same to the Finance Director, who shall annually prepare a
statement of these special charges for each lot or parcel of land and
report the same to the City Clerk, and the amount therein charged
to each lot or parcel of land shall be collected in all respects like
other special charges upon real estate as provided in § 66.0627,
Wis. Stats.
(4) Authority to vacate. The Chief shall have the authority to issue an
order to vacate any property deemed by the Chief to be necessary
due to an imminent hazard to the life safety and well-being of the
occupants.
G. Service of orders.
(1) The service of written orders for the correction of violations of this
chapter shall be made upon the owner, occupant or other person
responsible for the conditions, either by delivering a copy of same
to any person in charge of the premises or by mailing such orders
to the owner or other responsible person. This subsection shall in
no way preclude the Chief from issuing oral orders in such manner
as deemed appropriate under the circumstances.
(2) If buildings or other premises are owned by one person and
occupied by another, the orders issued in connection with the
enforcing of this chapter shall apply to the occupant thereof as well
as the owner, except where the rules or orders require the making
of additions to or changes in the premises themselves, such as
would immediately become fixtures upon real estate and be the
property of the owner of the premises. In such case, the orders
shall affect the owner and not the occupant.
§ 232-2 MONONA CODE § 232-2
1:234
§ 232-3. Authority to designate fire lanes.
(3) Receipt of such orders by the owner or occupant is sufficient notice
to effect compliance with the order.
H. Fire drills in educational and institutional occupancies. Fire drills shall
be held at least once a month in educational and institutional
occupancies, where such occupancies constitute the major occupancy
of a building. During severe weather, fire drills may be postponed. A
record of all fire drills shall be kept, and persons in charge of such
occupancies shall file written reports annually with the Chief, giving the
time and date of each such drill held.
A. Authority. The Fire Chief may designate certain areas of public or
private property as fire lanes in order to ensure proper access to
buildings in the event of a fire or other emergency situation.
B. Fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be provided on public or private property
devoted to public use for all buildings used for human habitation or
occupancy which are set back more than 100 feet from a public road or
exceed 30 feet in height and are set back more than 50 feet from a
public road. Fire lanes may also be designated on those private
roadways where it is found by the Fire Chief that such access is
necessary for fire apparatus.
C. Width. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of
not less than 20 feet (6096 mm), exclusive of shoulders, and an
unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet six inches (4115
mm).
D. Dead-end roads. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150
feet (45,720 mm) in length shall be provided with an approved area for
turning around fire apparatus.
E. Designation, marking and maintenance of fire lanes.
(1) The designation, marking and maintenance of fire lanes shall be
accomplished as specified by the Fire Chief. Marking (fire lanes):
Where required by the Fire Code Official, approved signs or other
approved notices or markings that include the words NO PARKING
- FIRE LANE - TOW-AWAY ZONE shall be provided for fire
apparatus access roads (fire lanes) to identify such roads or
prohibit the obstruction thereof. The means by which fire lanes are
designated shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at
all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide
adequate visibility. The current Wisconsin Department of
Transportation standards for highway marking shall be used as
guidelines in designating and marking any fire lanes.
(2) Designated fire lanes shall be marked with signs within five feet of
the beginning and within five feet of the end of the fire lane, with
spacing between signs not to exceed 75 feet. Each sign shall face in
§ 232-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-3
1:235
§ 232-4. Regulation of fire alarm systems, false alarms.
the direction of oncoming traffic. The curb shall be painted the full
length of the fire lane. Fire lane sign shall be affixed to a stationary
pole or object. Sign shall be plainly visible.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person(s) or firm(s) to post a fire lane
sign without the approval of the Fire Department.
F. Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads
shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles.
The minimum widths and clearances established in § 232-3C shall be
maintained at all times.
G. Traffic-calming devices. Traffic-calming devices shall be prohibited
unless approved by the Fire Code Official.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
ALARM — Any sound, signal or message generated by an alarm system,
alarm user or other person, to which fire personnel are expected to
respond.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any system, device or mechanism which, when
activated, transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video or other
form of message to an alarm-system-monitoring company or some other
number or emits an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen
by persons outside the protected premises or transmits a signal beyond
the premises in some other fashion, except a medical alert alarm. An
alarm system or alarm device may consist of one or more components,
all reporting to a central alarm station.
ALARM USER — The person, partnership, corporation or other entity
of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility or portion
thereof wherein an alarm system is in operation.
AUTOMATIC DIAL DEVICE — Any device that automatically sends,
over regular telephone lines, by direct connection, a prerecorded voice
message or coded signal indicating the existence of some type of
emergency to which fire personnel are expected to respond.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — A facility having the receiving,
recording and transmitting equipment to which remote alarm devices
and electrical protection circuits are connected and where operators
supervise an alarm panel and, upon receipt of emergency signals
indicating fires, may relay a message to the Fire Department and may
notify an alarm agent for the purpose of responding to the alarm signal.
CONTROL — The power or authority to manage, superintend, direct or
oversee a building, structure or facility or portion thereof.
§ 232-3 MONONA CODE § 232-4
1:236
DEPARTMENT — The City of Monona Fire Department and its
personnel and includes other fire agencies assisting the Monona Fire
Department.
FALSE ALARM — The reporting of or activation of any monitored
or nonmonitored alarm system where the Department arrives at the
premises and determines that there is no evidence of a fire or
emergency on the premises that would warrant a call for fire assistance
or investigation. An alarm shall be presumed to be false if the
responding Department does not locate evidence of a fire or emergency
on the premises that might have caused the alarm to sound. False
alarm includes an alarm caused by a power outage but shall not include
alarms activated by unusually severe weather conditions or other
causes which are identified by the Chief to be beyond the control of the
alarm user.
FIRE — The City of Monona Fire Department and its personnel and
includes other fire agencies assisting the Monona Fire Department.
B. Alarm requirements.
(1) Alarm system user responsibility. It shall be the duty of the alarm
user to properly use the alarm system, ensure that all alarm users
are instructed in the proper use of the alarm system and are aware
of the provisions of this chapter, and to maintain the alarm system
in proper working order. The alarm user shall maintain at each
alarm site a complete set of written operating instructions for each
alarm system. Any special codes, combinations or passwords must
not be included in these instructions but must be maintained on
site.
C. Alarm companies and private responders.
(1) Every alarm company shall provide its alarm customers with a
complete set of written operating instructions for the alarm system,
written information on the applicable law relating to false alarms,
including the forfeiture amounts, and written guidelines on how to
prevent false alarms.
(2) Every alarm company shall provide training to its alarm customers
in the proper use of the alarm system, including instructions on
how to prevent false alarms.
D. Misuse of alarm system: Use of an alarm system in the absence of an
actual emergency situation, which results in the response of fire
personnel; or use of an alarm system rather than a telephone to
summon fire personnel in any situation where such telephone use
would not create an immediate threat to the safety of the caller or other
persons and misuse of the alarm system. Misuse of an alarm system is
unlawful.
E. False alarm. Alarm users shall not have, permit or allow false alarms to
occur at any building, structure, facility or portion thereof under their
§ 232-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-4
1:237
§ 232-5. Adoption of state codes.
control and where an alarm system is in operation. Inspections, testing,
maintenance, alteration and repair activities for fire protection systems
shall not result in the transmission of a false alarm.
F. Responsibility for operation of alarm systems.
(1) Upon a finding that a signal from an alarm system is a false signal,
it shall then be the responsibility of the owner to secure the
building and prevent additional false signals. A second or
subsequent false alarm within a twelve-hour period shall constitute
a violation of this section, and the building owner shall be liable for
such violation.
(2) No building owner/occupant shall permit an alarm system to emit
more than three false signals during any twelve-month period. A
fourth false signal during a twelve-month period shall constitute a
violation of this section, and the building owner shall be liable for
such violation.
G. Orders. The Chief shall have the authority to order the installation of
double-action pull stations or pull covers with horn when the
department has responded to three or more intentional false alarms at
a premises.
H. Exceptions. None of the provisions of this section shall apply to any
official governmental body or subdivision thereof which owns, operates
and maintains its own alarm equipment.
I. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to penalties set forth in the Fees, Fines and Penalties
Schedule.115 [Amended 5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 5-19-716]
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the following
orders, rules and regulations of the Department of Safety and
Professional Services Ch. SPS 314, as set forth in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, are adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or
prohibited by Ch. SPS 314 or a statute incorporated herein by reference
is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments,
revisions or modifications of the Wisconsin Administrative Code are
intended to be made a part of this chapter and are hereby incorporated
herein as if fully set forth.
B. Except as otherwise specifically provided, those portions of the
National Fire Codes published by the NFPA, Boston, Massachusetts,
and other codes and standards, as listed in the following pages, are
hereby incorporated by reference and adopted as a part of this chapter.
Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the NFPA Codes
115. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 232-4 MONONA CODE § 232-5
1:238
§ 232-6. Fire protection systems required.
Approved automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained
as follows:
adopted herein are intended to be made part of this chapter and are
hereby incorporated as if fully set forth herein.
C. In the event that any of the foregoing orders, rules and regulations of
the Department of Safety and Professional Services or National Fire
Code conflict with any provisions of this chapter or with one another,
the most strict shall apply.
D. A copy of the foregoing provisions shall be kept on file at the office of
the Chief and shall be made available to the public, subject to the
provisions of Chapter 128 (Records) of the Monona Municipal Code.
A. Nursing, convalescent, senior citizen housing, prison, group care and
other institutional facilities. Throughout all nursing, convalescent,
senior citizen housing, prison and other group care or inscriptional
facilities.
B. High hazard occupancies. Throughout any building which, by reasons
of its construction, use or high combustible occupancy, involves a
severe life hazard to its occupants, or which in the judgment of the
Chief constitutes a fire hazard, including but not limited to:
(1) Aircraft hangers.
(2) Dry-cleaning establishments using or storing gasoline or other
volatile flammable liquids.
(3) Enameling or japanning operations.
(4) Mills, including sugar, starch, cereal, feed, flour and grist.
(5) Paint and varnish, including manufacturing, storing, handling,
spraying and other related operations.
(6) Pyrozylin products, manufacture and storage.
(7) Repair garages.
(8) Smokehouses.
(9) Storage of explosive gases under pressure (15 psi and over 5,400
cubic feet) such as acetylene, hydrogen, natural gas, etc.
(10) Storage of materials with a flash point under 200° F. such as
celluloid products, kerosene, fuel oil, etc.
(11)Woodworking establishments.
(12) Chemical works.
§ 232-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-6
1:239
§ 232-7. Installation and inspection of automatic fire sprinklers.
(13) Explosives and pyrotechnics manufacturing.
(14) Oil refineries.
(15) Any other occupancies involving processing, mixing, storage and
dispensing of volatile liquids.
C. Exceptions. Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall not be required in:
(1) Certain manufacturing areas. Rooms or building used for the
manufacture or storage of aluminum powder, calcium carbide,
calcium, metallic sodium or potassium, quick lime, magnesium
powder, sodium peroxide or like materials, where the application of
water may cause or increase combustion.
(2) Where water would increase hazard. Any location where, in the
sole discretion of the Chief, the use of water as a fire-extinguishing
agent would increase hazards or unduly expose equipment,
machinery or other chattel to damage or destruction; provided,
however, that an automatic fire-suppression system using an
extinguishing location is connected to an approved central station
monitoring service.
A. Installation standards.
(1) Approved automatic fire sprinkler equipment shall be installed in
accordance with the current editions of Pamphlet No. 13,
"Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems," and other
applicable standards of the National Fire Protection Association.
B. Plans. No automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed or altered in
any building until plans have been submitted to and approved by the
State of Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services and
the Fire Chief. Two copies of the plans and specifications shall be
submitted for review. Approved plans will be kept on file in the Fire
Department offices. Calculations shall be submitted with all plans. In
the event a pipe schedule is used, a written report with verified
pressure information shall be submitted. The Engineer completing such
calculations shall stamp and sign the report. The installer shall give
advance notice to the Fire Chief or his or her designee for any test to be
conducted.
C. Specific system requirements.
(1) System drain. The building automatic sprinkler system shall have a
drain piped to the outside of the building or to a drain suitable to
handle the required flows.
(2) Inspector's test valve. The building automatic sprinkler system
shall have an inspector's test valve piped so as to discharge to the
outside of the building. The inspector's test valve shall be mounted
§ 232-6 MONONA CODE § 232-7
1:240
§ 232-8. Alarm systems (fire and smoke detection).
at the most hydraulically remote location of the system. An orifice
equal to the discharge of one sprinkler alarm shall be tied into the
building alarm system.
(3) Alarm bell. Alarm bells shall be installed on all alarm systems. One
bell shall be installed on the outside of the building. The sprinkler
alarm shall be tied into the building alarm system.
D. Inspections. Every standpipe system or sprinkler system required by
this chapter or by the Wisconsin Administrative Code shall be inspected
by a certified sprinkler installer once every 12 months.
A. Where required. Smoke and heat detection systems shall be installed in
all spaces in all buildings regardless of size or construction except for
one and two-family dwellings. The detection systems shall be in all
spaces, including but not limited to hidden spaces (e.g., attics, crawl
spaces, truss-constructed areas), basements, storerooms, closets,
occupied and unoccupied areas. One- and two-family dwellings shall
have smoke-detection systems as required by the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
B. Monitoring. All detection systems shall be monitored by an approved
central station monitoring service, except for one- and two-family
dwellings.
C. Installation.
(1) All components of a fire- or smoke-detector system shall be listed
by Underwriters' Laboratories (UL) or the Factory Mutual System
(FM). The entire installation shall conform to applicable provisions
of NFPA Standard 72, the National Electrical Code Article 760, and
the Wisconsin Electrical Code.
(2) A remote annunciator shall be provided at the main entrance of the
building to indicate each of the designated alarm-initiating zones
via red LEDs which flash when in alarm and lock in upon
acknowledging the alarm. The remote annunciator shall be
electrically supervised from the main fire alarm control panel.
Space shall be provided on the remote annunciator for custom zone
labels. The zone labels shall plainly describe the location of the
zones. Different occupancies in one building shall be zoned
separately.
(3) External devices.
(a) The system shall utilize UL- or FM-listed fire-alarm-initiating
devices (pull stations, smoke detectors, heat detectors, waterflow
switches, duct detectors, etc.) and UL- and FM-listed firealarm-
indicating devices (horns, bells, visual lights, etc.).
§ 232-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-8
1:241
Smoke detectors shall possess a light-emitting diode (LED)
lamp to indicate either "ready" or "alarm" status.
(b) Smoke detectors (photoelectric, ionization) shall be installed
approximately 30 feet on center, located on the ceiling or wall
of the protected area. Smoke detection shall be provided in but
not limited to the following areas: basements, common
hallways, stairwells, sleeping rooms and all other rooms over
50 square feet in size.
(c) Heat detectors shall be installed approximately 30 feet on
center, located on the ceiling of the protected area. Heat
detection shall be provided in but not limited to the following
areas: furnace rooms, engine rooms, garages, hidden spaces
and kitchens and all other rooms over 50 square feet in area.
Heat detectors shall also be installed as a substitute for smoke
detectors in locations determined by the Fire Chief to be
unsuitable for smoke detector installation.
(d) Horns/bells.
[1] Alarm system horns. Horns used as the audible alarm
indicating appliance shall be 24-volt direct-current (DC)
horns of metal construction with a minimum sound
pressure output of 87 db at 10 feet. Fire alarm horns shall
be UL- or FM-listed for fire alarm use. Horns shall be
adaptable for surface or semi-flush mounting and be
suitable for use within combination audio-visual systems.
[2] Alarm system bells. Bells used as the audible alarmindicating
appliance shall be 24-volt DC bells of the
vibrating or single-stroke type with a minimum sound
pressure output of 90 db at 10 feet. Bells shall be suitable
for surface or semi-flush mounting and be suitable for use
within combination audio-visual systems.
[3] Visual flashing lamps. Visual indicating appliances shall be
comprised of a strobe-type flash tube and be entirely solid
state. These devices shall be UL- or FM-listed and be
capable of either ceiling or wall mounting. Visual units
shall incorporate a built-in reflector to improve lighting
characteristics. Visual units shall be incorporated as part
of the horn or bell assembly.
[4] Horns, bells or visual flashing lamps shall be installed in
each unit, living space or tenant space in the building.
D. System operation.
(1) Alarm-initiating devices shall be grouped in zones identified by
zone LED's on the control panel and at the remote annunciator.
§ 232-8 MONONA CODE § 232-8
1:242
(2) Actuation of an alarm-initiating device shall:
(a) Cause the respective red zone alarm LED on the control panel
to flash until the "acknowledge" switch is actuated at the
control panel. Once acknowledged, the zone LED shall be
constantly illuminated until the actuating device is restored to
normal and the system is reset or equivalent operation.
(b) The audible alarm-indicating appliance shall sound throughout
the entire facility until the system alarm acknowledge/silence
switch is operated.
(c) Visual-indicating appliances shall flash until the acknowledge/
silence switch is operated.
(d) After the acknowledge switch is operated, subsequent
activation of an initiating appliance shall cause the alarm bells
or horns to resound, and the visual-indicating appliances to
flash.
(3) Each alarm-initiating circuit and indicating appliance circuit shall
be electrically supervised. Any disarrangement of system wiring
such as opens and grounds shall activate the audible and visual
trouble indicators at the control panel. Actuation of the trouble
silence switch shall silence the audible trouble indicator, but the
trouble LED shall remain lit. The trouble LED shall be
noncanceling, except by an actual clearing of the trouble condition
and restoring the trouble silence switch to normal.
(4) The alarm system shall provide for the selection of:
(a) Desired type of signal operation; alarm signal tempos, area
selective codes, zone codes, general alarm codes and alarm
silence inhibit.
(b) UL- or FM-approved alarm verification operation.
(c) Water-flow/sprinkler supervisory operation on a distinct zone
of the system.
(5) Upon actuation of a smoke detector, the LED on the smoke detector
shall remain constantly illuminated until the system is reset.
E. Conditional approval for installation of fire and smoke detection
systems. No fire and smoke detection system shall be installed or
altered in any building until plans have been submitted to and
conditionally approved by the Fire Department. Two copies of the plans
shall be submitted. The plans shall contain drawings showing locations
of detectors, pull stations and horns. The plans shall contain a brief
description of connections within the system. Conditionally approved
plans shall be stamped with the date of approval. One copy shall be
returned to the owner.
§ 232-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-8
1:243
§ 232-9. Existing buildings.
F. Acceptance test required.
(1) The acceptance test of a fire and smoke detection system shall be
conducted in the presence of the Fire Chief or his or her designee
and the City of Monona Electrical Inspector prior to being placed in
service. All testing shall be conducted by the installer.
(2) The installer shall give three working days' advanced notice to the
Fire Department prior to the conduction of any test.
G. Failure to comply. Failure to comply with the items listed in this § 232-8
may result in enforcement action against the installer.
H. System service support. The system installer must be a licensed
electrician or a certified installer.
I. Alarm systems; test requirements; owner's responsibility to maintain
alarm system.
(1) Maintenance. Fire detection and fire alarm systems shall be tested
for efficient service as specified by NFPA requirements.
(2) A current test/maintenance record shall be posted at the system
control panel.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, automatic fire sprinklers, smoke
detectors and standpipes need not be installed in buildings which
existed or were under construction before this chapter became
effective unless such installation was required by a previous ordinance,
administrative regulation, or state statute.
B. Where a building is expanded or remodeled and the building as
remodeled or expanded is of a size, is of a type, or is for a use which,
were the building then to be constructed, would be subject to the
provisions of §§ 232-6 and 232-8:
(1) The entire building (existing, new and remodeled areas) shall be
made to conform to the requirements of §§ 232-6 and 232-8 if more
than 50% of the gross interior area of the building is remodeled or
added to the building.
(2) In determining the foregoing percentages, successive additions,
expansions or remodeling, if made within a five-year period, shall
be aggregated and treated as a single expansion or addition.
C. Regardless of any percentage test set forth in Subsection B above, if the
additional expanded or remodeled area is of a size, is of a type, or is for
a use which is subject to the provisions of §§ 232-6 and 232-8, the
additional, expanded or remodeled area must conform to the
requirements of such sections.
§ 232-8 MONONA CODE § 232-9
1:244
§ 232-10. Fire hydrants required.
Where municipal fire hydrants are available and any portion of a
commercial or industrial building is a distance of more than 300 feet from
the municipal fire hydrant, the owner shall install at his or her expense
approved water hydrants. Hydrants shall be freestanding and shall be
installed not more than 50 feet nor less than 25 feet from the building.
One hydrant shall be provided around the perimeter of the building so
that no hydrant is more than 400 feet from any other approved hydrant,
measured by normal access routes. The connecting waterline between the
municipal water main and the approved water hydrant shall be not less
than six inches. All water hydrants shall be approved by the Chief and
shall be installed in compliance with the standards of the City Water Utility.
All water hydrants shall be installed in such a manner and location so
as to be accessible at all times to the Fire Department. All private water
hydrants shall be kept in good operating condition, and the owner shall file
a maintenance report monthly with the City Water Utility.
§ 232-11. Maintenance of equipment.
Any sprinkler system, standpipe system, fire alarm system, smoke-detection
system, and other fire-protective or -extinguishing system or appliance,
which has been installed pursuant to this chapter or in compliance with
any other statute, ordinance or regulation, shall be maintained in operative
condition at all times. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to
reduce the effectiveness of the protection so required; provided, however,
that the owner or occupant may temporarily reduce or discontinue the
protection where necessary to make tests, repairs, alterations or additions
to the system or appliance. The Chief shall be notified before any system
is reduced or discontinued for repair, alteration or addition and shall be
notified again when the system has been restored to service.
§ 232-12. Access in construction area.
During the course of erection, any major alteration or demolition of any
building, the following provisions shall be complied with:
D. Where at the time of its construction a building or any part thereof is
exempt from the requirements of § 232-6 by reason of its proposed or
intended use, and subsequent to construction the use of such building
or part thereof is changed in such a way that the reason for the
exemption no longer exists, the entire building or area, as the case may
be, shall be made to conform to the requirements of § 232-6.
E. If the use of an existing building or structure is changed and the
requirements for the new use are more stringent than those for the
previous use, the building or structure shall be made to comply with the
requirements for the new use as provided in this chapter.
§ 232-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-12
1:245
§ 232-13. Setting of outside fires and blasting.
A. Access to equipment. Access for use of heavy firefighting equipment
shall be provided to the immediate job site at the start of construction
and maintained until all construction is completed.
B. Access to fire hydrants. Free access from the street to fire hydrants and
to outside connections for standpipes, sprinklers or other fireextinguishing
equipment, whether permanent or temporary, shall be
provided and maintained at all times. Protective pedestrian walkways
shall not be so constructed as to impede ready access to hydrants. No
material or construction shall be placed within 10 feet of such hydrants
or connections, nor between them and the center line of the street.
C. Access to first aid and fire equipment. During building operations, free
access to permanent, temporary or portable first aid and fire equipment
shall be maintained at all times.
D. Stairways. In all buildings over 50 feet in height, at least one stairway
shall be provided in usable condition at all times. The stairway shall be
extended upward as each floor is installed in new construction.
E. Firefighter's access to premises. Arrangements shall be made so that
firefighters will have immediate access to the premises when called.
A. General prohibition. All setting of fires or blasting on any land in the
City is prohibited, except as provided in Subsection B or C. This shall
include burning or causing to be burned any leaves, brush, grass, wood,
rubbish or other combustible materials on any street, alley, sidewalk
within the City at any time.
B. Exceptions. Setting of fires shall be allowed in any of the following
situations, provided applicable state regulations are followed:
(1) Any nonrecyclable paper products not covered by the City's
recycling regulations in Chapter 381, Solid Waste, of the Code of
the City of Monona may be burned in an indoor or outdoor
incinerator or covered container.
(2) The burning of standing or razed buildings or fires which have been
set under the control and supervision of the Fire Chief are
permitted if approved in writing by the Fire Chief or his/her
designee.
(3) Fires set for the sole purpose of cooking food are permitted. This
shall include but not be limited to the burning of charcoal or similar
substances outdoors in vessels designed for cooking purposes only,
when such burning does not constitute a fire hazard.
(4) Outside burning of wood (not building materials) is permitted,
subject to the following restrictions:
§ 232-12 MONONA CODE § 232-13
1:246
§ 232-14. Appeals.
(a) The perimeter of the fire must be at least 15 feet from any lot
line, building, utility pole, overhead wires or any other
combustible material.
(b) No burning will take place in City streets, curbsides, in
roadside ditches, or so close to surface waters as to allow for
ash runoff into the surface waters.
(c) No burning will take place between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m.
(d) Persons utilizing and maintaining outdoor fires shall be
responsible for monitoring atmospheric conditions and shall be
responsible for any liability resulting from damage caused by
the fire.
(e) All outdoor fires will be attended at all times.
(5) Prescribed/controlled burns for environmental purposes are
allowed if approved in writing by the Fire Chief or his/her designee.
C. Blasting. Blasting is allowed if all applicable state regulations are
followed and a written permit has been obtained from the Fire Chief or
his or her designee.
D. Fire emergency. Whenever the Fire Chief deems it imprudent to set
fires upon any land within the City, he/she shall issue a notice
forbidding the setting of fires in the area designated as a fire
emergency area. No person may set any fire in the area so designated
unless a permit has been obtained from the Fire Chief or his/her
designee.
A. The following decisions of the Chief or Building Inspector may be
appealed to the Public Safety Committee:
(1) The rejection of any application for a required permit or certificate
for approval.
(2) The revocation of any permit or certificate previously issued.
(3) Conditioning the issuance of any required permit, certificate or
approval upon compliance with any requirement other than those
established by this chapter or any other applicable state, federal,
county or local ordinance, statute or administrative regulation.
B. A written notice of appeal must be filed with the Chief within 14 days of
the date when notice of the action appealed from is received. Notice of
any action of the Chief is received when it is personally served or is
mailed by first class mail.
§ 232-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-14
1:247
§ 232-15. High-rise buildings.
C. The notice of appeal shall state the action appealed from, shall specify
the reasons given for such action, and shall specify the reasons why the
person believes said action was unlawful, unjust or inappropriate.
D. The Chief shall file the notice of appeal with the Public Safety
Committee for consideration by the Committee. The appeal shall be
processed as provided by the rules of the Public Safety Committee.
E. Within 30 days of the appeal hearing, the Public Safety Committee shall
affirm, modify or reverse the action of the Chief or Building Inspector.
F. The provisions of Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., shall not be applicable to any
determination made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
A. Applicability. This section shall apply to all buildings having floors
located more than 60 feet above the lowest interior level or exceeding
five stories.
B. Stairway doors and telephones. Doors from stairways to floors may be
locked only if provided with a remote release system from the building
control station. Stairways shall have a telephone or intercom to the
building control station at least every five floors, if kept locked. Locks
must release on power failure, with doors remaining unlocked.
C. Automatic sprinkler and standpipe systems.
(1) An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with
NFPA 13.
(2) A standpipe system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 14.
(3) Shutoff valves and water-flow detection devices for the standpipe
and sprinkler systems shall be provided for each floor.
(4) Standpipe and sprinkler valves shall be supervised by a
continuously manned station or central station.
D. Smoke/heat detection systems.
(1) At least one approved smoke detector, suitable for the intended
use, shall be installed:
(a) Within every mechanical equipment, electrical transformer or
control telephone equipment, elevator machine, or similar
room.
(b) Within the main return and exhaust air plenum of each airconditioning
system and located in a serviceable area
downstream of the last duct inlet.
§ 232-14 MONONA CODE § 232-15
1:248
(2) These detectors shall activate an alarm or signaling system and
shut down the ventilation system, except where automatic smoke
control is incorporated in the system.
(3) Approved heat-detection equipment shall be installed in boiler
rooms and furnace rooms in lieu of smoke-detection equipment.
(4) Alarm systems installed within such buildings shall conform to the
Wisconsin State Electrical Code and the following standards: NFPA
72.
(5) Detectors shall conform to the Standards for Automatic Fire
Detectors NFPA 72.
(6) Alarm and communications systems. The alarm and
communications systems shall be designed and installed so that
damage to any terminal unit or speaker will not render more than
one zone of the system inoperative.
E. Voice alarm system.
(1) The operation of any smoke detector, water-flow device or manual
fire alarm station shall automatically sound an alarm signal to the
desired areas, followed by voice direction to the occupant. The
voice alarm and public address system may be a combined system.
When approved, the Fire Department communications system may
be combined with the voice alarm system and the public address
system.
(2) The central control station shall contain controls for the voice
alarm system so that a selective or general voice alarm may be
manually initiated.
(3) The system shall be supervised to cause the activation of an audible
trouble signal in the central control station upon interruption or
failure of the audio path, including amplifiers, speaker wiring,
switches and electrical contacts, and shall detect opens, shorts and
grounds which might impair the function of the system.
(4) The alarm shall be designed to be heard clearly by all occupants
within the building or designated portions thereof as is required for
the public address system.
F. Public address system. A public address communications system
designed to be clearly heard by all occupants of the building shall
operate from the central control station. It shall be capable of directing
messages selectively or on a general basis to the following terminal
areas:
(1) Elevators.
(2) Elevator lobbies.
§ 232-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-15
1:249
(3) Corridors.
(4) Exit stairways.
(5) Rooms and tenant spaces exceeding 1,000 square feet in area.
(6) Dwelling units.
(7) Hotel guest rooms and/or suites.
G. Fire Department communications system. A central control station for
Fire Department operations shall be provided in a location approved by
the Fire Department. This station shall contain:
(1) Voice alarm and public address system control panels.
(2) Two-way communications between the control stations and all
elevators, elevator lobbies, exit/access and stairways at each floor.
The type of equipment proposed for this function shall be approved
by the Fire Department.
(3) Fire detection and alarm system annunciator panels.
(4) Annunciator visual indication of the location and status of each
elevator.
(5) Status indicators and controls for air-handling systems.
(6) Controls for unlocking all stairway doors simultaneously.
(7) Sprinkler valve and water-flow detector display panels.
(8) Standby power controls and status indicators.
(9) A telephone for Fire Department use with controlled access to the
public telephone system.
(10) Manual override control for all elevators.
(11) Small-scale layout plan of the building, showing all permanent
partitions, identifying permanent areas and doorways, exterior wall
openings suitable for use in smoke ventilation, elevator locations
and stair locations.
(12) Diagrams to indicate the location of the main shutoff for sprinkler
or standpipe systems, electrical, water, gas and steam systems,
with an indication of the area(s) served by each of these main
shutoffs.
(13) A list of names indicating all key building operating personnel and
a phone number where they may be reached.
(14) An emergency plan of action for the building with personnel
responsibilities defined.
H. Standby power and lighting.
§ 232-15 MONONA CODE § 232-15
1:250
§ 232-16. Lock box requirements.
(1) An approved, permanently installed standby power-generating
system shall be provided. The system shall be equipped with
suitable means for automatically starting the generator set upon
failure of the normal electrical service and for automatic transfer
and operations of the required electrical functions at full power
within 60 seconds of such normal service failure. System
supervision with manual start and transfer features shall be
provided at the central control station.
(2) An on-premises natural gas fuel supply, or other fuel approved by
the Department, sufficient for not less than 12 hours full -demand
operation of the system, shall be provided.
(3) The power requirement shall be determined so as to provide
service to, but not limited to:
(a) Fire alarm system.
(b) Exit and other emergency lighting.
(c) Fire protection equipment.
(d) Mechanical ventilation equipment.
(e) Elevators.
(f) Communications systems.
(4) Maintenance. All communications, fire-protection, -detection and -
suppression systems required under this section shall be tested and
maintained in an operable condition. All installed equipment
required under this section shall be maintained pursuant to the
current standards of the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA).
(5) Floor level identification. All stairways shall have each floor level or
story identified on both sides of the door leading to the stairway as
to its name or number, with a permanent sign having letters or
characters at least two inches in height.
(6) All elevators shall have each floor level or story identified on both
sides of the door leading to the elevator shaft as to its name or
number with a permanent sign having letters or characters at least
two inches in height.
A. Purpose and policy. The purpose of this section is to provide for
effective fire protection by providing a method for rapid response entry
into and throughout locked buildings in emergency situations where
time may be of the essence. A lock box system shall be mandatory for
specified buildings as of a March 1, 2013. Owners of buildings not
§ 232-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-16
1:251
required to participate by this section are still encouraged to
participate in the emergency entry lock-box system.
B. Scope. The owner of any building, for which a building permit is issued
for: 1) any new construction; or 2) any alteration, enlargement or repair
to any existing building, shall install and maintain an emergency-entry
lock-box system meeting the requirements of this section. Any building
that undergoes a change in ownership, use or occupancy shall be
required to purchase and install and maintain an emergency-entry lockbox
system meeting the requirements of this section.
C. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following:
(1) Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings.
(2) Multiple-family dwellings; provided, however, that this exception
shall only apply if every entrance into each dwelling unit shall have
direct access to the exterior of the building, i.e., no entry or exit
into a common corridor or hallway before entering or exiting the
building.
(3) Buildings that are staffed 24 hours per day, seven days per week
and 365 days per year by a front desk person, caretaker or security
person, provided that the Fire Chief has issued a written variance
approval therefor.
D. Selection of vendor and system. To facilitate access by the Fire
Department without confusion or delay, the only City-approved
emergency-entry lock-box system permitted to be installed and the only
approved vendor(s) therefor shall be the emergency-entry lock-box
system and vendor(s) approved in writing by the Fire Department.
E. Location of lock box. The lock box shall be installed within five feet of
the main entry door on the addressed side of the building. The lock box
shall be located no lower than four feet above grade nor higher than six
feet above grade. However, alternative locations may be approved by
the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
F. Contents. The lock box shall contain the building master keys to all of
the following:
(1) All locked points of ingress and egress, whether located at the
exterior or in the interior of the building. This shall include keys for
all locked exterior doors and keys for all locked principal ingress
and egress doors to individual businesses and offices but shall not
be mandatorily required for any residential dwelling unit located
within the building.
(2) All locked mechanical equipment rooms.
(3) All locked electrical rooms.
(4) All locked elevator controls.
§ 232-16 MONONA CODE § 232-16
1:252
(5) All locked elevator rooms.
(6) All locked fire alarm panels.
(7) All locked fire-suppression systems.
(8) All other areas determined necessary by the Fire Chief.
G. Access to lock box. Only Fire Department personnel shall have access to
the lock box or possess the master key to the lock box.
H. Lock-box use. Lock boxes shall be utilized only to gain entry into
properties in the event of an emergency situation. Lock boxes shall not
be utilized in nonemergency situations such as lockouts. Fire
Department personnel, for the purpose of gaining emergency access
during an ongoing police emergency situation, can utilize lock boxes
during police incidents. Safety of Fire Department personnel is of the
utmost importance, and if the company officer deems the situation
unsafe, other means shall be used to gain entry into the building/
complex. At no time shall the lock-box master key or building master
keys located in the lock box be turned over to law enforcement
personnel. Lock boxes shall not be used for the purpose of gaining entry
to gather evidence or process court-ordered search warrants.
I. Owner's responsibilities. Building owners:
(1) Shall provide to the Fire Department, on an annual basis and on a
form provided by the Fire Department, a list of emergency contacts
for use in the event of an emergency.
(2) Shall purchase the lock box directly from the vendor referenced in
Subsection D of this section at owner's expense.
(3) Shall supply the Fire Department with the building master keys
referenced in Subsection F of this section, said keys being properly
labeled with respect to their identity and function, with the building
master keys being placed in the lock box by Fire Department
personnel.
(4) Shall provide to the Fire Department, when a change of locks
occurs, properly labeled replacement keys for installation by the
Fire Department in the lock box.
(5) Shall not have possession of a lock-box master key.
(6) Shall keep the immediate area of the lock box free and clear of any
obstructions.
(7) Shall not tamper with or remove any lock box, or direct or permit
another person to so do, without permission of the Fire
Department.
J. Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until there is compliance with the requirements of this section.
§ 232-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-16
1:253
§ 232-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of the Code.
Chapter 238
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 312.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 321.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 335.
§ 238-1. Regulation of fireworks.
K. Standard operating guideline. The Fire Department shall adopt a
standard operating guideline to implement the requirements of this
section.
A. Fireworks prohibited. No person may possess, use, sell or possess with
intent to sell fireworks except as allowed herein.
B. Definitions.
(1) As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREWORKS — Anything manufactured, processed or packaged
for exploding, flying, hopping, jumping and/or emitting sparks or
combustion, which does not have another common use.
(2) Any portion of current Ch. 167, Wis. Stats., or as hereafter
amended, not otherwise set forth herein, is hereby adopted by
reference.
C. Exclusions. The general prohibition against fireworks shall not apply to
or include any of the following:
(1) A cap containing not more than one-quarter grain of explosive
mixture, if the cap is used or possessed or sold for use in a device
which prevents direct bodily contact with a cap when it is in place
for explosion.
(2) A toy snake which contains no mercury.
(3) A sparkler on a wire or wood stick not exceeding 36 inches in
length or 0.25 inches in outside diameter, which does not contain
magnesium, chlorate or perchlorate.
§ 232-16 MONONA CODE § 238-1
1:254
(4) A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and
which contains less than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture.
(5) A device designed to produce an audible sound but not explode,
spark, move or emit an external flame after ignition, and which
does not exceed three grams in total weight.
(6) A fuseless device that is designed to produce audible or visible
effects or audible and visible effects, and that contains less than
one-quarter grain of explosive mixture.
(7) A device that is designed primarily to burn pyrotechnic smokeproducing
mixtures at a controlled rate and that produce audible or
visible effects.
(8) A cylindrical fountain that consists of one or more tubes and is
classified by the federal Department of Transportation as a Division
1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50.
(9) A cone fountain that is classified by the federal Department of
Transportation as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR
173.50.
(10) Fuel or a lubricant.
(11) A firearm cartridge, shotgun shell, explosives, ammunition and/or
blasting agents handled or utilized as provided by law.
(12) A flare used or possessed or sold for use as a signal in an
emergency or in the operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or
motor vehicle.
(13) A match, cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space
heater.
(14) Tobacco and a tobacco product.
(15) The use or sale of blank cartridges for circus or theatrical
purposes, or signal purposes in athletic contest or sporting events,
or use by militia, police or military organizations.
D. Pyrotechnic display permits.
(1) This section shall not prohibit the use of fireworks for pyrotechnic
displays given by public authorities, fair associations, amusement
parks, park boards, civic organizations or groups of individuals that
have been granted a permit for such display by the City. No permits
shall be issued to minors.
(2) Application for permits shall be made in writing at least 30 days in
advance of the date of the display, unless good cause is shown for
the need for a shorter time period, and shall specify: the name and
address of the permit holder; the kind and quantity of fireworks
which will be displayed; and the date and location of permitted use.
§ 238-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-1
1:255
In addition, applicants must submit a site plan and pay a fee as
established by the Common Council in the City's Fee Schedule at
the time of application. After such permit has been issued, sale,
possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall
be lawful for the purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall
be transferable.116
(3) Every such display shall be handled by a competent adult operator
and shall be of such composition, character and so located,
discharged or fired as in the opinion of the Chief of Police, Fire
Chief and/or his or her designee shall not be hazardous to property
or endanger any person or persons.
(4) Every permittee shall have and maintain adequate liability
insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000 bodily injury and
property damage, combined single limit, naming the City, its
officers, employees and agents as additional insureds. Said
insurance shall indemnify and defend the City, its officers,
employees and agents against all claims, liability, loss, damages or
expenses, whether caused by or contributed to by the negligence of
the City, its officers, employees or agents. Said insurance shall
provide that the City receive written notice 30 days prior to any
cancellation, nonrenewal or material changes in the policy. Proof of
said insurance shall be submitted to the City.
E. Permits for allowable devices. In the City of Monona it shall only be
legal to sell or offer to sell the devices listed in Subsection C(1) through
(9) (hereafter generally referred to as the "allowable devices"), subject
to the following:
(1) No retail sales or offices to sell allowable devices from a permanent
location shall occur without first obtaining a permit from the City.
No permits shall be issued to minors.
(2) Application for such permit shall be made annually in writing at
least 30 days in advance of the sale or offer to sell and shall specify:
the name and address of the permit holder; the date on and after
which sales or offers to sell shall be made; and the kind, quantity
and location of each device to be offered for sale. In addition,
applicants shall pay a fee as established by the Common Council in
the City's Fee Schedule at the time of application. No permit
granted hereunder shall be transferable.117
(3) Any permits granted shall be publicly displayed.
F. Allowable devices - sale from temporary stands.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 238-1 MONONA CODE § 238-1
1:256
(1) No sales or offers to sell "allowable devices" from a temporary
stand or location should occur without first obtaining a ten-day
permit from the City Clerk.
(2) All applications shall be submitted 30 days prior to commencing
the prescribed activities.118
(3) A separate application and fee shall be required for each ten-day
permit.119
(4) A permit and application are not transferable, and any change in
equipment, ownership or location shall require a new
application.120
(5) Application for such permit shall include satisfactory completion of
any required forms and the payment of fees as prescribed in the
City's Fee Schedule. The City shall make an investigation of the
applicant to determine whether the applicant possesses the
qualifications necessary for issuance of a permit under this section.
These investigating officials shall have four business days from the
time of application in which to report to the City Clerk their
findings and recommendations.121
(6) To be granted a permit, the following requirements shall be met:
(a) Sales may only be permitted from properties zoned commercial
under the City's Zoning Code; sales are prohibited from
properties in other zoning classifications or from public
properties or rights-of-way.
(b) Applicants shall have written permission from the property
owner to engage in such sales activity.
(7) Any permit granted shall be publicly displayed.
(8) All signs associated with the sales activities shall comply with the
City's sign regulations; such signs are prohibited from being
attached to any traffic control device or utility pole and shall not be
located in a public right-of-way or encroach on the vision clearance
triangle of any intersection.
(9) Instructions: Submit a complete list of product names and the type
of fireworks.122
(10) Conditions of license:123
118. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
119. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
120. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
122. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
123. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 238-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-1
1:257
§ 238-2. Violations and penalties.125
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a forfeiture of not more than
$1,000.
(a) Post "No Smoking" signs in fireworks sales and storage areas.
(b) Storage should be at least 10 feet from all sources of ignition
and open flames.
(c) Only sparklers, snakes, caps and/or party poppers can be
offered for sale.
(d) At least one portable fire extinguisher shall be within 50 feet of
fireworks sales and/or storage area.
(e) Fireworks prohibited in this chapter will not be offered for
sale.
G. Out-of-state. This section does not prohibit a resident wholesaler, dealer
or jobber from selling fireworks at wholesale, if that wholesaler, dealer
or jobber ships or delivers the fireworks outside of this state in sealed
opaque containers by, as defined in § 194.01(1), (2) and (11), Wis.
Stats., common motor carrier, contract motor carrier or private motor
carrier engaged in the business of shipping or delivering property, or to
a person or group granted a permit under this section.
(1) No wholesaler, dealer or jobber may store or handle fireworks in
premises unless the premises is equipped with fire extinguishers
approved by the City.
(2) No person may smoke where fireworks are stored or handled.
(3) A person who stores or handles fireworks shall immediately notify
the City of the location, description and quantity of the fireworks.
(4) No wholesaler, dealer or jobber may store fireworks within 50 feet
of a dwelling.
(5) No person may store fireworks within 50 feet of a public
assemblage or place where gasoline or volatile liquid is dispensed
in quantities exceeding one gallon.124
H. Seizure. The Chief shall seize, at the expense of the owner, all fireworks
stored, handled, sold, possessed or used by any person who violates this
section.
I. NFPA 1123 and NFPA 1126 are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
125. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 238-1 MONONA CODE § 238-2
1:258
Chapter 245
FURNACES, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 175. Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 232.
§ 245-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
NUISANCE — To substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort,
health, repose or safety of anyone residing or working within 200 feet of the
property with the outdoor furnace.
OUTDOOR FURNACE — A furnace, stove or boiler designed for the
combustion of solid fuel for the purpose of providing indoor heat and/or
heated water to any building or other structure, which is located outside of
the building or structure. This definition shall not include a furnace or stove
providing direct radiant heat, used occasionally for area heating within an
accessory building.
§ 245-2. Outdoor furnaces prohibited.
No person shall install, use or maintain an outdoor furnace in the City of
Monona, except as otherwise specifically provided herein.
§ 245-3. Preexisting furnaces.126
Any person with an outdoor furnace installed and operating prior to the
effective date of this chapter may apply for a permit to continue to operate
the furnace. The permit shall be issued by the City Clerk based upon an
application form provided by that office and payment of the requisite fee
pursuant to the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule. Permits issued
pursuant to this section expire on June 30 of each year and shall not be
transferable to the new owner of an existing outdoor furnace.
A. Use and operation of preexisting outdoor furnaces. All permitted
outdoor furnaces shall be used and operated in accordance with the
following restrictions:
(1) All outdoor furnaces shall be operated in accordance with the
manufacturer's directions, except as otherwise provided herein.
(2) No industrial waste, rubber, plastic, used motor oil, toxic
chemicals, hazardous waste, yard waste, painted or chemically
treated wood, processed wood products, household garbage,
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 238-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-3
1:259
§ 245-4. Violations and penalties.127
Violations of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty set forth
in § 1-4 of the Code. The Building Inspector shall promptly report all such
violations to the City Attorney, who shall, if authorized by the Mayor, bring
action to enjoin the use of the outdoor furnace.
Chapter 256
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 232. Abatement of health nuisances — See § 263-2.
§ 256-1. Cleanup of spilled or accidentally discharged wastes.
cardboard, wastepaper or animal waste shall be burned in an
outdoor furnace.
(3) Outdoor furnaces shall not be operated between May 31 through
the next following September 1.
(4) Outdoor furnaces shall not be operated in a manner that produces
excessive smoke, dust or odors.
(5) Outdoor furnaces shall meet all applicable state and federal
emission standards.
B. Procedure to revoke permit. In the event that a complaint is received by
the City as to the operation of an outdoor furnace with a permit, the
complaint shall be referred to the Building Inspector for investigation.
The Building Inspector shall then determine whether the operation of
the furnace is a nuisance, as defined by this chapter, or being operated
in violation of the requirements set forth in Subsection A above. In the
event the Building Inspector determines that the operation of the
furnace is a nuisance or in violation of Subsection A, he or she shall
revoke the permit and provide notice of the revocation of the permit to
the holder of the permit by certified mail. The holder of the permit shall
have the right to appeal the determination of the Building Inspector by
filing a petition for review of the determination pursuant to Chapter 7,
Administrative Review. Revocation of the permit shall be stayed
pending the final determination of such review.
A. Cleanup required. All persons, firms or corporations delivering,
hauling, disposing, storing, discharging or otherwise handling
potentially polluting substances, solid or liquid, such as, but not limited
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 245-3 MONONA CODE § 256-1
1:260
§ 256-2. Storage of polluting substances.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to store any
potentially polluting substances unless such substances are stored in such
manner as to securely prevent them from escaping onto the ground surface
and/or into any street, sewer, ditch or drainageway, lake or stream within
the jurisdiction of the City of Monona.
§ 256-3. Prohibited discharges.
to, the following: fuel oil, gasoline, solvents, industrial liquids or fluids,
milk, whey, grease trap and septic tank wastes, sewage sludge, sanitary
sewer wastes, storm sewer catch basin wastes, oil or petroleum wastes,
shall immediately clean up any such spilled material to prevent it
becoming a hazard to health or safety or, directly or indirectly, causing
pollution to the lakes and streams under the jurisdiction of the City of
Monona.
B. Notification. Spills or accidental release of hazardous materials or
pollutants at a site or of a quantity or nature that cannot adequately be
cleaned up by the responsible party or parties shall be immediately
reported to the Police Department, Fire Department and Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources so that assistance can be given by the
proper agency.
C. Financial liability. The party or parties responsible for the release,
escape or discharge of wastes shall be held financially liable for the cost
of any cleanup or attempted cleanup deemed necessary or desirable
and undertaken by the City, or its designated agent, in an effort to
minimize the pollutional effects of the discharged waste.
A. Prohibited discharges. No person, firm or corporation shall discharge
or cause to be discharged, leaked, leached or spilled upon any public or
private street, alley, public or private property, or unto the ground,
surface waters, subsurface waters or aquifers, or within the City
(except those areas specifically licensed for waste disposal or landfill
activities and to receive such materials) any explosive, flammable or
combustible solid, liquid or gas, any radioactive material at or above
nuclear regulatory restriction levels, etiologic agents, or any solid,
liquid or gas creating a hazard, potential hazard or public nuisance, or
any hazardous substance as defined by Ch. 299, Wis. Stats.128
B. Notification. Any discharge or release into the environment of any
hazardous waste or substance shall be immediately reported to the
Police Chief, Fire Chief or Director of Public Works, who shall take
immediate steps to cause the containment, removal and proper disposal
of such waste or substance in the event the person, firm or corporation
having responsibility therefor shall be unable or unwilling to do so or
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 256-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-3
1:261
shall fail to take immediate steps therefor. Such containment, removal
and disposal shall, at all times, remain the primary responsibility and
obligation of the person, firm or corporation causing or permitting the
discharge or from whose facility the same shall have been emitted.
Applicable state agencies shall also be involved.
C. Containment, cleanup and restoration. Any person, firm or corporation
in violation of the above subsection shall, upon direction of City
officials, begin immediate actions to contain, cleanup and remove to an
approved repository the offending material(s) and restore the site to its
original condition, with the offending person, firm or corporation being
responsible for all expenses incurred. Should any person, firm or
corporation fail to engage the necessary men and equipment to comply
or to complete the requirements of this section, the senior City police or
fire official on the scene may order the required actions to be taken by
public or private resources and allow the recovery of any and all costs
incurred by the City of Monona as action imposed by Subsection C.
D. Emergency services response. (Includes, but is not limited to, fire
service, emergency medical service, law enforcement.) A person, firm
or corporation who possesses or controls a hazardous substance which
is discharged or who causes the discharge of a hazardous substance
shall be responsible for reimbursement to the responding agencies for
actual and necessary expenses incurred in carrying out their duties
under this section. Actual and necessary expenses may include, but not
be limited to, replacement of equipment damaged by the hazardous
material; cleaning; decontamination and maintenance of the equipment
specific to the incident; costs incurred in the procurement and use of
specialized equipment specific to the incident; specific laboratory
expenses incurred in the recognition and identification of hazardous
substances in the evaluation of response, decontamination, cleanup and
medical surveillance; and incurred costs in future medical surveillance
of response personnel as required by the responding agencies' medical
advisors.
E. Site access. Access to any site, public or private, where a prohibited
discharge is indicated or suspected will be provided to City Police and
Fire Department personnel for the purpose of evaluating the threat to
the public and monitoring containment, cleanup and restoration
activities.
F. Public protection. Should any prohibited discharge occur that threatens
the life, safety or health of the public at, near or around the site of a
prohibited discharge, and the situation is so critical that immediate
steps must be taken to protect life and limb, the senior City police or
fire official on the scene of the emergency may order a evacuation of the
area or take other appropriate steps for a period of time until the
Common Council can take appropriate action.
G. Civil liability. Any person, firm or corporation in violation of this section
shall be liable to the City of Monona for any expenses incurred by the
§ 256-3 MONONA CODE § 256-3
1:262
§ 256-4. Prohibited retail sales.129
Sale of mercury thermometers prohibited. Except as permitted under
§ 299.49(2), Wis. Stats., the sale or distribution of mercury fever or basal
thermometers is prohibited. No person shall sell at retail or offer for sale
at retail within the City of Monona any fever thermometer or basal
thermometer containing mercury. Any person violating this section shall
be subject to a forfeiture as prescribed in the Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit
Schedule adopted by Common Council.
Chapter 263
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See § 1-4.
Building construction — See Ch. 175.
Nuisances — See Ch. 312.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 342.
Sewer use — See Ch. 360.
Solid waste — See Ch. 381.
Zoning — See Ch. 480.
§ 263-1. Rules and regulations.
The Common Council may make reasonable and general rules for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and for the prevention of the
creation of health nuisances and the protection of the public health and
welfare and may, where appropriate, require the issuance of licenses and
permits. All such regulations shall have the same effect as ordinances, and
any person violating any of such regulations and any lawful order of the
Council shall be subject to the general penalty provided for in this Code.
§ 263-2. Health nuisances abatement.
City or loss or damage sustained by the City by reason of such
violations.
A. Defined. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
HEALTH NUISANCE — Any source of filth or cause of sickness.
B. Access to premises.
(1) To abate health nuisances. The Building Inspector, whenever he or
she may deem it necessary in order to promote the public health,
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 256-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-2
1:263
may enter upon any premises and into any house to ascertain every
nuisance that may exist therein.
(2) To inspect sewerage facilities. The Building Inspector or any City
law enforcement officer may enter upon any premises and into any
house to ascertain whether or not such house or premises is
connected with the public sewerage system of the City and to
examine the condition and manner of the construction of such
sewer connection and to inspect the cellars, cesspools, privies,
drains and greasetraps on such premises, and if he or she shall find
any violation of any ordinance of the City regulating the manner of
construction of such sewer connections, or in the manner in which
it is being used by the occupants of any building or premises, he or
she shall immediately report such violations to the City Engineer
and the Plumbing Inspector.
(3) Unlawful to refuse access for examination of health conditions on
premises. No person shall refuse the Building Inspector or any
police officer free access to any building or premises for the
purpose of examining the health conditions therein or hinder or
obstruct the free examination of such building or premises.
(4) Inspection warrant. If the Building Inspector is refused entry as
provided in Subsection B(1) and (2) or the building is unoccupied,
the Building Inspector may obtain an inspection warrant under
§ 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
C. Abatement of health nuisances. When any health nuisance, source of
filth or cause of sickness is found on private property, the Building
Inspector shall order the owner or occupant thereof, in writing, to
remove or abate the same at his or her own expense within a
reasonable time, which shall be specified in the order. If such owner or
occupant shall refuse or neglect to remove or abate such condition, the
Building Inspector shall cause the same to be removed or abated, and
the City shall recover the expenses incurred thereby from the owner or
occupant or from such other person as shall have caused or permitted
the same, and the same shall be a lien against the premises. If the
owner is absent from the City, notice to the person who receives the
rent or has charge of the property shall be deemed notice to the owner.
If any owner or occupant is required to remove any nuisance, source of
filth or cause of sickness upon the property owned or occupied by him
or her and fails or neglects to do so within the time specified in the
notice, the Building Inspector shall cause such work to be done, and the
cost thereof shall be collected from the owner of the premises, and if
the owner of such property fails to pay the expense of such removal or
abatement, the costs thereof shall be levied and collected as a special
tax upon the lot or land upon which such work was done.
§ 263-2 MONONA CODE § 263-3
1:264
§ 263-3. Deposit of deleterious substances prohibited.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any public street or
on any public ground or on any private property not his or her own any
refuse, garbage, litter, waste material or liquid or any other objectionable
material or liquid. When any such material is placed on the person's own
private property, it shall be properly enclosed and covered so as to prevent
the same from becoming a public nuisance.
§ 263-4. Destruction of noxious weeds.
A. Unless delegated to the county, the City Clerk shall annually on or
before May 15 publish as required by state law a notice that every
person is required by law to destroy all noxious weeds on lands in the
City which he or she owns, occupies or controls. A joint notice with
other towns or municipalities may be utilized.
B. If the owner or occupant shall neglect to destroy any weeds as required
by such notice, then the Weed Commissioner of the City shall give seven
days' written notice by mail to the owner or occupant of any lands upon
which the weeds shall be growing to the effect that the said Weed
Commissioner after the expiration of the seven-day period will proceed
to destroy or cause to be destroyed all such weeds growing upon said
lands and that the cost thereof will be imposed as a charge upon the
lands upon which such weeds are located under the provisions of
§ 66.0407, Wis. Stats., and Chapter 312, Nuisances, of this Code.130
C. As provided for in § 66.0407, Wis. Stats., the City shall require that all
noxious weeds shall be destroyed prior to the time in which such plants
would mature to the bloom or flower state. Noxious weeds shall include
any weed, grass or similar plant growth which, if allowed to pollinate,
would cause or produce hay fever in human beings or would cause a
skin rash through contact with the skin.131
(1) Noxious weeds are defined as any plant listed under § 23.235(1) or
66.0407(1)(b), Wis. Stats., or Wisconsin Invasive Species Rule (Ch.
NR 40, Wis. Adm. Code) and shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(a) Cirsium arvense (Canada thistle).
(b) Ambrosia artemisiifolia (common ragweed).
(c) Ambrosia trifida (great ragweed).
(d) Euphorbia esula (leafy spurge).
(e) Convolvulus arvensis (creeping jenny) (field bindweed).
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 263-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-4
1:265
§ 263-5. Regulation of natural lawns.
(f) Rhus radicans (poison ivy).
(g) Pastinaca sativa (wild parsnip).
(h) Arctium minus (burdock).
(i) Ailanthus altissima (tree of heaven).
(j) Alliaria petiolata (garlic mustard).
(k) Celastrus orbiculatus (oriental bittersweet).
(l) Chelidonium majus (Celandine).
(m) Dipsacus laciniatus (cut-leafed teasel)
(n) Dipsacus sylvestris or dipsacus fullonum (common teasel).
(o) Fallopia japonica or polygonum cuspidatum (japanese
knotweed).
(p) Robinia pseudoacacia (black locust)
(q) Solanum dulcamara (bittersweet nightshade).
(r) Phragmites (various) (common reed).
A. Natural lawns defined. "Natural lawn," as used in this section, shall
include common species of grass and wild flowers native to North
America which are designed and purposely cultivated to exceed eight
inches in height from the ground. Specifically excluded in natural lawns
are the noxious grasses and weeds identified in § 263-4 of this chapter.
The growth of a natural lawn in excess of eight inches in height from
the ground surface shall be prohibited within the City corporate limits
unless a natural lawn management plan is approved and a permit is
issued by the City as set forth in this section. Natural lawns shall not
contain litter or debris and shall not harbor undesirable wildlife.
B. Natural lawn management plan defined.
(1) "Natural lawn management plan," as used in this section, shall
mean a written plan relating to the management and maintenance
of a lawn which contains a legal description of lawn upon which the
planted grass will exceed 12 inches in length, a statement of intent
and purpose for the lawn, a detailed description of the vegetational
types, plants and plant succession involved, and the specific
management and maintenance techniques to be employed.
(2) Property owners who wish to plant and cultivate a natural lawn
must submit their written plan and related information on the form
provided by the City. "Property owner" shall be defined to include
the legal title holder and/or the beneficial owner of any such lot
§ 263-4 MONONA CODE § 263-5
1:266
according to the most current City records. Natural lawn
management plans shall only indicate the planting and cultivating
of natural lawns on property legally owned by the property owner.
Applicants are strictly prohibited from developing a natural lawn
on any City-owned property, including street rights-of-way. This
shall include at a minimum the property located between the
sidewalk and the street or a strip not less than 10 feet adjacent to
the street where there is no sidewalk, whether the area is under
public or private ownership. In addition, natural lawns shall not be
permitted within 10 feet of the abutting property owner's property
unless waived in writing by the abutting property owner on the side
so affected. Such waiver is to be affixed to the lawn management
plan.
(3) Any subsequent property owner who abuts an approved natural
lawn may revoke the waiver, thereby requiring the owner of the
natural lawn to remove the natural lawn that is located in the tenfoot
section abutting the neighboring property owner. Such
revocation shall be put in writing and presented to the City Clerk
by the subsequent abutting property owner. Upon receiving the
written request to revoke the original waiver, the Weed
Commissioner shall contact the owner of the approved natural lawn
and direct the owner to remove the natural lawn located in the tenfoot
section abutting the neighboring property owner. The Weed
Commissioner shall revise the approved natural lawn management
permit accordingly. The owner of the approved natural lawn shall
be required to remove the ten-foot section abutting the
neighboring property owner within 20 days of receipt of the written
notification from the City, provided the notification is received
sometime between May 1 and November 1. Property owners who
receive notification from the City between November 1 and April 30
shall be required to remove the ten-foot section abutting the
neighboring property owner no later than May 20 following receipt
of the notification.
C. Application process.
(1) Property owners interested in applying for permission to establish
a natural lawn shall obtain and complete an application form
available from the City Clerk. The completed application shall
include a natural lawn management plan. Upon submitting a
completed application, a nonrefundable filing fee prescribed by the
City's Fee Schedule will be assessed by the City. Upon receiving
payment, copies of the completed application shall be mailed by the
City to each of the owners of record, as listed in the office of the
City Assessor, who are owners of the property situated wholly or in
part within 300 feet of the boundaries of the properties for which
the application is made. If within 15 calendar days of mailing the
copies of the complete application to the neighboring property
owners the City receives written objections from 51% or more of
§ 263-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-5
1:267
the neighboring property owners, the Weed Commissioner shall
deny the application. "Neighboring property owners" shall be
defined as all those property owners who are located within 300
feet of the proposed natural lawn site.132
(2) If the property owner's application is in full compliance with the
natural lawn management plan requirements and less than 51% of
the neighboring property owners provide written objections, the
Weed Commissioner shall issue a two-year permit to install a
natural lawn. Permit renewals shall follow the same procedure
used for original applications.
D. Application for appeal. The property owner may appeal the Weed
Commissioner's decision to deny the natural lawn permit request to the
Common Council at an open meeting. All applications for appeal shall
be submitted within 15 calendar days of the notice of denial of the
natural lawn management plan. The decision rendered by the Common
Council shall be final and binding.
E. Safety precautions for natural grass areas.
(1) When in the opinion of the Fire Chief of the Department serving the
City of Monona the presence of a natural lawn may constitute a fire
or safety hazard due to weather and/or other conditions, the Fire
Chief may order the cutting of natural lawns to a safe condition. As
a condition of receiving approval of the natural lawn permit, the
property owner shall be required to cut the natural lawn within
three days upon receiving written direction from the Fire Chief.
(2) Natural lawns shall not be removed through the process of burning
unless stated and approved as one of the management and
maintenance techniques in the lawn management plan. The Fire
Chief shall review all requests to burn natural lawns and shall
determine if circumstances are correct and all applicable
requirements have been fulfilled to ensure public safety. Burning of
natural lawns shall be strictly prohibited unless a written permit to
burn is issued by the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall establish a
written list of requirements for considering each request to burn
natural lawns, thereby ensuring the public safety. In addition, the
property owner requesting permission to burn the natural lawn
shall produce evidence of property damage and liability insurance
identifying the City as a third-party insured. A minimum amount of
acceptable insurance shall be $300,000.
F. Revocation of an approved natural lawn permit. The Weed
Commissioner shall have the authority to revoke an approved natural
lawn permit if the owner fails to maintain the natural lawn or comply
with the provisions set forth in this section. Notice of intent to revoke
an approved natural lawn permit shall be appealable to the Common
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 263-5 MONONA CODE § 263-5
1:268
§ 263-6. Regulation of length of lawn and grasses.
Council. All applications for appeal shall be submitted within 15
calendar days of receipt of the written notice of intent to revoke the
approved natural lawn management plan. Failure to file an application
for appeal within the 15 calendar days shall result in the revoking
of the natural lawn management plan permit. All written applications
for appeal filed within the fifteen-calendar-day requirement shall be
reviewed by the Common Council in an open meeting. The decision
rendered by the Common Council shall be final and binding.
G. Public nuisance defined; abatement after notice.
(1) The growth of a natural lawn, as defined in this section, shall be
considered a public nuisance unless a natural lawn management
plan has been filed and approved and a permit is issued by the City
as set forth in this section. Violators shall be served with a notice of
public nuisance by certified mail to the last-known mailing address
of the property owner.
(2) If the person so served with a notice of public nuisance violation
does not abate the nuisance within 10 days, the enforcement officer
may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the
expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged to
and paid by such property owner. Notice of the bill for abatement of
the public nuisance shall be mailed to the owner of the premises
and shall be payable within 10 calendar days from receipt thereof.
Within 60 days after such costs and expenses are incurred and
remain unpaid, the City Clerk shall enter those charges onto the tax
roll as a special tax as provided by state statute.
(3) The failure of the City Clerk to record such claim or to mail such
notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not
affect the right to place the City expense on the tax rolls for unpaid
bills for abating the public nuisance as provided for in this section.
H. Penalty.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation which does not abate the nuisance
within the required time period or who otherwise violates the
provisions of this section shall be subject to the general penalty
found in § 1-4 of the Code.
(2) In addition to any penalties herein provided, the City may issue
stop-work orders upon owners of lots where work is unfinished
under a previously issued building permit for any violation of this
section.
A. Purpose. This section is adopted due to the unique nature of the
problems associated with lawns, grasses and noxious weeds being
allowed to grow to excessive length in the City of Monona.
§ 263-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-6
1:269
B. Public nuisance declared. The Common Council finds that lawns,
grasses and noxious weeds on nonagricultural lots or parcels of land, as
classified under the Zoning Code, within the City of Monona, which
exceed eight inches in length, adversely affect the public health and
safety of the public in that they tend to emit pollen and other
discomforting bits of plants, constitute a fire hazard and a safety hazard
in that debris can be hidden in the grass, interfere with the public
convenience and adversely affect property values of other land within
the City. For that reason, any nonagricultural lawn, grass or weed on a
lot or other parcel of land which exceeds eight inches in length is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance, except for property located in
a designated floodplain area and/or wetland area or where the lawn,
grass or weed is part of a natural lawn approved pursuant to § 263-5
above.
C. Nuisances prohibited. No person, firm or corporation shall permit any
public nuisance as defined in Subsection B above to remain on any
premises owned or controlled by him or her within the City.
D. Inspection. The Weed Commissioner or his or her designee shall inspect
or cause to be inspected all premises and places within the City to
determine whether any public nuisance as defined in Subsection B
above exists.
E. Abatement of nuisance. If the Weed Commissioner shall determine with
reasonable certainty that any public nuisance as defined in Subsection
B above exists, he or she shall immediately cause written notice to be
served that the City proposes to have the lot's grass or lawn cut so as to
conform with this section and § 263-5.133
F. City's option to abate nuisance.134
(1) In any case where the owner, occupant or person in charge of the
property shall fail to cut his or her lawn, grass or weeds as set forth
above, then and in that event the City may abate the nuisance
pursuant to § 312-7 of the Code.
(2) The City shall cut or cause to be cut all grass and weeds from the
subject's property and shall charge the expenses of so doing at a
rate as established by resolution by the Common Council. The
charges shall be set forth in a statement to the City Clerk who, in
turn, shall mail the same to the owner, occupant or person in
charge of the subject premises. If said statement is not paid in full
within 30 days thereafter, the City Clerk shall enter the charges in
the tax roll as a special tax against said lot or parcel of land, and the
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II); this ordinance also repealed original Subsections E(2) and F, which immediately
followed.
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 263-6 MONONA CODE § 263-6
1:270
§ 263-7. Rodent control.
same shall be collected in all respects like other taxes upon real
estate or as provided under § 66.0907(3)(f), Wis. Stats.
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this section:
HARDWARE CLOTH — Wire screening of such thickness and spacing
as to afford reasonable protection against the entrance of rodents.
OWNER or MANAGER — Whenever any person or persons shall be in
actual possession of or have charge, care or control of any property
within the City, as executor, administrator, trustee, guardian or agent,
such person or persons shall be deemed and taken to be the owner
or owners of such property within the true intent and meaning of this
section and shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this section
to the same extent as the owner, and notice to any such person of
any order or decision of the Building Inspector or his or her designee
shall be deemed and taken to be a good and sufficient notice as if such
person or persons were actually the owner or owners of such property,
except that, whenever an entire premises or building is occupied as a
place of business, such as a store, factory, warehouse, rooming house,
junkyard, lumberyard or any other business under a single
management, the person, firm or corporation in charge of such
business shall be considered the owner or manager.
RODENT HARBORAGE — Any place where rodents can live and nest
without fear of frequent molestation or disturbance.
RODENTPROOF CONTAINER — A container constructed of concrete or
metal, or the container shall be lined with metal or other material that
is impervious to rodents, and openings into the container such as doors
shall be tight-fitting to prevent the entrance of rodents.
RODENTPROOFING — Consist of closing openings in building
foundations and openings under and around doors, windows, vents
and other places which could provide means of entry for rodents, with
concrete, sheet iron, hardware cloth or other types of rodentproofing
material approved by the City.
B. Elimination of rodent harborages. Whenever accumulations of rubbish,
boxes, lumber, scrap metal, car bodies or any other materials provide
rodent harborage, the person, firm or corporation owning or in control
of such materials shall cause the materials to be removed or the
materials shall be stored so as to eliminate the rodent harborage.
Lumber boxes and similar materials shall be neatly piled. These piles
shall be raised at least a foot above the ground. When the owner of the
materials cannot be found after a reasonable search, the owner or
manager of the premises on which the materials are stored shall be
responsible for disposal or proper piling of the materials.
C. Elimination of rodent-feeding places. No person, firm or corporation
shall place or allow to accumulate any materials that may serve as a
§ 263-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-7
1:271
§ 263-8. Composting.
food for rodents in a site accessible to rodents. Any waste material that
may serve as food for rodents shall be stored in rodentproof containers.
Feed for birds shall be placed on raised platforms, or such feed shall be
placed where it is not accessible to rodents.
D. Extermination. Whenever rodent holes, burrows or other evidence of
rodent infestation are found on any premises or in any building within
the City, it shall be the duty of the owner or manager of such property to
exterminate the rodents or to cause the rodents to be exterminated.
Within 10 days after extermination, the owner or manager shall cause
all of the rodent holes or burrows in the ground to be filled with earth or
other suitable material.
E. Rodentproofing. It shall be the duty of the owner or manager of any
building in the City of Monona to make such building reasonably
rodentproof, to replace broken basement windows and, when
necessary, to cover the basement window openings with hardware cloth
or other suitable material for preventing rodents from entering the
building through such window openings.
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to promote the
recycling of yard wastes and certain kitchen wastes through
composting and to establish minimum standards for proper compost
maintenance.
B. Definitions. "Composting" shall mean the controlled biological
reduction of organic waste to humus. Yard waste shall mean the organic
waste produced from the growing, trimming and removal of grass,
branches (not exceeding one inch in diameter), bushes, shrubs, plants,
leaves and garden debris. Kitchen waste shall be any uncooked plant
matter not contaminated by or containing meat, fish and/or dairy
products.
C. Maintenance. All compost piles shall be maintained using approved
composting procedures to comply with the following requirements:
(1) All compost piles shall be enclosed in a freestanding compost bin.
Each compost bin shall be no larger in volume than 125 cubic feet
and shall be no taller than 42 inches.
(2) All compost bins shall be so maintained as to prevent the attraction
or harborage of rodents and pests. The presence of rodents in or
near a compost bin shall be cause for the City to proceed under
§ 263-7.
(3) All compost bins shall be so maintained as to prevent unpleasant
odors.
§ 263-7 MONONA CODE § 263-8
1:272
(4) No compost bin shall be allowed to deteriorate to such condition as
to be a blighting influence on the surrounding property or
neighborhood or City in general.
(5) All compost bins shall be located not less than three feet from a
property line or principal building or dwelling and three feet from
any detached accessory building.
(a) A variance from these setback requirements may be applied for
if the property owner(s) can show a hardship exists which
prohibits compliance. In addition, any variance application
must include a signed written approval of the variance request
from the adjacent property owner(s). Variances can be granted
by the Building Inspector on an annual basis upon the proper
application being submitted by the property owner(s).
Screening and/or fencing of compost bins may be required as a
condition of a variance being granted.
(6) No compost bin shall be located in any yard except a rear yard, as
defined in the City's Zoning Code, unless a variance is granted by
the Board of Appeals.
(7) Those composting bins which existed prior to the adoption of this
section shall be given one year to comply with the requirements set
forth herein.
D. Ingredients.
(1) No compost bin shall contain any of the following:
(a) Lake weeds;
(b) Cooked food scraps of any kind or type;
(c) Fish, meat or other animal products;
(d) Manure;
(e) Large items that will impede the composting process.
(2) Permitted ingredients in a compost bin shall include the following:
(a) Yard waste;
(b) Coffee grounds and used tea leaves;
(c) Uncooked plant matter not contaminated by or containing
meat, fish and/or dairy products;
(d) Commercial compost additives.
E. Owner responsibility. Every owner or operator shall be responsible for
maintaining all property under his or her control in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
§ 263-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-9
1:273
§ 263-9. Regulations regarding foods handled by public places.
Chapter 272
INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND FERMENTED MALT
BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 7.
License Review Committee — See § 18-13.
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 145.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 335.
A. Food to be fresh and wholesome. No meats, fish, fruit, vegetables or
other articles of food shall be sold or offered or held for sale as food
unless the same is fresh or properly preserved, sound, wholesome and
safe for use as food, nor shall any flesh of any animal which died by
disease be sold or offered for sale in the City.
B. Food not to be contaminated. All articles of food shall be free from
contamination.
C. Places where food products manufactured. All places where food
products are manufactured or prepared or sold to the public shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
D. Openings shall be protected from flies. When flies are prevalent, all
openings into the outer air shall be effectively screened and doors shall
be self-closing unless other effective means are provided to prevent the
entrance of flies.
E. Health Officer to seize food. The Health Officer shall seize and destroy
any articles of food or drink which are offered or held for sale as food or
drink, which have become tainted, decayed, spoiled or otherwise
unwholesome or unfit to be eaten or drunk.
F. Definition of food. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
FOOD — Includes all articles used for food or drink by humans, whether
simple, mixed or combined.
§ 263-9 MONONA CODE § 263-9
1:274
ARTICLE I
Licenses and Permits
[Adopted as Title 7, Ch. 2, of the 1994 Code]
§ 272-1. State statutes adopted.
The provisions of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., except §§ 125.09(6), 125.14(2) and
(3), 125.56(2), 125.60, 125.61, 125.63 and 125.66(3), relating to the sale of
intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages, except provisions therein
relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be
performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is
required or prohibited by this article. Any future amendment, revisions or
modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made a
part of this article in order to secure uniform statewide regulation of alcohol
beverage control.
§ 272-2. Definitions.
A. As used in this article, the terms "alcohol beverages," "wine,"
"intoxicating liquors," "principal business," "legal drinking age,"
"premises," "sell," "sold," "sale," "retailer," "person," "fermented malt
beverages," "wholesalers" and "operators" shall have the meaning
given them by Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.135
B. In addition, the following definitions shall also be applicable in this
article:
BREWER — Any person who manufactures fermented malt beverages
for sale or transportation.
HOTEL — All places where accommodations are offered for pay to
transients in five or more rooms and all places used in connection
therewith. [See § 97.01(7), Wis. Stats.]136
MANUFACTURER — A person, other than a rectifier, who ferments,
manufactures or distills intoxicating liquor.
PEACE OFFICER — A sheriff, undersheriff, deputy sheriff, police officer,
constable, marshal, deputy marshal, or any employee of the
Department of Revenue or the Department of Justice authorized to act
under Ch. 125 or Ch. 134, Wis. Stats.
PERMIT — Any permit issued by the Department of Revenue under Ch.
125, Wis. Stats.
PERSON — A natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership,
corporation or association.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-2
1:275
§ 272-3. License required.
No person, except as provided by § 125.06, Wis. Stats., shall distribute,
vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at retail or wholesale, deal or traffic
in or, for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage, or cause the same to be
done, without having procured a license as provided in this article and
all statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state and City applicable
thereto.
§ 272-4. Classes of licenses and permits. [Amended 3-17-2014 by
Ord. No. 2-14-657]
PREMISES — The area described in a license or permit.
REGULATION — Any rule or ordinance adopted by the Common
Council.
RESTAURANT — Any building, room or place where meals or lunches
are prepared, served or sold to transients or the general public and all
places used in connection therewith. [See § 97.01(14g), Wis. Stats.]137
A. Retail "Class A" intoxicating liquor license. A retail "Class A"
intoxicating liquor license, when issued by the City Clerk under the
authority of the Common Council, shall permit its holder to sell, deal
and traffic in intoxicating liquors only in original packages or
containers and to be consumed off the premises so licensed. The license
shall expire on June 30.
B. Retail "Class B" intoxicating liquor license. A retail "Class B"
intoxicating liquor license, when issued by the City Clerk under
authority of the Common Council, shall permit its holder to sell, deal
and traffic in intoxicating liquors to be consumed by the glass only on
the premises so licensed and in the original package or container in
multiples not to exceed four liters at any one time, to be consumed off
the premises, except that wine may be sold in the original package or
otherwise in any other quantity to be consumed off the premises. The
license shall expire on June 30.
C. Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. A Class "A"
retailer's fermented malt beverage license, when issued by the City
Clerk under the authority of the Common Council, shall entitle the
holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt
beverages only for consumption away from the premises where sold
and in the original packages, containers or bottles. The license shall
expire on June 30.
D. Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-2 MONONA CODE § 272-4
1:276
(1) License. A Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license,
when issued by the City Clerk under the authority of the Common
Council, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for
sale fermented malt beverages, either to be consumed upon the
premises where sold or away from such premises. The holder may
also sell beverages containing less than 1/2 of a percentum of
alcohol by volume without obtaining a special license to sell such
beverages. The license shall expire on the following June 30.
(2) Application. Class "B" licenses may be issued to any person
qualified under § 125.04(5), Wis. Stats. Such licenses may not be
issued to any person acting as agent for or in the employ of another,
except that this restriction does not apply to a hotel or restaurant
which is not a part of or located on the premises of any mercantile
establishment or to a bona fide club, society or lodge that has been
in existence for at least six months before the date of application. A
Class "B" license for a hotel, restaurant, club, society or lodge may
be issued in the name of an officer who shall be personally
responsible for compliance with this article. Except as provided in
§ 125.295, Wis. Stats., Class "B" licenses may not be issued to
brewers or brewpubs. A Class "B" license may not be issued to a
person holding a wholesaler's permit issued under § 125.28, Wis.
Stats., or to a person who has a direct or indirect ownership
interest in a premises operating under a wholesaler's permit issued
under § 125.28, Wis. Stats.138
E. Temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage license. [Amended
10-07-2013 by Ord. No. 10-13-651139]
(1) License. As provided in § 125.26(1) and (6), Wis. Stats., temporary
Class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses may be issued to bona
fide clubs and chambers of commerce, to county or local fair
associations or agricultural societies, to churches, lodges or
societies that have been in existence for at least six months before
the date of application, and to posts of veterans' organizations,
authorizing the sale of fermented malt beverages at a particular
picnic or similar gathering, at a meeting of the post or during a fair
conducted by the fair association or agricultural society. A license
issued to a county or district fair licenses the entire fairgrounds
where the fair is being conducted and all persons engaging in retail
sales of fermented malt beverages from leased stands on the
fairgrounds. The county or district fair to which the license is
issued may lease stands on the fairgrounds to persons who may
engage in retail sales of fermented malt beverages from the stands
while the fair is being held. Such license is valid for dates as
approved by the Common Council.
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-4
1:277
(2) Application. Application for such license shall be signed by the
president or corresponding officer of the society or association
making such application and shall be filed with the City Clerk,
together with the appropriate license fee for each day or up to
three consecutive days for which the license is sought. The
application shall identify all person(s) in charge of the event, who
shall be subject to a criminal background check. Any person
submitting false information on an application shall be subject to a
forfeiture as set in the Schedule of Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit and
will be ineligible to apply for a temporary Class "B" license for one
year. The license shall specify the hours and dates of license
validity. The application shall be filed a minimum of 15 days prior to
the beginning of the proposed event. Applications from first-time
applicants or previously approved applicants whose proposed
event is different in any material way from the previously approved
events, making substantial changes to previous plans, shall be
reviewed by the License Review Committee and the Common
Council. In all other cases, the City Clerk may approve such
application. If the application is for a license to be used in a City
park, the applicant shall specify the main point-of-sale facility.
F. Temporary "Class B" wine license.140
(1) License. Notwithstanding § 125.68(3), Wis. Stats., temporary
"Class B" licenses may be issued to bona fide clubs, to county or
local fair associations or agricultural societies, to churches, lodges
or societies that have been in existence for at least six months
before the date of application and to posts of veterans'
organizations, authorizing the sale of wine in an original package,
container or bottle or by the glass if the wine is dispensed directly
from an original package, container or bottle at a particular picnic
or similar gathering, at a meeting of the post, or during a fair
conducted by the fair association or agricultural society. No fee
may be charged to a person who, at the same time, applies for a
temporary Class "B" beer license under § 125.26(6), Wis. Stats., for
the same event. A license issued to a county or district fair licenses
the entire fairgrounds where the fair is being conducted and all
persons engaging in retail sales of wine from leased stands on the
fairgrounds. The county or district fair to which the license is
issued may lease stands on the fairgrounds to persons who may
engage in retail sales of wine from the stands while the fair is being
held.
(2) Application. Application for such license shall be signed by the
president or corresponding officer of the society or association
making such application and shall be filed with the City Clerk,
together with the appropriate license fee for each day or up to
three consecutive days for which the license is sought. The
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-4 MONONA CODE § 272-4
1:278
application shall identify all person(s) in charge of the event, who
shall be subject to a criminal background check. Any person
submitting false information on an application shall be subject to
a forfeiture as set forth in the Schedule of Fee, Forfeiture and
Deposit and will be ineligible to apply for a temporary "Class B"
wine license for one year. The license shall specify the hours and
dates of license validity. The application shall be filed a minimum of
15 days prior to the beginning of the proposed event. Applications
from first-time applicants or previously approved applicants whose
proposed event is different in any material way from the previously
approved event, making substantial changes to previous plans,
shall be reviewed by the License Review Committee and the
Common Council. In all other cases, the City Clerk may approve
such application. If the application is for a license to be used
in a City park, the applicant shall specify the main point-of-sale
facility.141
G. Retail "Class C" licenses.
(1) In this Subsection, "barroom" means a room that is primarily used
for the sale or consumption of alcohol beverages.
(2) A "Class C" license authorizes the retail sale of wine by the glass or
in an opened original container for consumption on the premises
where sold.
(3) A "Class C" license may be issued to a person qualified under
§ 125.04(5) for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol beverages
accounts for less than 50% of gross receipts and which does not
have a barroom or for a restaurant in which the sale of alcohol
beverages accounts for less than 50% of gross receipts and which
has a barroom in which wine is the only intoxicating liquor sold. A
"Class C" license may not be issued to a foreign corporation, a
foreign limited liability company or a person acting as agent for or
in the employ of another.142
(4) A "Class C" license shall particularly describe the premises for
which it is issued.
(5) The license shall expire on June 30.
H. Reserve "Class B" license. A reserve "Class B" license means a license
that is not granted or issued on December 1, 1997, and is counted
under § 125.51(4)(br), Wis. Stats., which authorizes the retail sale of
intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises where sold by the
glass to be consumed on the licensed premises or in the original
141. Editor's Note: Original Subsection G, Wholesaler's license, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II).
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-4
1:279
§ 272-5. License fees. [Amended 10-04-2010 by Ord. No. 9-10-617;
5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 5-15-671145]
There shall be the following classes of licenses which, when issued by
the City Clerk under the authority of the Common Council after payment
of the license fee and publication costs hereinafter specified, shall permit
the holder to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquors or fermented malt
beverages as provided in § 272-4 of this article and Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.:
package or container in multiples not to exceed four liters at any one
time and to be consumed off the licensed premises, except that wine
may be sold in the original container or otherwise in any quantity to be
consumed off the premises.
I. Beer garden permit. A permit which authorizes the sale and
consumption of fermented malt beverages, wine and intoxicating
liquors (to the same degree allowed under the permittee's alcohol
beverage license) in an unroofed area immediately adjacent to a
building which is part of a Class "B" or "Class C" licensed premises. The
permit shall expire on June 30 and be subject to the fee set forth in the
City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule.143
J. Patio permit. A permit which authorizes table-service sales of
fermented malt beverages, wine and intoxicating liquors (to the same
degree allowed under the permittee's alcohol beverage license) in an
unroofed area with seating for 40 or fewer patrons appurtenant to a
Class "B" or "Class C" licensed premises. The permit shall expire on
June 30 and be subject to the fee set forth in the City's Fee, Forfeiture
and Deposit Schedule.144
A. Class "A" fermented malt beverages retailer's license. The annual fee
for this license shall be as prescribed in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and
Deposit Schedule. The fee for a license for less than 12 months shall be
prorated according to the number of months or fraction thereof for
which the license is issued.
B. Class "B" fermented malt beverage license. The annual fee for this
license shall be as prescribed in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit
Schedule. This license may be issued at any time for six months in any
calendar year, for which 50% of the applicable license fee shall be paid,
but such license shall not be renewable during the calendar year in
which issued. The fee for a license for less than 12 months shall be
prorated according to the number of months or fraction thereof for
which the license is issued.
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-4 MONONA CODE § 272-5
1:280
§ 272-6. Application for license.
C. Temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage license. The fee for this
license shall be as prescribed in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit
Schedule per event.
D. Temporary "Class B" wine license. The fee for this license shall be as
prescribed in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule per event.
However, there shall be no fee if the temporary wine license is obtained
along with a temporary fermented malt beverage license.146
E. "Class A" intoxicating liquor retailer's license. The annual fee for this
license shall be as prescribed in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit
Schedule.
F. "Class B" intoxicating liquor retailer's license. The annual fee for this
license shall be as prescribed in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit
Schedule. This license may be issued at any time for six months in any
calendar year, for which 50% of the applicable license fee shall be paid,
but such license shall not be renewable during the calendar year in
which issued.
G. "Class C" wine license. The annual fee for this license shall be as
prescribed in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule. The fee
for less than one year shall be prorated.
H. Reserve "Class B" license.
(1) Subject to the limitations contained herein, the fee for a reserve
"Class B" license shall be as set forth in the City's Fee, Forfeiture
and Deposit Schedule.
(2) Renewal. The annual fee for renewal of a reserve "Class B" license
shall be as set forth in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit
Schedule.
I. Applications for the renewal of liquor licenses filed after April 15 shall
be accompanied by a late fee as prescribed in the City's Fee, Forfeiture
and Deposit Schedule. The City reserves the right to reject all untimely
applications. Depending upon the circumstances, applications filed
after April 15 may not be able to be reviewed by the City prior to
expiration of the existing license. Payment of the late fee does not
ensure the application will be reviewed in time for renewal prior to
expiration of the existing license.
A. Contents.
(1) Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on the form
146. Editor's Note: Original Subsection E, Fermented malt beverage wholesalers' license, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 272-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-6
1:281
prescribed by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue and shall be
sworn to by the applicant as provided by §§ 887.01 to 887.03, Wis.
Stats. The premises shall be physically described to include every
room and storage space to be covered by the license, including
all rooms not separated by a solid wall or joined by connecting
entrances. [Amended 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 5-15-671]
(2) The City requests that the fee prescribed for such license in the
City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule shall accompany the
application. The fee at a minimum shall be submitted no later than
14 days prior to the date of issuance of such license.147
(3) All applicants for retail licenses must provide a copy of their seller's
permit along with their application, as proof that they are in good
standing for sales tax purposes, before they may be issued a
license.
B. Corporations. Such application shall be filed and sworn to by the
applicant if an individual, by the president and secretary if a
corporation.
C. Application to contain certain information. The application shall contain
a statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony or of a violation of federal or state act or ordinance of the City
regulating the sale or use of alcohol beverages and, if so, the dates of
such convictions. The application shall also state whether any other
business than the sale of alcohol beverages and soft drinks is to be
conducted on the premises sought to be licensed and, if so, a
description of the nature of such business, but such information shall
not be required in an application for an operator's license. Any false
statement contained in such application shall automatically nullify any
license pursuant thereto.
D. Publication.
(1) The City Clerk shall publish each application for a Class "A," Class
"B," "Class A," "Class B," or "Class C" license. There is no
publication requirement for temporary Class "B" picnic beer
licenses under § 125.26, Wis. Stats., or temporary "Class B" picnic
wine licenses under § 125.51(10), Wis. Stats. The application shall
be published once in the official City newspaper, and the costs of
publication shall be paid by the applicant at the time the
application is filed, as determined under § 985.08, Wis. Stats. No
license to sell intoxicating liquor shall be granted until after the
expiration of 15 days from the filing of the application therefor and
after proper publication.
(2) A Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's special event
license shall be exempt from the requirements of submitting the
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-6 MONONA CODE § 272-6
1:282
§ 272-7. Provisional retail licenses. [Added 10-7-2008 by Ord. No.
7-08-584]
application 15 days prior to the license review meeting and
publication requirements of this subsection. An application for said
license shall be filed with the City Clerk and approved by the
License Review Committee and City of Monona Common Council
pursuant to the applicable requirements of this article.
E. Amending application. Whenever anything occurs to change any fact
set out in the application of any licensee, such licensee shall file with
the City Clerk a notice in writing of such change within 10 days after
the occurrence thereof.
F. Application fees refunded; when. Whenever a license application is
made it shall be accompanied by the license fee. If the license is not
issued, the applicant is entitled to a refund of 80% of the license fee.
G. License quotas. Retail intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverage
licenses issued by the Common Council shall be limited in number to
the quota prescribed by § 125.51(4), Wis. Stats.
A. License. The City Clerk may issue a provisional retail license in
accordance with § 125.185, Wis. Stats., upon request, to any person
who has applied for a Class "A," "Class A," Class "B," "Class B" or "Class
C" license, in situations where a special meeting of the License Review
Committee and/or the Common Council would be required for approval
of the license applied for. The provisional license shall authorize only
the activities that the type of retail license applied for would authorize.
The applicant for a provisional retail license shall pay a nonrefundable
fee as set forth in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule at the
time of application. The provisional license shall expire upon the earlier
of: 1) 60 days after its issuance; or 2) issuance of the Class "A," Class
"B," "Class A," "Class B," or "Class C" license. All restrictions,
conditions and requirements imposed within this article upon the type
of retail license applied for shall apply to the provisional license.148
B. Standards. A person is qualified to obtain a provisional retail license if
that person has submitted a complete application and requisite fee to
the City Clerk for a Class "A," "Class A," Class "B," "Class B" or "Class
C" license which establishes the applicant meets the requirements for
the retail license applied for under § 125.04, Wis. Stats., and § 272-8 of
this article, and a special meeting of the License Review Committee
and/or Common Council would be required for approval for such
license. The City Clerk may revoke a provisional retail license if he or
she discovers that the holder of the license made a false statement on
the application or is no longer qualified for the license for which he or
she applied. A provisional retail "Class B" license may not be issued if
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-7
1:283
§ 272-8. Qualifications of applicants and premises.
the City's quota under§ 125.51(4), Wis. Stats., prohibits issuance of a
"Class B" license. No person may hold more than one provisional retail
license for each type of license applied for by the holder per year.
A. Residence requirements. All applicants under this article shall comply
with the restrictions as stated in the "Uniform Guidelines for Issuance
of Alcohol Beverage Licenses (A and B)," established by the City of
Monona License Review Committee.
B. Statutory requirements. Class "A" and "B" licenses shall be issued only
to persons eligible therefor under §§ 125.04(5), 125.04 and 125.33, Wis.
Stats.149
C. Violators of liquor or beer laws or ordinances. No retail Class "A" or "B"
or operator's license shall be issued to any person who has been
convicted of a violation of any federal or state alcohol beverage law or
any other law substantially related to the sale of alcohol beverages or
the provisions of this article during one year prior to such application. A
conviction of a member of a partnership or the partnership itself shall
make the partnership or any member thereof ineligible for a license for
one year.
D. Health and sanitary requirements. No retail Class "B" license shall be
issued for any premises which does not conform to the sanitary, safety
and health requirements of the State Department of Safety and
Professional Services pertaining to buildings and plumbing, to the rules
and regulations of the State Department of Health Services applicable
to restaurants, and to all such ordinances and regulations adopted by
the City.
E. Right to premises. No applicant will be considered unless he or she has
the right to possession of the premises described in the application for
the license period by lease or by deed.
F. Corporate restrictions.
(1) No license or permit may be issued to any corporation unless the
corporation meets the qualifications under § 125.04(5)(a)1 and 4
and (b), Wis. Stats., unless the agent of the corporation appointed
under § 125.04(6) and the officers and directors of the corporation
meet the qualifications of § 125.04(5)(a)1 and 3 and (b) and unless
the agent of the corporation appointed under § 125.04(6) meets the
qualification under § 125.04(5)(a)2. The requirement that the
corporation meets the qualifications under § 125.04(5)(a)1 and (b)
does not apply if the corporation has terminated its relationship
with all of the individuals whose actions directly contributed to the
conviction.150
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-7 MONONA CODE § 272-8
1:284
(2) Each corporate applicant shall file with its application for such
license a statement by its officers showing the names and
addresses of the persons who are stockholders together with the
amount of stock held by such person or persons. It shall be the duty
of each corporate applicant and licensee to file with the City Clerk a
statement of transfers of stock within 48 hours after such transfer
of stock.
(3) Any license issued to a corporation may be revoked in the manner
and under the procedure established in § 125.12, Wis. Stats., when
more than 50% of the stock interest, legal or beneficial, in such
corporation is held by any person or persons not eligible for a
license under this article or under the state law.
G. Sales tax qualification. All applicants for retail licenses shall provide
proof, as required by § 77.61(11), Wis. Stats., that they are in good
standing for sales tax purposes (i.e., hold a seller's permit), before they
may be issued a license.
H. Connecting premises. Except in the case of hotels, no person may hold
both a "Class A" license and either a "Class B" license or permit, a Class
"B" license or permit, or a "Class C" license for the same premises or for
connecting premises. Except for hotels, if either type of license or
permit is issued for the same or connecting premises already covered
by the other type of license or permit, the license or permit last issued
is void. If both licenses or permits are issued simultaneously, both are
void.
I. Limitations on other business; Class "B" premises. No Class "B" license
or permit may be granted for any premises where any other business is
conducted in connection with the premises, except that this restriction
does not apply if the premises for which the Class "B" license or permit
is issued is connected to the premises where other business is
conducted by a secondary doorway that serves as a safety exit and is
not the primary entrance to the Class "B" premises. No other business
may be conducted on premises operating under a Class "B" license or
permit. These restrictions do not apply to any of the following:
(1) A hotel.
(2) A restaurant, whether or not it is a part of or located in any
mercantile establishment.
(3) A combination grocery store and tavern.
(4) A combination sporting goods store and tavern in towns, villages
and fourth class cities.
(5) A combination novelty store and tavern.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-8
1:285
(6) A bowling alley or recreation premises.
(7) A club, society or lodge that has been in existence for six months or
more prior to the date of filing application for the Class "B" license
or permit.
(8) A movie theater.151
(9) A painting studio.152
(10) Premises for which a temporary Class "B" license is issued under
§ 125.26(6), if the license is one of multiple licenses issued by the
municipality to the same licensee for the same date and times, the
licensee is the sponsor of an event held at multiple locations within
the municipality on this date and at these times, and an admission
fee is charged for participation in the event, and no additional fee is
charged for service of alcohol at the event.153
J. Age requirement. No license hereunder shall be granted to any person
under the legal drinking age, except that an operator's license may be
issued to a person who has attained the age of 18.154
K. Issuance for sales in dwellings prohibited. No license shall be issued to
any person for the purpose of possessing, selling or offering for sale any
alcohol beverages in any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment,
and no Class "A" or "B" intoxicating liquor license shall be issued for
any premises within a residential district under the City Zoning Code,
except where there already exists a license for such premises.
L. Keeping of unauthorized alcohol beverages prohibited. No alcohol
beverage shall be kept on any licensed premises if it is of a type not
authorized to be sold by the licensee.
M. Multiple licenses limited. No person shall hold more than two Class "A"
or "B" licenses of any kind, except this provision does not apply to
hotels or clubs. No license shall be issued to any person if it would
cause that person to hold more than two "A" or "B" licenses in this state,
except that hotels or clubs may hold more than two liquor licenses. [See
§§ 125.32 and 125.51(10), Wis. Stats.]155
N. Training course required. Applicants for retail alcohol beverage
licenses (i.e., "Class A" liquor, Class "A" beer, "Class B" liquor, Class "B"
beer and "Class C" wine licenses) must successfully complete a
responsible beverage server training course in order to qualify for a
license.
151. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
152. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
153. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-8 MONONA CODE § 272-9
1:286
§ 272-9. License review procedure.
§ 272-10. Approval of application.
A. Investigation by Chief of Police. The Chief of Police or designee within
the Police Department shall make an investigation of the applicant to
determine whether the applicant possesses the qualifications necessary
for issuance of a license under this article. The Chief of Police or
designee within the Police Department shall also make an investigation
of the premises, if applicable, to determine its suitability for licensing.
B. Investigation by Fire Chief and Building Inspector. The Fire Chief and
Building Inspector shall inspect the premises proposed to be licensed
under a Class "A" or "B" license to determine whether such premises
conform to the ordinances of the City and the laws of the state and any
administrative regulations that are applicable which have been issued
by the state or any agency of the state.
C. Report of investigation. Each of the above officers shall file written
reports with the License Review Committee indicating any respects in
which any such officer finds the applicant or the premises proposed to
be licensed unsuitable for the issuance of a license. If any such report is
unfavorable, a copy thereof shall be mailed to the applicant, together
with a notice of the meeting at which the license application will be
considered, with an indication in such notice that the applicant may
appear before the License Review Committee at such time to be heard
with respect to the application.
D. Investigation by License Review Committee. Each application shall be
referred by the City Clerk to the License Review Committee, which
shall make such additional investigation as to the advisability of
granting such license as may be necessary or desirable. The License
Review Committee shall recommend grant or denial of the license by
the Common Council.
E. Grant of license. No license shall be granted under this article until the
Council shall authorize the same.
F. Renewals. This section applies to renewals as well as original
applications.
A. No license shall be granted for operation on any premises or with any
equipment for which taxes, assessments, forfeitures or other financial
claims of the City are delinquent and unpaid.
B. Consideration for the granting or denial of a license will be based on:
(1) Arrest and conviction record of the applicant, subject to the
limitations imposed by §§ 111.321, 111.322 and 111.335, Wis.
Stats.;
(2) The financial responsibility of the applicant;
§ 272-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-10
1:287
§ 272-11. Granting of license.
§ 272-12. Transfer and lapse of license.
(3) The appropriateness of the location and the premises where the
licensed business is to be conducted; and
(4) Generally, the applicant's fitness for the trust to be reposed.
C. An application may be denied based upon the applicant's arrest and
conviction record if the applicant has been convicted of a felony (unless
duly pardoned) or if the applicant has habitually been a law offender.
For purposes of this licensing procedure, "habitually been a law
offender" is generally considered to be an arrest or conviction of at
least two offenses which are substantially related to the licensed
activity within the five years immediately preceding the license
application. Because a license is a privilege, the issuance of which is a
right granted solely to the Common Council, the Common Council
reserves the right to consider the severity and facts and circumstances
of the offense when making the determination to grant, deny or not
renew a license. Further, the Council, at its discretion, may, based upon
an arrest or conviction record of two or more offenses which are
substantially related to the licensed activity within the five years
immediately preceding, act to suspend such license for a period of one
year or more.
A. Following the investigation reports of § 272-9, opportunity shall be
given by the governing body to any person to be heard for or against the
granting of any license. Upon the approval of the applicant by the
Common Council, the City Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license,
upon payment by the applicant of the license fee to the City.156
B. If the Common Council denies the license, the applicant shall be
notified in writing, by registered mail or personal service, of the
reasons for the denial. The notice shall also inform the applicant of the
opportunity to appear before the Common Council and to provide
evidence as to why the denial should be reversed. In addition, the notice
shall inform the applicant that the reconsideration of the application
shall be held in closed session, pursuant to § 19.85(1)(b), Wis. Stats.,
unless the applicant requests such reconsideration be held in open
session and the Common Council consents to the request. Such written
notice shall be mailed or served upon the applicant at least 10 days
prior to the Common Council meeting at which the application is to be
reconsidered.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 125.04(12), Wis. Stats., a license
shall be transferable from one premises to another if such transfer is
first approved by the Common Council. An application for transfer shall
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-10 MONONA CODE § 272-12
1:288
§ 272-13. Numbering of license.158
All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date of
issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee. The City Clerk shall
affix to the license his or her affidavit.
§ 272-14. Posting licenses; defacement.
Every Class "A" and "B" license issued under this article shall be posted
and at all times displayed as provided in § 125.04(10), Wis. Stats. No person
shall post such license or permit any other person to post it upon premises
other than those mentioned in the application or deface or destroy such
license.
be made on a form furnished by the City Clerk. Proceedings for such
transfer shall be had in the same form and manner as the original
application. The fee for such transfer is as set forth in the Fee,
Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule. Whenever a license is transferred, the
City Clerk shall forthwith notify the Wisconsin Department of Revenue
of such transfer. In the event of the sale of a business or business
premises of the licensee, the purchaser of such business or business
premises must apply to the City for reissuance of said license, and the
City, as the licensing authority, shall in no way be bound to reissue said
license to said subsequent purchaser.157
B. Whenever the agent of a corporate holder of a license is for any reason
replaced, the licensee shall give the City Clerk written notice of said
replacement, the reasons therefor and the new appointment. Until the
next regular meeting or special meeting of the Common Council, the
successor agent shall have the authority to perform the functions and
be charged with the duties of the original agent. However, said license
shall cease to be in effect upon receipt by the City Clerk of notice of
disapproval of the successor agent by the Wisconsin Department of
Revenue or other peace officer of the municipality in which the license
was issued. The corporation's license shall not be in force after receipt
of such notice or after a regular or special meeting of the Common
Council until the successor agent or another qualified agent is
appointed and approved by the City.
NOTE: Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., provides for some limited transfers
between licensees. See § 125.04(12), Wis. Stats.
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-15
1:289
§ 272-15. Conditions of license.
All retail Class "A," Class "B," "Class A" and "Class B" licenses granted
hereunder shall be granted subject to the following conditions, and all
other conditions of this section, and subject to all other ordinances and
regulations of the City applicable thereto:
A. Consent to entry. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents
to the entry of police or other duly authorized representatives of the
City at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search,
and consents to the removal from said premises of all things and
articles there had in violation of City ordinances or state laws, and
consents to the introduction of such things and articles in evidence in
any prosecution that may be brought for such offenses. Any refusal to
permit such inspection shall automatically operate as a revocation of
any license issued hereunder and shall be a violation of this section.
B. Employment of minors. No retail "Class B" or Class "B" licensees shall
employ any underage person, as defined in the Wisconsin Statutes, but
this shall not apply to hotels and restaurants. This subsection shall not
apply to a person who has an operator's license or who is at least 18
years of age and is under supervision as provided in §§ 125.32(2) and
125.68(2), Wis. Stats.159
C. Disorderly conduct prohibited. Each licensed premises shall, at all
times, be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or
indecent conduct shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises.
D. Licensed operator on premises. There shall be upon premises operated
under a "Class A," Class "A," "Class B," Class "B" or "Class C" license, at
all times, the licensee, members of the licensee's immediate family who
have attained the legal drinking age, and/or some person who shall
have an operator's license and who shall be responsible for the acts of
all persons serving, as waiters or in any other manner, any fermented
malt beverages to customers. No person other than the licensee shall
serve fermented malt beverages in any place operated under a "Class
B," Class "B," or "Class C" license unless he or she possesses an
operator's license or there is a person with an operator's license upon
said premises at the time of such service.
E. Health and sanitation regulations. The rules and regulations of the
State Department of Health Services governing sanitation in
restaurants shall apply to all "Class B" liquor licenses issued under this
article. No "Class B" or "Class C" license shall be issued unless the
premises to be licensed conforms to such rules and regulations.
F. Restrictions near schools and churches. No retail Class "A," Class "B,"
"Class A" or "Class B" license shall be issued for premises, the main
entrance of which is less than 300 feet from the main entrance of any
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-15 MONONA CODE § 272-15
1:290
established public school, parochial school, hospital or church. Such
distance shall be measured by the shortest route along the highway
from the closest point of the main entrance of such school, church or
hospital to the main entrance to such premises. This subsection shall
not apply to premises licensed as such on June 30, 1947, nor shall
it apply to any premises licensed as such prior to the occupation of
real property within 300 feet thereof by any school building, hospital
building or church building.
G. Clubs. No club shall sell or give away any intoxicating liquors except to
bona fide members and guests invited by members.
H. Gambling prohibited. Except as authorized by state law, no gambling or
game of chance of any sort shall be permitted in any form upon any
premises licensed under this article or the laws of the State of
Wisconsin.
I. Credit prohibited. No retail Class "A," Class "B," "Class A," "Class B" or
"Class C" liquor, wine or fermented malt beverage licensee shall sell or
offer for sale any alcohol beverage to any person or persons by
extending credit, except hotel credit extended to a resident guest or a
club to a bona fide member. It shall be unlawful for such licensee or
permittee to sell alcohol beverages to any person on a passbook or store
order or to receive from any person any goods, ware, merchandise or
other articles in exchange for alcohol beverages.
J. Licensee or permittee responsible for acts of help. A violation of this
article by a duly authorized agent or employee of a licensee or
permittee under this article shall constitute a violation by the licensee
or permittee. Whenever any licensee or permittee under this article
shall violate any portion of this article, proceedings for the suspension
or revocation of the license or permit of the holder thereof may be
instituted in the manner prescribed in this article.
K. Improper exhibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or
for any licensee or manager or agent of the licensee to permit any
employee, entertainer or patron to engage in any live act,
demonstration, dance or exhibition on the licensed premises, which:
(1) Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region; or
(2) Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates genitals, pubic hair, buttocks,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
(3) Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof; or
(4) Engages in or simulates sexual intercourse and/or any sexual
contact, including the touching of any portion of the female breast
or the male and/or female genitals.
§ 272-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-15
1:291
L. Violators of liquor or beer laws or ordinances. No retail Class "A" or "B"
or operator's license shall be issued to any person who has been
convicted of a violation of any federal or state alcohol beverage law or
any other law substantially related to the sale of alcohol beverages or
the provisions of this article, during one year prior to such application.
A conviction of a member of a partnership or the partnership itself shall
make the partnership or any member thereof ineligible for a license for
one year.
M. Possession and consumption outside licensed premises prohibited. No
licensee shall permit the possession or consumption of alcohol
beverages on any portion of the licensed premises not enclosed within
the building, except under license granted by the Common Council
pursuant to § 272-20. No person shall consume or have in his or her
possession alcohol beverages on any unenclosed part of a licensed
premises, except as provided in § 272-20. No licensee shall permit the
removal of any alcohol beverage from the licensed premises in an open
container. No person shall remove any alcohol beverage from a licensed
establishment in an open container.
N. Liquor premises to have clear view from street. All premises for which a
Class "A" or "B" liquor license shall have been issued shall be so
arranged as to furnish a clear view from the street, except in the case of
restaurants, clubs or hotels; but in the case of any restaurant, club or
hotel where the barroom or licensed portion of the premises is not
visible from the street, there shall not be a separate advertised
entrance from the street to such barroom or licensed portion of the
premises. No such premises shall, during the hours in which the sale of
liquor is prohibited, obstruct by the use of curtains, blinds, screens or in
any other manner a full and complete view of the interior from the
outside.
O. Sales to intoxicated persons. No person shall procure for, sell, dispense
or give away alcohol beverages to a person who is intoxicated.
P. Free alcohol beverages in restaurants. No person holding a license to
operate a restaurant may give away or permit to be given away any
alcohol beverages on the restaurant premises.
Q. Public place. No owner, lessee or person in charge of a public place
shall permit the consumption of alcohol beverages on the premises of
the public place unless the person has an appropriate retail license or
permit.
R. Place-to-place deliveries. No person shall peddle any alcohol beverage
from house to house where the sale and delivery are made concurrently.
S. No advertising by sound. No person shall use any amplification device
for the purpose of advertising the sale of alcohol beverages.
§ 272-15 MONONA CODE § 272-15
1:292
§ 272-16. Closing hours. [Amended 5-7-2012 by Ord. No.
5-12-639160]
Closing hours shall be established in conformance with §§ 125.32(3) and
125.68(4), Wis. Stats., and further restricted as follows:
Annotation: See Colonnade Catering Corp. v. United States, 397 U.S.
72, 90 S. Ct. 774 (1970); and State v. Erickson, 101 Wis. 2d 224 (1981),
for guidelines for warrantless searches of licensed premises.
A. Hours.
(1) Class A establishments.
(a) "Class A" liquor licenses. No establishment holding a "Class A"
liquor license shall remain open for the sale of alcohol
beverages between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(b) Class "A" fermented malt beverage licenses. No establishment
holding a Class "A" fermented malt beverage license shall
remain open for the sale of alcohol beverages between 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(c) Inaccessibility. Establishments holding either a "Class A" liquor
and Class "A" fermented malt beverage licenses shall, between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., take the necessary
measures to make all intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages in original packages, containers and bottles
inaccessible for public sale. The term inaccessible for public
sale may include but is not limited to locking of display cases,
covering or removing intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages in original packages, containers and bottles from
the public shopping area. Such establishments shall also post
at least one sign in the area of product sales or where the
intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages in original
packages, containers or bottles are located for the purpose of
notifying the public of the limitations on hours of sale.
(d) Carry-out ban. No person may sell on or carry away from an
establishment holding a "Class A" liquor license or Class "A"
fermented malt beverage license alcohol beverages in original
packages, containers or bottles between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
(2) Class B establishments.
(a) "Class B" liquor licenses. No establishment holding a "Class B"
liquor license shall remain open for the sale of liquor or
fermented malt beverages or for any other purpose between
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-16
1:293
§ 272-17. Restrictions on temporary fermented malt beverage or
wine licenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization on a temporary basis
to sell or offer to sell any alcohol beverage upon any City-owned property
or privately owned property within the City of Monona, except through
the issuance of a temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage license
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday,
and 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Saturday and Sunday; except that,
on the Sunday that daylight saving time begins, as specified
in § 175.095(2), Wis. Stats., no premises may remain open
between 3:30 a.m. and 6 a.m. There shall be no closing hours
on January 1.
(b) Class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses. No establishment
holding a Class "B" fermented malt beverage license shall
remain open for the sale of liquor or fermented malt beverages
or for any other purpose between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and 2:30 a.m. and 6:00
a.m., Saturday and Sunday; except that, on the Sunday that
daylight saving time begins, as specified in § 175.095(2), Wis.
Stats., no premises may remain open between 3:30 a.m. and 6
a.m. There shall be no closing hours on January 1.
(c) Carry-out ban. No person may sell on or carry away from an
establishment holding a "Class B" liquor license or Class "B"
fermented malt beverage license alcohol beverages in original
packages, containers or bottles between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m.
(3) "Class C" wine license. No establishment holding a "Class C" wine
license shall remain open for the sale of liquor or fermented malt
beverages or for any other purpose between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
Saturday and Sunday; except that, on the Sunday that daylight
saving time begins as specified in § 175.095(2), Wis. Stats., no
premises may remain open between 3:30 a.m. and 6 a.m. There
shall be no closing hours on January 1.
(4) Wholesalers. No establishment holding a wholesalers' license shall
remain open for the sale of alcohol beverages between 5:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.; except on Saturday, when the closing hour shall be
9:00 p.m.
B. Hotels, restaurants and other businesses. Hotels and restaurants, the
principal business of which is the furnishing of food or lodging to
patrons; bowling alleys; indoor horseshoe-pitching facilities; curling
clubs; golf courses and golf clubhouses may remain open for the
conduct of their regular business but shall not sell liquor or malt
beverages during the closing hours of Subsection A above.
§ 272-16 MONONA CODE § 272-17
1:294
or temporary "Class B" wine license issued by the Common Council in
accordance with Wisconsin Statutes and as set forth in this section. A
temporary Class "B" fermented malt beverage license or temporary "Class
C" wine license authorizing the sale and consumption of beer and/or wine
on City-owned property or privately owned property may be authorized by
the Common Council, provided the following requirements are met:
A. Compliance with eligibility standards. The organization shall meet the
eligibility requirements of a bona fide club, church, chamber of
commerce, veterans' association, lodge or society as set forth in
§§ 125.26(6) and 125.51(10), Wis. Stats., and shall fully comply with the
requirements of this section and Article II of this chapter.161
B. Posting of signs and licenses. All organizations issued a temporary
license shall post in a conspicuous location at the main point of sale and
at all remote points of sale a sufficient number of signs stating that no
fermented malt beverage shall be served to any underage person
without proper identification, when ticket sales, beer and/or wine sales
stop, when to vacate the area, and that no beer and/or wine is allowed
outside the event area.
C. Fencing. A double-row snow fence shall be required and installed
around the event area. The snow fence and, if used, tent shall be
erected no more than 48 hours in advance and removed within 48 hours
after the event is over. Where possible, there shall be only one point of
ingress and egress. The double fence shall be a minimum of four feet
high and a minimum of six feet between fences. Exceptions may be
granted for instances of inclement weather or undue hardship.
D. Underage persons prohibited. No underage persons, as defined by the
Wisconsin Statutes, shall be allowed to assist in the sale of fermented
malt beverages or wine at any point of sale, nor shall they be allowed to
loiter or linger in the area of any point of sale, except for a person 18
years of age or over who possesses a valid operator's license.162
E. Licensed operators requirement. A licensed operator shall be stationed
at all points of sales at all times. The names of these operators shall be
provided to the City Clerk at least one week in advance.
F. Waiver. The Common Council may waive or modify the requirements of
this section due to the physical characteristics of the licensed site.
G. Insurance. The applicant for a temporary fermented malt beverage or
wine license may be required to indemnify, defend and hold the City and
its employees and agents harmless against all claims, liability, loss,
damage or expense incurred by the City on account of any injury to or
death of any person or any damage to property caused by or resulting
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-17
1:295
§ 272-18. Revocation and suspension of licenses; nonrenewal.
from the activities for which the permit is granted. As evidence of
the applicant's ability to perform the conditions of the license, the
applicant may be required to furnish a certificate of comprehensive
general liability insurance with the City of Monona. The applicant may
be required to furnish a performance bond prior to being granted the
license.163
H. Underage monitor. There should be at least one responsible person in
attendance at all hours the event is open to the public to monitor the
ages of persons entering the event area and to be sure no alcohol
beverage leaves the event area. The names and driver license numbers
of these responsible persons shall be provided to the City Clerk at least
one week prior to the event. The Police Chief will approve these
persons.
I. Law enforcement officer presence. The License Review Committee may
require a uniformed police officer to be present at all times, at its
option.
J. Ticket sales. Ticket sales, if used, shall stop at 11:45 p.m. Sale of beer
shall stop at 12 midnight. The event area shall be vacated by 12:30 a.m.
K. Glass containers. Beer shall not be served in glass containers.
Recycling of used containers should be promoted at these events.
Incentives which promote beer consumption, such as trophies and
volume discounts, are not permitted.
L. Portable toilets. Portable toilets may be required.
M. Amplification devices. Use of amplification equipment at the event will
follow Monona Municipal Code requirements.
N. City cleanup. If the City is required to clean up after the event, the cost
for such will be billed to the organization.
O. Past record. Permits may not be granted if past problems have
occurred.
P. Exception. Section 272-17C does not apply to licenses issued for use
with the Schaefer Shelter, unless specifically granted with the licenses.
A. Procedure. Whenever the holder of any license under this article
violates any portion of this article or Article II of this article,
proceedings for the revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of such
license may be instituted in the manner and under the procedure
established by § 125.12, Wis. Stats., and the provisions therein relating
to granting a new license shall likewise be applicable. The License
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-17 MONONA CODE § 272-18
1:296
§ 272-19. Nonalcohol events for underage persons on licensed
premises.
The presence of underage persons on a licensed premises as provided under
§ 125.07(3)(a)10, Wis. Stats., shall be subject to the following:
Review Committee shall serve as the hearing agency for the Common
Council in any such proceedings.164
B. Cancellation or forfeiture of license; fees not refunded. If a Class "A" or
"B" license issued hereunder is not used within 15 days after its
issuance, or if after its issuance its usage is discontinued for a period of
15 days or more, the license may be canceled by the Council. If any
license issued under this article is revoked for cause or is voluntarily
surrendered, no refund shall be made of any part of the license fee.
C. Nonrenewal of licenses. Before renewal of any license issued under this
article is refused, the licensee shall be given written notice of any
charges or violations against him or her or the reasons proposed for
nonrenewal and a copy of any proposed motion for nonrenewal and
shall have an opportunity to be heard before the License Review
Committee and the Common Council on such motion.
D. Effect of revocation of license. Whenever any license has been revoked,
at least six months from the time of such revocation shall elapse before
another license shall be granted for the same premises and 12 months
shall elapse before another license shall be granted to the person whose
license was revoked.
A. The licensee or agent of a corporate licensee shall notify the Police
Department at least 48 hours in advance of the date of any event at
which underage persons will be present on the licensed premises. Each
such nonalcohol event notice shall specify the date(s) on which the
event is to occur and the time(s) of commencement. All notices shall be
filed with the Police Department during normal working hours (8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday) and shall be given on forms
prescribed by the Department. After a nonalcohol event notice has been
given, the licensee may cancel an event(s) only by giving like notice to
the Department in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
Regardless of the date given, all notices shall expire and be deemed
cancelled no later than the date of expiration or revocation of the
applicable retail Class "B" or "Class B" license.
B. During the period of any nonalcohol event, a notice card prescribed by
the Police Department shall be posted at all public entrances to the
licensed premises notifying the general public that no alcohol
beverages may be consumed, sold or given away on or carried into the
164. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (b), which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 7-19-2010 by Ord. No. 6-10-615.
§ 272-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-19
1:297
§ 272-20. Beer garden or patio permits required for outdoor
consumption. [Amended 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 2-14-657]
licensed premises during the event. Such notice cards shall be made
available by the Department to a requesting licensee.
C. Once a nonalcohol event has commenced, no alcohol beverages may be
consumed, sold or given away on or carried into the licensed premises
until the next day following the closing hours of the licensed premises.
D. During the period of any nonalcohol event, all alcohol beverages shall
be stored in a locked portion of the licensed premises in a secure place
out of the sight and physical reach of any patron present and shall be
under the direct and immediate control and supervision of the licensee
or a licensed bartender in the employ of the licensee. All beer taps and
automatic dispensers of alcohol beverages ("speed guns") shall be
either disconnected, disabled or made inoperable.
A. Required for outdoor consumption. No licensee shall permit the
consumption of alcohol beverages on any part of the licensed premises
not enclosed within the building except under a permit granted by the
Common Council pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding the
previous sentence, outdoor smoking areas approved prior to July 8,
2013, which authorized the consumption of alcohol and are still in use
as of March 2014, may continue to be used for those limited purposes
as previously authorized. Such permits may be issued by the Council as
provided herein after review by the Plan Commission and License
Review Committee. The permits are a privilege in which no rights vest
and, therefore, may be revoked by the Council at its pleasure at any
time or shall otherwise expire on June 30 of each year. No person shall
consume or have in his or her possession, or serve to another person,
alcohol beverages on any unenclosed part of a licensed premises which
is not described in a valid beer garden or patio permit. The City Clerk
shall develop and periodically update as necessary application forms for
beer garden and patio permits.
B. Limitations on issuance of beer garden and patio permits. The following
restrictions apply to both beer garden permits and patio permits:
(1) Use of all beer gardens and patios shall completely cease no later
than 9:00 p.m. for all purposes, except cleaning by employees of
the licensee.
(2) Sound from any source that is emitted from the outdoor area and
measured at any property line of the real property on which the
licensed premises is located shall not exceed the limits set forth in
§ 480-10.
(3) All necessary zoning approvals shall be subject to review and
approval by the Plan Commission.
§ 272-19 MONONA CODE § 272-20
1:298
(4) Applications for either a beer garden or patio permit shall
accurately describe the area intended for use as a beer garden or
patio and shall describe with specificity the nature of visual and
video surveillance, fencing and other measures intended to provide
control over the operation of the beer garden or patio.
(5) The permittee shall install and maintain digital video surveillance
covering the entire area of the beer garden or patio as approved by
the Chief of Police. The permittee shall keep digital recordings for a
minimum of 30 days and promptly make them available to the
Monona Police Department upon request.
C. Limitations on issuance of beer garden permits. In addition to the
restrictions set forth in Subsection B, permits issued for beer gardens
shall be governed by the following additional restrictions and
considerations:
(1) A separate bar may be located in a beer garden for service of
alcohol to the same degree allowed within the indoor premises.
(2) A licensed operator shall be present in the beer garden at all times
when alcohol beverages are sold or consumed in the beer garden.
(3) In considering an application for a beer garden, the approval
authority shall consider the proximity of residential structures. A
proposed beer garden located within 100 feet of the lot line to any
property upon which a residential structure is located shall only be
approved in exceptional situations where no other location on the
property of the licensed premises is reasonably practicable and
under additional restrictions to minimize to the greatest degree
reasonably possible the impact on the nearby residences.
(4) Every beer garden shall be completely enclosed with a fence or
wall not less than five feet in height, as approved by the Plan
Commission. Beer gardens shall only be accessible through a
latched gate, which shall remain closed except for ingress and
egress of individual persons.
D. Limitations on issuance of patio permits. In addition to the restrictions
set forth in Subsection B, permits issued for patios shall be governed by
the following additional restrictions and considerations:
(1) Patio permits shall only be issued for areas with seating for no
greater than 40 persons.
(2) Alcohol may be sold only to and consumed by patrons seated at
tables. If the patio is not directly accessible from the indoor
licensed premises, then alcohol shall be served to patrons only by
licensed operators.
(3) No separate bar may be located in a patio.
§ 272-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-20
1:299
§ 272-21. Enforcement.
§ 272-22. Operator's license.
(4) The Plan Commission or Common Council may require that the
patio be enclosed partially or completely by a fence or wall, as
appropriate in the specific circumstances of any application.
E. Adjoining and nearby property owners and residents to be notified of
pendency of applications. All property owners and residents within 250
feet of the proposed beer garden or patio shall be notified of the
pendency of an application for a beer garden permit or patio permit by
City staff. This provision shall be interpreted liberally to provide notice
to all persons residing within said area of the time, date and location of
the initial meetings of both the License Review Committee and the Plan
Commission at which any such application will be considered.
F. State statutes enforced within beer garden and patio. Every permittee
under this section shall comply with and enforce all provisions of Ch.
125, Wis. Stats., applicable to its licensed premises, except insofar as
such provisions are clearly inapplicable. Violation of the provisions of
Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the
beer garden permit or patio permit by the Council.
A. Except as specifically provided otherwise within this article, any person
violating any provision of this article or any condition included on a
license application or on the license itself or who provides any false or
inaccurate information on a written application shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in § 1-4A of the Code, except that where a lower
maximum penalty shall be provided by Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin
Statutes for any specific offense, such maximum penalty shall prevail
for the same offense committed in violation of this article.165
B. Nothing in this section shall in any way diminish the authority of the
Common Council to suspend, revoke or not renew any license issued
pursuant to this article for any violation of this article or grounds
enumerated in § 272-18 or 272-22H of the Code of the City of Monona.
C. The Chief of Police shall report to the License Review Committee any
conviction under this section.
A. Operator's license required.
(1) Operator's licenses; Class "A," "Class A," Class "B," "Class B" or
"Class C" premises. Except as provided under §§ 125.32(3)(b) and
125.07(3)(a)10, Wis. Stats., no premises operated under a Class
"A," "Class A," Class "B," "Class B" or "Class C" license or permit
may be open for business unless there is upon the premises the
licensee or permittee, the agent named in the license or permit if
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-20 MONONA CODE § 272-22
1:300
the licensee or permittee is a corporation, or some person who
has an operator's license and who is responsible for the acts of all
persons serving any fermented malt beverages to customers. An
operator's license issued in respect to a vessel under § 125.27(2),
Wis. Stats., is valid outside the municipality that issues it. For the
purpose of this section, any person holding a manager's license
under § 125.18, Wis. Stats., or any member of the licensee's or
permittee's immediate family who has attained the age of 18, shall
be considered the holder of an operator's license. No person,
including a member of the licensee's or permittee's immediate
family, other than the licensee, permittee or agent, may serve
fermented malt beverages in any place operated under a Class "A,"
"Class A," Class "B," "Class B" or "Class C" license or permit unless
he or she has an operator's license or is at least 18 years of age
and is under the immediate supervision of the licensee, permittee,
agent or a person holding an operator's license, who is on the
premises at the time of the service.
(2) Use by another prohibited.
(a) No person may allow another to use his or her Class "A," "Class
A," Class "B," "Class B" or "Class C" license or permit to sell
alcohol beverages.
(b) The license or permit of a person who violates Subsection
A(2)(a) above shall be revoked.
B. Procedure upon application. [Amended 11-3-2014 by Ord. No.
10-14-666]
(1) The Common Council shall issue an operator's license to any
applicant who meets the qualifications set forth in§ 125.04(5), Wis.
Stats., and pays the fee set forth in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and
Deposit Schedule. Such license shall be granted only upon
application in writing on forms to be obtained from the City Clerk
only to persons 18 years of age or older. Operator's licenses shall
be operative only within the limits of the City.166
(2) All applications are subject to an investigation by the Chief of
Police and/or other appropriate authority to determine whether the
applicant and/or premises to be licensed complies with all
regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. The Police
Department shall conduct an investigation within two working days
of the applicant, including, but not limited to, requesting
information from the state, surrounding municipalities, and/or any
community where the applicant has previously resided concerning
the applicant's arrest and conviction record. Based upon such
investigation, the Chief of Police shall recommend, in writing, to
the Common Council approval or denial of the application. If the
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-22
1:301
Chief of Police recommends denial, the Chief of Police shall
provide, in writing, the reasons for such recommendation. If the
Chief of Police recommends denial, the application shall be
referred to the License Review Committee for review and
recommendation by it to the Common Council.
(3) If approved by the Common Council, the City Clerk shall issue the
license within seven working days from the Common Council's
approval.
C. Duration. Licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall be
valid for a period of one year and shall expire on the 30th day of June of
each year. An operator may apply for a two-year license.
D. Operator's license fee; provisional or temporary licenses. [Amended
11-3-2014 by Ord. No. 10-14-666]
(1) Fee. The annual fee for an operator's license or provisional license
shall be as prescribed in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit
Schedule.167
(2) Provisional license. The City Clerk may issue provisional operator's
licenses in accordance with § 125.17(5), Wis. Stats. The provisional
operator's license shall expire 60 days after its issuance or when an
operator's license is issued to the holder, whichever is sooner. At
the time of application, the applicant shall provide documentation
that he or she has either completed the training course described
in § 272-22F, or that he or she is currently enrolled in such a
course. If a provisional license is issued to a person enrolled in a
training course who fails to successfully complete the course, the
provisional license shall be revoked. A provisional license may not
be issued to any person who has been denied an operator's license
by the Common Council or who has had his or her operator's
license revoked or suspended within the preceding 12 months. The
City Clerk shall provide an appropriate application form to be
completed in full by the applicant. The City Clerk may revoke the
provisional license issued if he or she discovers that the holder of
the license made a false statement on the application.
(3) Temporary license. The Common Council may issue a temporary
operator's license, provided that:
(a) This license may be issued only to operators employed by or
donating their services to nonprofit corporations.
(b) No person may hold more than two licenses of this kind per
year.168
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-22 MONONA CODE § 272-22
1:302
(c) The license is valid for any period from one day to 14 days, and
the period for which it is valid shall be stated on the license.
(d) The fee for this license shall be prescribed in the City's Fee,
Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule.169
E. Issuance or denial of operator's licenses. [Amended 11-3-2014 by
Ord. No. 10-14-666]
(1) Operator's licenses shall be issued and numbered in the order they
are granted and shall give the applicant's name and the date of the
expiration of such license.170
(2) If the application is denied by the Common Council, the City Clerk
shall, in writing, inform the applicant of the denial and the reasons
therefor.
(3) Because a license is a privilege, the issuance of which is a right
granted solely to the City, the Common Council reserves the right
to consider the severity and facts and circumstances of the offense
when making the determination to deny or not renew a license.
F. Training course.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection F(2) below, the Common Council
may not issue an operator's license unless the applicant has
successfully completed a responsible beverage server training
course at any location that is offered by a technical college district
and that conforms to curriculum guidelines specified by the
technical college system board or a comparable training course,
which may include computer-based training and testing, that is
approved by the Department of Revenue or the Educational
Approval Board, or unless the applicant fulfills one of the following
requirements:171
(a) The person is renewing an operator's license.
(b) Within the past two years, the person held a Class "A," Class
"B," "Class A," "Class B" or "Class C" license or permit or a
manager's or operator's license.
(c) Within the past two years, the person has completed such a
training course.
(2) The City Clerk may issue a provisional operator's license to a
person who is enrolled in a training course under Subsection F(1)
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-22
1:303
§ 272-23. Violations and penalties.
above and shall revoke that license if the applicant fails
successfully to complete the course in which he or she enrolls.
(3) The City Clerk may not require that applicants for operators'
licenses undergo training in addition to that under Subsection F(1),
but may require applicants to purchase, at cost, materials that deal
with relevant local subjects not covered in the course under
Subsection F(1).
G. Display of license. Each license issued under the provisions of this
article shall be posted on the premises whenever the operator
dispenses beverages or be in his or her possession.172
H. Revocation of operator's license. Violation of any of the terms or
provisions of the state law or of this article relating to operator's
licenses by any person holding such operator's license shall be cause
for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of the license. Any such
action shall proceed in accordance with§ 125.12, Wis. Stats., and the
License Review Committee shall be the official hearing body.
[Amended 11-3-2014 by Ord. No. 10-14-666]
A. Forfeitures for violations of §§ 125.07(1) through (4) and 125.09(2),
Wis. Stats., adopted by reference in § 272-1 of the Code of the City of
Monona, shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be
imposed for violations of the comparable state statute, including any
variations or increases for subsequent offenses.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article of the Code of
the City of Monona, except as otherwise provided herein, or who shall
conduct any activity or make any sale for which a license is required
without a license, shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in § 1-4,
Penalties, of Ch. 1, General Provisions, of the Code of the City of
Monona.
C. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing
court to exercise additional authorities granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes.
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 272-22 MONONA CODE § 272-23
1:304
ARTICLE II
Offenses
[Adopted as Title 11, Ch. 4, of the 1994 Code; amended in its
entirety 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2-14-658]
§ 272-24. Alcoholic beverages in public areas.
§ 272-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOL BEVERAGE — Includes all ardent, spirituous, distilled or vinous
liquors, liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented, or
not, and by whatever name called, as well as all liquors and liquids made
by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley malt
A. Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or give
away, or offer to sell, serve or give away, any alcohol beverage upon any
public street, sidewalk, alley, public parking lot, highway, cemetery or
drives or other public area within the City of Monona or on private
property without the owner's consent, except at licensed premises. It
shall be unlawful for any person to consume or have in his or her
possession any open container containing alcohol beverage upon any
public street, public sidewalk, public way, public alley or public parking
lot within the City except as licensed premises.
B. Private property held out for public use. It shall be unlawful for any
person to consume any alcohol beverages upon any private property
held open for public use within the City unless the property is
specifically named as being part of a licensed premises.
C. Leaving licensed premises with open container.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any licensee, permittee or operator to
permit any patron to leave the licensed premises with an open
container containing any alcohol beverage.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any patron to leave a licensed premises with
an open container containing any alcohol beverage.
D. Exceptions.
(1) The provisions of this section may be waived by the Common
Council for duly authorized events.
(2) Any organization which has been issued a temporary fermented
malt beverage and/or temporary wine license for a designated area
pursuant to this Code, provided that the provisions of this article
and Article I of this chapter are fully complied with.
E. Commercial quadricycles. It shall be unlawful for any passenger on a
commercial quadricycle to consume a fermented malt beverage.
§ 272-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-25
1:305
and hops, with or without unmalted grains or decorticated or degerminated
grains or sugar, which contain 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume and
which are fit for use for beverage purposes.
COMMERCIAL QUADRICYCLE — Vehicle as defined in§ 340.01(8m), Wis.
Stats., as may be amended from time to time.
PUBLIC AREA — Any location within the City which is open to access
to persons not requiring specific permission of the owner to be at such
location, including all parking lots serving commercial establishments.
UNDERAGE PERSON — Any person under the legal drinking age as defined
by the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 272-25 MONONA CODE § 272-25
1:306
Chapter 281
JUVENILES
§ 281-1. Curfew.
A. Curfew established. It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years
of age to be present on any public street, avenue, highway, road, alley,
park, school grounds, place of amusement and entertainment,
cemetery, playground, public building or any other public place in the
City of Monona, unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or
person having lawful custody and control of his or her person, or unless
there exists a reasonable necessity therefor, during the following hours:
youths 15 and under: weeknights (Sunday to Thursday) 10:00 p.m. to
5:00 a.m. the next day; weekends (Friday and Saturday) 11:00 p.m. to
5:00 a.m. the next day; youths age 16 and up to 18: weeknights (Sunday
to Thursday) 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. the next day; weekends (Friday
and Saturday) 12:00 midnight to 5:00 a.m. the next day. [Amended
10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
B. Exceptions.
(1) This section shall not apply to a child:
(a) Who is performing an errand as directed by his or her parent,
guardian or person having lawful custody.
(b) Who is on his or her own premises or in the areas immediately
adjacent thereto.
(c) Whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets,
alleys or public places or in any motor vehicle during such
hours.
(d) Who is returning home from a supervised school, church or
civic function, but not later than 30 minutes after the ending of
such function.
(e) Who is participating in, going to, or returning from, an activity
involving the exercise of their rights protected under the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution or any
equivalent rights under the Wisconsin Constitution, including
freedom of speech, the free exercise of religion, and the right
of assembly.
(2) Unless flight by the child or other circumstances makes it
impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to issuing a
citation for an offense under this section, afford the child an
opportunity to explain his or her reasons for being present in the
public place. A law enforcement officer shall not issue a citation for
an offense under this section unless the officer reasonably believes
§ 272-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-1
1:307
§ 281-2. Possession of controlled substances by juveniles.
that an offense has occurred and that none of the exceptions
described in this section apply.
(3) These exceptions shall not, however, permit a child to
unnecessarily loiter about the streets, alleys or public places or be
in a parked motor vehicle on the public streets.
C. Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or
other person having the lawful care, custody and control of any person
under 18 years of age to allow or permit such person to violate the
provisions of Subsection A above. The fact that, prior to the present
offense, a parent, guardian or custodian was informed by any law
enforcement officer of a separate violation of this section occurring
within 30 days of the present offense shall be prima facie evidence that
such parent, guardian or custodian allowed or permitted the present
violation. Any parent, guardian or custodian herein who shall have
made a missing person notification to the Police Department shall not
be considered to have allowed or permitted any person under 18 years
of age to violate this section.
D. Warning and penalty. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(1) Warning. The first time a juvenile is detained by a law enforcement
officer of the City, as provided in this section, the parent, guardian
or person having legal custody of such juvenile shall be advised as
to the provisions of this section and further advised that any
violation of this section occurring thereafter by such juvenile or any
other juvenile under the care of such parent, guardian or person
having legal custody shall result in a penalty being imposed as
hereinafter provided.
(2) Penalty. Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a
child described in Subsection A above who has been warned in the
manner provided in Subsection D(1) herein and who thereafter
violates this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
§ 1-4 of this Code. After a second violation within a six-month
period, if the defendant, in a prosecution under this section, proves
that he or she is unable to comply with this section because of the
disobedience of the child, the action shall be dismissed, and the
child shall be referred to the court assigned to exercise jurisdiction
under Ch. 48 or Ch. 938, Wis. Stats. Any juvenile person under 18
years of age who shall violate this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit not less than $1 nor more than $25, together with
the costs of prosecution, and upon a second or subsequent offense,
upon conviction thereof, face forfeitures as set forth in the City's
Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 281-1 MONONA CODE § 281-2
1:308
§ 281-3. City jurisdiction over persons 12 through 17 years of age.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — The same meaning as the term is defined in
§ 961.571, Wis. Stats.
B. Possession of drug paraphernalia. No person under 17 years of age may
use, or possess with the primary intent to use, drug paraphernalia to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance or controlled substance analog in
violation of this chapter.
C. Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. No person under 17
years of age may deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture
with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be
primarily used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance or
controlled substance analog in violation of this chapter.
D. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to a disposition in accordance with § 938.344(2e), Wis. Stats., as
adopted by § 281-6 of this chapter.
A. Adoption of state statute. Section 938.17(2), Wis. Stats., is hereby
adopted and by reference made a part of this section as if fully set forth
herein.
B. Provisions of chapter applicable to persons 12 through 17 years of age.
Subject to the provisions and limitations of § 938.17(2), Wis. Stats.,
complaints alleging a violation of any provision of this Code against
persons 12 through 17 years of age may be brought on behalf of the
City of Monona and may be prosecuted utilizing the same procedures in
such cases as are applicable to adults charged with the same offense.
C. No incarceration as penalty. The Court shall not impose incarceration
as a penalty for any person convicted of an offense prosecuted under
this section.
D. Additional prohibited acts. In addition to any other provision of the City
of Monona Code, no person aged 12 through 17 shall own, possess,
ingest, buy, sell, trade, use as a beverage, give away or otherwise
control any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in violation
of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats.
E. Penalty for violations of Subsection D. Any person 12 through 17 years
of age who shall violate the provisions of Subsection D shall be subject
to the same penalties as are provided in § 1-4 of this Code exclusive of
the provisions therein relative to commitment in the County Jail.
§ 281-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-4
1:309
§ 281-4. Unlawful sheltering of juveniles.
§ 281-5. Enforcement and penalties.
§ 281-6. Dispositional authority of Municipal Court.
A. No person shall intentionally shelter or conceal a juvenile child who:
(1) Is a "runaway child," meaning a child who has run away from his or
her parent, guardian or legal or physical custodian; or
(2) Is a child who may be taken into custody pursuant to § 48.19, Wis.
Stats.
B. Subsection A applies when the following conditions are present:
(1) The person knows or should have known that the child is a child
described in either Subsection A(1) or (2); and
(2) The child has been reported to a law enforcement agency as a
missing person or as a child described in Subsection A(1) or (2).
C. Subsection A does not apply to any of the following:
(1) A person operating a runaway home in compliance with § 48.227,
Wis. Stats.; or
(2) A person who shelters or conceals a child at the request or with the
consent of the child's parent, guardian or legal or physical
custodian, except if the sheltering or concealment violates
§ 948.31, Wis. Stats.; or
(3) A person who immediately notifies a law enforcement agency,
county department of public welfare or social services, or the
intake worker of the court exercising jurisdiction under Ch. 48,
Wis. Stats., that he or she is sheltering or concealing such child and
provides the person or agency notified with all information
requested.
A. Citation process. For violations of §§ 281-2 through 281-4, juveniles
may be cited by the citation process on a form approved by the City
Attorney which shall contain on the reverse side the penalties that the
juvenile may receive simultaneously with issuing the citation to the
juvenile. A copy will be mailed to the parent or legal guardian.
B. Penalties. Violations of §§ 281-2 through 281-4 by a person under the
age of 18 shall be punishable according to §§ 938.17(2), 938.343,
938.344 and 938.345, Wis. Stats. Nothing in this section shall prevent
the Juvenile Officer, in his or her discretion, from referring cases
directly to the District Attorney's office.
§ 281-4 MONONA CODE § 281-6
1:310
§ 281-7. Truancy and school dropouts.
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by Wisconsin Statutes § 938.17(2),
the City of Monona Municipal Court is granted the dispositional
alternatives as outlined in Subsection B.
B. The following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are hereby specifically
adopted by reference for the dispositional authority of the Monona
Municipal Court:173
(1) Section 938.341.
(2) Section 938.342.
(3) Section 938.343.
(4) Section 938.344.
(5) Section 938.355.
A. Definitions. In this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
given:
DROPOUT — A child who ceased to attend school, does not attend
a public or private school, technical college or home-based private
education program on a full-time basis, has not graduated from high
school and does not have an acceptable excuse under § 118.15(1)(b) to
(d) or (3), Wis. Stats.
HABITUAL TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school without an
acceptable excuse under §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis. Stats., for part
or all of five or more days on which school is held during a school
semester.
TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable
excuse under §§ 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis. Stats., for part or all of any
day on which school is held during a school semester.
B. Habitual truancy. No person under 18 years of age shall be a habitual
truant from the school the person is supposed to be attending.
C. Dropout. No person who is at least 16 years of age but less than 18
years of age shall be a dropout.
D. Truancy. No person under the age of 18 years of age shall be a truant
from the school the person is supposed to be attending.
E. Dispositions, truancy, habitual truancy, and school dropout.
(1) Habitual truancy. If the Court finds that a person under 18 years of
age violates § 281-7B of this chapter, the Court shall enter an order
making one or more of the following dispositions:
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 281-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-7
1:311
(a) Suspension of the person's operating privilege for not less than
30 days nor more than one year. The Court may take
possession of any suspended license. If the Court takes
possession of a license, it shall destroy the license. The Court
shall forward to the Department of Transportation a notice
stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension.174
(b) Order the person to participate in counseling or a supervised
work program or other community service work as described
in § 938.34(5g), Wis. Stats. The costs of such counseling or
supervised work or community service program may be
assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the
person, or both.175
(c) Order the person to remain at home except during hours in
which the person is attending religious worship or a school
program, including travel time required to get to and from the
school program or place of worship. The order may permit a
person to leave his or her home if the person is accompanied by
a parent or guardian.
(d) Order the person to attend an educational program under
§ 938.34(7d), Wis. Stats.
(e) Order the Department of Workforce Development to revoke,
under § 103.72, Wis. Stats., a permit under § 103.70 Wis.
Stats., authorizing the employment of the person.
(f) Order the person to be placed in a teen court program if all of
the following conditions apply:
[1] The Chief Judge of the Judicial Administrative District has
approved a teen court program established in the person's
county of residence, and the judge determines
participation in the teen court program will likely benefit
the person and the community.
[2] The person admits or pleads no contest in open court, with
the person's parent, guardian or legal custodian present,
to the allegations the person violated the civil law or
ordinance.
[3] The person has not successfully completed participation in
a teen court program during the two years before the date
of the alleged civil law or ordinance violation.
(g) Order the person to attend school.
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 281-7 MONONA CODE § 281-7
1:312
§ 281-8. Contributing to truancy.
(h) Impose a forfeiture of not more than $500 plus costs, subject to
§ 938.37, Wis. Stats. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may
be assessed against the person, the parents or guardians of the
person, or both.
(i) Impose any other reasonable conditions consistent with
§ 118.163, Wis. Stats., including a curfew, restrictions as to
going to or remaining on specified premises and restrictions on
associating with other children or adults.
(j) Place the person under formal or informal supervision, as
described in § 938.34(2), Wis. Stats., for up to one year.
(k) Order the person's parent, guardian or legal custodian to
participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's or legal
custodian's own expense or to attend school with the person,
or both.
(2) School dropout. If the Court finds a person is subject to and has
violated § 281-7C of this chapter, the Court may suspend the
person's operating privilege until the person reaches the age of 18.
The Court may take possession of any suspended license. If the
Court takes possession of a license, it shall destroy the license. The
Court shall forward to the Department of Transportation a notice
stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension.
[Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(3) Truancy. If the Court finds a person under 18 years of age violated
§ 281-7D of this chapter, the Court shall enter an order making one
or more of the following dispositions:
(a) Order the person to attend school.
(b) Impose a forfeiture of not more than $50 plus costs for the first
violation, or a forfeiture of $100 plus costs for any second or
subsequent violation committed within 12 months of a previous
violation, subject to § 938.37, Wis. Stats., and subject to a
maximum cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than $500
for all violations committed during a school semester. All or
part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the
person, the parents or the guardian of the person, or both.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, any person 17 years of age or older
who, by any act or omission, knowingly encourages or contributes to
truancy, as defined under § 118.16(1)(c), Wis. Stats., of a person 17
years of age or under shall be subject to a forfeiture of up to $500.
B. Subsection A does not apply to a person who has under his or her
control a child who has been sanctioned under § 49.26(1)(h), Wis. Stats.
§ 281-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-8
1:313
§ 281-9. Sexting prohibited. [Added 8-6-2018 by Ord. No. 7-18-703]
C. An act or omission contributes to the truancy of a child, whether or not
the child is adjudged to be in need of protection or services, if the
natural and probable consequences of that act or omission would be to
cause the child to be truant.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
HARMFUL TO MINORS — Any reproduction, imitation,
characterization, description, exhibition, presentation, or
representation, of whatever kind or form, depicting nudity, sexual
conduct, or sexual excitement when it:
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing
of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple; or the depiction of covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. A mother's breastfeeding
of her baby does not under any circumstance constitute "nudity,"
irrespective of whether or not the nipple is covered during or incidental
to feeding.
(1) Predominantly appeals to a prurient, shameful, or morbid interest;
Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community
as a whole with respect to what is suitable material or conduct for
minors; and
(2)
Taken as a whole, is without serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific value for minors.
(3)
B. A minor commits the offense of sexting if he or she knowingly:
(1) Uses a computer, or any other device capable of electronic data
transmission or distribution, to transmit or distribute to another
minor any photograph or video of any person which depicts nudity,
as defined above, and is harmful to minors, as defined above.
(2) Possesses a photograph or video of any person which depicts
nudity, as defined above, and is harmful to minors, as defined
above. A minor does not violate this paragraph if all of the following
apply:
(a) The minor did not solicit the photograph or video.
(b) The minor did not transmit or distribute the photograph or a
video to a third party other than a parent, school official or law
enforcement official.
§ 281-8 MONONA CODE § 281-9
1:314
Chapter 296
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
License Review Committee — See § 18-13. Zoning — See Ch. 480.
§ 296-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any place of business where private
massage therapy or bodywork therapy is practiced, used or made available
as a principal use of the premises.
MASSAGE THERAPIST — A person who practices, administers or uses or
offers to practice, administer or use massage therapy or bodywork therapy
for compensation.176
MASSAGE THERAPY or BODYWORK THERAPY — The science and healing
art that uses manual actions and adjunctive therapies to palpate and
manipulate the soft tissue of the human body in order to improve
circulation, reduce tension, relieve soft tissue pain, or increase flexibility.
"Massage therapy" or "bodywork therapy" includes determining whether
manual actions and adjunctive therapies are appropriate or
contraindicated, or whether a referral to another health care practitioner
is appropriate. "Massage therapy" or "bodywork therapy" does not include
making a medical, physical therapy, or chiropractic diagnosis.
§ 296-2. License required.
(3) Solicits the transmission or distribution of any text,
correspondence, message, photograph or video from another minor
that would itself be prohibited under this section.
C. Any person who shall violate this section shall pay a forfeiture as set
forth in the forfeiture schedule.
A. Establishment. No person, corporation or other legal entity shall cause
or permit the operation of a massage establishment within the City
without first having obtained a license. A separate license shall be
required for each such establishment.
B. Massage. No person shall administer massage therapy or bodywork
therapy within the City without holding a valid certification as a
massage therapist or bodywork therapist from the State of Wisconsin.
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 281-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-2
1:315
§ 296-3. Application for license.
Establishment. All applications shall include:
C. Applicants for a massage establishment license must be 18 years of age
or over.
D. No license shall be granted for any establishment that is part of, or
internally accessible to, a residence, whether by common hallway or
otherwise, nor for any room or rooms in any hotel or motel.
A. The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment.
B. For an individual or for each person of a partnership or agent of a
corporation:
(1) Full name and present residential address.
(2) Date of birth.
(3) Whether a similar license had been revoked or suspended and, if
so, the reason therefor and the location thereof.
(4) Whether convicted of any crime or ordinance violation other than
traffic offenses within the past five years and, if so, a listing of the
convictions and the locations thereof.
C. If the applicant is a corporation, the full names and residential
addresses of each officer and director and shareholder of such
corporation, together with the extent of the ownership of each, and a
statement whether such officer, director or stockholder holds office or
stock in any other corporation conducting a similar business in the
State of Wisconsin. Such application shall be made by an agent
registered as such who shall be a resident of the City of Monona.
D. All telephone numbers of the proposed establishment.
E. The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and State of Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services credential numbers of
all persons employed by the applicant to perform massages or
bodywork at the proposed establishment at the time of application.
F. The application shall contain a statement signed by the applicant and
each individual of a partnership or corporation that all information
contained therein is true and correct.
G. The nonrefundable fee in the amount set forth in the City's Fee,
Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule.177
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 296-2 MONONA CODE § 296-4
1:316
§ 296-4. Investigation of application.178
The City Clerk shall refer the application to the Police Department, which
shall investigate and determine whether the applicant and the
establishment proposed to be licensed conform to the requirements of this
chapter and other applicable laws and regulations. The Police Department
shall refer the application to the Building Inspector, who shall investigate
the premises proposed to be licensed to determine whether the premises
conforms to the requirements of this chapter, the rules and regulations
of the Department of Health Services, and any other applicable laws and
ordinances.
§ 296-5. Grant of license.
Issuance or denial of massage establishment licenses.
A. Issuance. The City Clerk shall grant a massage establishment license if
the City Clerk finds the application to be complete, the application fee
has been paid in full, the applicant meets the qualifications for such
license, and the establishment and proposed premises conform to the
requirements of this chapter. Such licenses shall be issued and
numbered in the order they are granted and shall give the applicant's
name and address and the date of the expiration of such license.
B. Denial.
(1) If the application is denied by the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall, in
writing, inform the applicant of the denial, the reasons therefor,
and of the opportunity to request a reconsideration of the
application by the License Review Committee.
(2) The License Review Committee is the official hearing body.
(3) Recommendations for denial from the Police Department shall be
accompanied by written comments outlining reasons for the
recommendation. These comments should be entered on the
license application.
(4) A representative from the Police Department should attend the
License Review Committee meeting at which denials are discussed.
(5) The applicant may have letters of reference (letter to state who this
letter is from) and/or witnesses. The applicant may be represented
by legal counsel at the License Review Committee meeting.
(6) At such reconsideration meeting, the applicant may present
evidence and testimony as to why the license should be granted.
(7) If upon reconsideration the Committee again denies the
application, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant in writing of
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 296-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-5
1:317
§ 296-6. Regulation of massage establishments.
the reasons therefor. An applicant who is denied any license upon
reconsideration of the matter may apply to the Common Council for
an appeal of the License Review Committee denial.
C. Because a license is a privilege, the issuance of which is a right granted
solely by the City, the License Review Committee reserves the right to
consider the severity and facts and circumstances of an offense when
making the determination to deny or not renew a license.
D. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on the 30th day of
June following their issuance.
E. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred between
locations or persons, sold or be subject to transfer of corporate assets
or change of corporate officers or directors.
A. There shall be on the licensed premises at all times a massage therapist
properly licensed pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes. The licensee of the
establishment shall personally supervise the conduct of the business
thereon and shall not violate or permit any technician or employee in
his or her employ to violate any provision of this chapter. A violation of
any provision of this chapter by an officer, employee or technician shall
constitute a violation by the licensee of the establishment.
B. No alcohol beverages shall be sold or used on the premises.
C. No licensed premises shall be open for business except between 8:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
D. All licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition and in compliance with all City ordinances and state laws and
regulations.
E. Only massage therapists validly licensed pursuant to Wisconsin
Statutes shall be employed as massage therapists by the
establishment.179
F. The practice of all massage therapists employed by the establishment
shall be limited to the licensed premises.
G. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the
premises.
H. The establishment shall provide a waiting area for patrons separate
from any area wherein massages are given. There shall be direct access
to this area from the main entrance or from the hallway connected only
to the main entrance.
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 296-5 MONONA CODE § 296-6
1:318
§ 296-7. Inspection of licensed premises.
The licensed premises shall be open at all times to inspection by the
police officers of the City or the Health Officer or Building Inspector for
the purpose of determining whether the premises and the technicians and
employees are complying with the provisions of this section.
§ 296-8. Suspension and revocation of license.
Any license issued hereunder may be suspended by the Chief of Police or the
Mayor for violation of any provision of this chapter. Upon such suspension,
the licensee shall be given notice of the reasons for the suspension or
revocation and opportunity to be heard before the License Review
Committee for the purpose of determining whether such suspension or
revocation shall be removed or whether the license shall be suspended
or revoked. Any party aggrieved by a decision of the License Review
Committee may appeal such action to the Common Council.
Chapter 303
MOBILE HOMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 480.
§ 303-1. Monthly permit fee; limitations on parking.
I. The operator or a licensed manager shall be present on the premises at
all times during hours of operation and shall be responsible for the
operation of the establishment.
J. The establishment shall keep current records of the names and
addresses of its massage therapists, agents, managers and employees
and the date of employment and termination of each. Such records shall
be open to inspection by any of the personnel listed in this subsection
above;
K. The establishment shall report any change of fact required on the
application form and all personnel changes to the City Clerk within 10
days after such change.
A. There is hereby imposed on each owner of a nonexempt, occupied
mobile home in the City of Monona a monthly permit fee as determined
in accordance with § 66.0435(3), Wis. Stats., which is hereby adopted
by reference and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. It
shall be the full and complete responsibility of the licensee to collect the
proper amount from each mobile home owner. Licensees shall pay to
the City Treasurer such monthly permit fees on or before the 10th day
§ 296-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-1
1:319
§ 303-2. Parks to be licensed.
of the month following the month for which such fees are due, in
accordance with the terms of this chapter and such regulations as the
City Treasurer may reasonably promulgate.
(1) Licensees of mobile home parks and owners of land on which are
parked any occupied, nonexempt mobile homes shall furnish
information to the City Treasurer and Assessor on such homes
added to their park or land within five days after arrival of such
home on forms furnished by the City Treasurer in accordance with
§ 66.0435(3)(c) and (e), Wis. Stats. Failure to comply with this
subsection shall be subject to a forfeiture of not more than $25.
Each failure to report is a separate offense.180
(2) Occupants or owners of nonexempt mobile homes parked outside of
a mobile home park shall remit such fees directly to the City
Treasurer as provided in Subsection A. It shall be the full and
complete responsibility of the licensee of a mobile home park to
collect such fees from each occupied nonexempt mobile home
therein and to remit such fees to the City Treasurer as provided in
Subsection A.
B. It shall be the full and complete responsibility of the licensees of a
mobile home park to collect such cash deposits from each occupied,
nonexempt mobile home therein and to remit such deposits to the City
Treasurer.
A. No person shall establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be
established, operated or maintained, upon any property owned, leased
or controlled by him or her, a mobile home park within the City, without
having first obtained a license for each such park from the Council
pursuant to this section. Such license shall be issued as of July 1 of each
year and shall expire on June 30 following the date of issuance but may
be renewed under the provisions of this section for additional periods of
one year. Licenses for mobile home parks not in existence or not
operating on July 1 may be granted, subject to the provisions of this
section, at any time during the licensing year upon payment of such
proportion of the annual fee provided herein as the number of months
or fraction of a month remaining until June 30 bears to 12. Licenses
issued under this section may be transferred from owner to owner with
consent of the Council upon payment of a ten-dollar transfer fee.
B. The application for such license or renewal thereof shall be filed with
the City Clerk no later than May 15 and shall be accompanied by a fee
of $100 for each 50 spaces or fractional part thereof in the existing or
proposed park, but no less than $100, and a surety bond from a
company licensed to do business in the State of Wisconsin in the sum of
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 303-1 MONONA CODE § 303-2
1:320
§ 303-3. Inspection required.
$1,000. In lieu of the bond, the applicant may post a one-thousanddollar
cash deposit. The bond or cash deposit shall guarantee the
collection by the licensee of the monthly permit fee provided for in
§ 303-1 (see § 66.0435(3), Wis. Stats.).
C. The application for a license or a renewal thereof shall be made on
forms furnished by the City Clerk and shall include the name and
address of the owner in fee of the tract and a legal description of the
premises proposed for licensing. If the application is made by someone
other than the fee owner of the premises, the application shall contain a
statement from the owner that the applicant is authorized to construct
or maintain a mobile home park on the premises proposed for licensing.
Each application shall be accompanied by two copies of the park plan
showing the following items:
(1) The precise area to be used for mobile home purposes.
(2) Roadways and driveways.
(3) Location and up-to-date dimensions of units or pads for mobile
homes.
(4) Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets,
washrooms, laundries and utility rooms to be used by occupants of
units.
(5) Method and plan for sewage disposal.
(6) Method and plan for garbage and refuse disposal.
(7) Plan for water supply.
(8) Plan for provision of electric to units.
(9) If the existing or proposed park is designated to serve independent
mobile home units, such plans shall clearly set forth the location of
all sewer and water pipes and connections.
A. Annual inspection. No mobile home park license shall be issued or
renewed until the City Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police, Chief of the
Fire Department and Building Inspector of such application, and these
officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application and the
premises to determine whether the applicant and the premises on
which mobile homes will be or are located comply with the regulations,
ordinances and laws applicable thereto. These officials shall furnish to
the City Clerk and the Council in writing by May 1 of each year the
information derived from such investigation and a statement as to
whether the applicant and the premises meet the requirements of the
department for whom the officer is certifying. No permit shall be issued
or renewed unless each official named above has certified that the
requirements of his or her department have been met. For the purpose
§ 303-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-3
1:321
Chapter 312
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 7.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 263.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 335.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 342.
of making inspections and securing enforcement, such officials or their
authorized agents may enter on any premises on which a mobile home
is located or about to be located to inspect the same and all
accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable time.
B. Inspections. The Chief of Police, Fire Chief and Building Inspector are
hereby authorized and directed to inspect mobile home parks not less
than once in every twelve-month period to determine whether the
conditions therein pose a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the
occupants of the park or the inhabitants of the City and that the
activities, structures and conditions comply with the provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable laws of the City and state. If upon such
inspections, any violation of the ordinances of the City or laws of the
state or any threat to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or of
the public is found, the inspecting officer shall notify the park permittee
in writing of the nature of the violation and order correction of the
offending condition within a time fixed by the order, but not less than 10
days from the date of the order. If such order affects an individual
mobile home, a copy of such order shall also be served on the owner of
such mobile home. Such order shall be served by registered mail or by a
law enforcement officer of the City. If the park operator fails to comply
with such order within the time stated, a citation for violation of this
chapter shall be issued to the operator, and the offending condition
shall be abated by the City and the cost thereof levied as a special tax
against the property under § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.181
C. Duty of occupants. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile
home park to give the owner or the owner's agent or employee access
to any part of a mobile home or the site on which located at reasonable
times for the purpose of making repairs or alterations necessary to
comply with any order of the Chief of Police, Chief of the Fire
Department or Building Inspector issued under this section.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 303-3 MONONA CODE § 312-1
1:322
§ 312-1. Public nuisances prohibited.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any public nuisance within the City of Monona.
§ 312-2. Public nuisance defined.
A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property
which shall continue for such length of time as to:
§ 312-3. Chronic nuisance property. [Added 7-7-2008 by Ord. No.
5-08-580; amended 7-15-2013 by Ord. No. 7-13-647]
A. Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or
safety of the public;
B. In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property;
C. Greatly offend the public morals or decency;
D. Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct
or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable
body of water or other public way or the use of public property.
A. Findings. The Monona Common Council finds that certain property
within the City receives and requires more than the general, acceptable
level of police services and Building Inspection Department services,
places an undue and inappropriate burden on City of Monona
taxpayers, and constitutes a public nuisance. Nuisance activity
contributes to the general decay of an affected neighborhood and
negatively impacts law-abiding residents in these neighborhoods. This
section is enacted to encourage property owners and persons in charge,
as defined below, to recognize their responsibility to ensure that
activities occurring on their properties conform to the law and do not
unduly burden the City's police and building inspection resources and
to provide a mechanism for the City to take action against property
owners and/or persons in charge who fail to ensure properties they own
or control do not require a disproportionate level of police and building
inspection resources to be devoted to such property. This section
provides a method for Police and the Department of Building Inspection
to use in a progressive manner when working with property owners and
persons in charge to abate nuisance activities occurring on their
properties. Therefore, the Common Council determines that the City
will charge the owners of such properties and/or persons in charge with
the costs associated with abating nuisance activity at properties where
nuisance activities chronically occur. This section is not intended to
discourage crime victims or a person in legitimate need of police
services from requesting them. This section does not affect a property
owner's duty to comply with Chapter 225, Fair Housing, of the Code of
the City of Monona, nor does it affect a property owner's duty to comply
§ 312-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-3
1:323
with all other laws governing residential tenancies which are contained
in the Wisconsin Statutes and the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The City of Monona Police Department's Chief of
Police or designee.
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY — A property that meets any of the
following criteria:
DIRECTOR OF BUILDING INSPECTION — The City of Monona Building
Inspector.
ENFORCEMENT ACTION — Any of the following: The physical arrest
of an individual(s), the issuance of a citation for a law violation and/or
referral of charges by the police or the Building Inspection Department
to the City Attorney or District Attorney for prosecution.
NUISANCE ACTIVITIES — Any of the following activities, behaviors or
conduct:
Property has generated three or more calls for police services that
have resulted in enforcement action for nuisance activities on three
separate days within a ninety-day period and/or has generated five
or more cases for building inspection from at least five building
inspections occurring within a one-year period, with such cases
resulting in enforcement action. Three or more calls for police
services resulting in enforcement action for nuisance activities
includes enforcement action taken against any person associated
with the property while at or within 200 feet of the property
for a nuisance activity; or [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
9-17-689]
(1)
Is a property for which a Dane County court of law has determined
that, pursuant to a search warrant request, probable cause exists
that manufacture, distribution or delivery of a controlled substance
has occurred on or in association with the property within 30 days
prior to the date of the search warrant application; or
(2)
Is a property which has had one enforcement action associated
with the property resulting from the manufacture, delivery or
distribution of a controlled substance(s), as defined in Ch. 961, Wis.
Stats.
(3)
(1) An act of harassment as defined in § 947.013, Wis. Stats.
Disorderly conduct as defined in § 335-9 of this Code or § 947.01,
Wis. Stats.
(2)
(3) Crimes of violence as defined in Ch. 940, Wis. Stats.
§ 312-3 MONONA CODE § 312-3
1:324
Resisting or obstructing an officer as prohibited by § 946.41, Wis.
Stats.
(4)
(5) Indecent exposure as prohibited by § 944.20(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
Damage to property as prohibited by § 335-1 of this Code or
§ 943.01, Wis. Stats.
(6)
The production or creation of noises disturbing the peace, as
prohibited by § 335-8A of this Code.
(7)
(8) Discharge of a firearm as prohibited by § 335-3A of this Code.
Crimes involving illegal possession of firearms as defined in
§§ 941.23, 941.26, 941.28, 941.29 and 948.60, Wis. Stats.
(9)
Trespass to land as defined in § 943.13, Wis. Stats., or criminal
trespass to dwelling as defined in § 943.14, Wis. Stats, or unlawful
trespass as prohibited in § 335-23 of this Code.
(10)
(11)Obstructing a street or sidewalk, as prohibited by § 335-6.
(12)Theft as defined in § 943.20, Wis. Stats.
(13)Arson as defined in § 943.02, Wis. Stats.
(14)Depositing rubbish as prohibited by § 312-4C of this chapter.182
(15)Keeping a place of prostitution as defined in or § 944.34, Wis. Stats.
Loitering for the purposes of prostitution as prohibited by § 335-13
of this Code.
(16)
Loitering for purposes of soliciting prostitutes, as prohibited by
§ 335-7 of this Code.
(17)
(18)Prostitution as prohibited by § 944.30, Wis. Stats.
(19)Soliciting prostitutes as prohibited by § 944.32, Wis. Stats.
Keeping, or aiding or assisting in keeping, or being an inmate of
any disorderly house, as prohibited in § 312-1 of this chapter.
(20)
Possessing an open container which contains alcohol beverages or
consuming alcohol beverages upon any public street as prohibited
by § 272-15M of this Code.
(21)
Selling, offering for sale or giving away of any intoxicating liquors
or fermented malt beverages without a license as provided in
§ 272-3 of this Code or § 125.04(1), Wis. Stats.
(22)
Possession, manufacture, distribution or delivery of a controlled
substance or related offenses as defined in Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
(23)
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 312-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-3
1:325
PERSON — Any natural person, agent, association, firm, partnership,
corporation or other entity capable of owning, occupying or using
property in the City of Monona.
PERSON ASSOCIATED WITH — Any person who, whenever engaged
in a nuisance activity, has entered, patronized, visited or attempted to
enter, patronize or visit, or waited to enter, patronize or visit, a property
or person present on a property, including without limitation any officer,
director, customer, agent, employee or any independent contractor of a
property, person in charge, or owner of a property.
PERSON IN CHARGE — Any person, in actual or constructive
possession of a property, including but not limited to an owner, lessee
or occupant of property under his or her ownership or control.
PROPERTY — A place of a commercial building, an abode, a residence,
a house or multiple-dwelling unit for one or more persons, including
lodging houses, hotels, motels and tourist rooming houses, and
associated common areas, yards and parking lots. In the case of
multiple-dwelling units, "property," as used in this section, may consist
of any single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for
one or more persons, including provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking and sanitation.
(24)Maintaining a drug dwelling as defined in § 961.42, Wis. Stats.
(25) Illegal gambling as defined in § 945.02, Wis. Stats.
Owning, keeping or harboring a dangerous animal, as defined in
§ 159-6 of this Code.
(26)
(27)Violations of the Minimum Housing Code.183
C. Procedure.
(1) Upon finding that a property meets the definition of a chronic
nuisance property, the Chief of Police or the Director of Building
Inspection may declare the property a chronic nuisance property.
The Chief of Police or the Director of Building Inspection shall
provide written notice of his or her determination to the property
owner identified by the City of Monona Assessor's records for that
property and/or persons in charge. The notice shall be deemed
delivered if sent either by first class mail to the property owner's or
person in charge's last known address or delivered in person to him
or her. If he or she cannot be located, the notice shall be deemed to
be properly delivered if a copy of it is left at the property owner's or
person in charge's place of business with the person who is
apparently in charge of the office, if the property owner is a
corporate entity; or if the property owner is a natural person, at his
or her usual place of abode in the presence of some competent
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 312-3 MONONA CODE § 312-3
1:326
member of the family at least 14 years of age or a competent adult
currently residing there and who shall be informed of the contents
of the notice. If a current address cannot be located, it shall be
deemed sufficient if a copy of the notice is sent by first class mail
to the last known address of the owner as identified by the records
of the City Assessor or to the person in charge at the last known
address on file with the City. The notice shall contain the following
information:
(a) Street address, parcel number or a legal description sufficient
to identify the property.
(b) A concise statement, including a description of the relevant
activities supporting the determination that the property is a
chronic nuisance property.
(c) A statement that the owner or person in charge shall
immediately notify the Chief of Police or Director of Building
Inspection of any change in address to ensure receipt of future
notices.
(d) A statement that the cost of future enforcement may be
assessed as a special charge against the property and/or
charged to the person in charge.
(e) A statement that the owner and/or person in charge shall,
within 10 days of receipt of the notice, respond to the Chief of
Police or the Director of Building Inspection either with an
appeal or to propose a written course of action to abate the
nuisance activities. If the owner and/or person in charge
responds to the notice in Subsection C(1) with a nuisance
abatement proposal, the Chief of Police or the Director of
Building Inspection may accept, reject or work with the owner
to modify the proposal at his or her discretion. The plan is
acceptable if it can reasonably be expected to result in
abatement of the nuisance activities described in the notice
within 60 days.
(2) Whenever the Chief of Police or the Director of Building Inspection
determines that any of the following have occurred: a) a property
owner and/or person in charge has failed to respond to the notice in
Subsection C(1); or b) enforcement action for an additional
nuisance activity has occurred at a property for which notice has
been issued pursuant to Subsection C(1), and this enforcement
action has occurred not less than 15 days after the notice has been
issued; or c) a course of action submitted pursuant to Subsection
C(1)(e) has not been completed, then the Chief of Police and/or the
Director of Building Inspection may calculate the cost of
enforcement to abate this and any subsequent nuisance activities
and may refer such cost to the Finance Director so that the cost
may be billed to the property owner and/or person in charge. The
§ 312-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-3
1:327
Chief of Police and/or the Director of Building Inspection shall
notify the property owner and/or person in charge of the decision
to refer the cost of enforcement. Delivery of this notice, along with
a copy of the Chief's or Building Inspection Director's referral letter
to the Finance Director, shall be made as set forth in Subsection
C(1). The notice shall contain:
(a) The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
(b) A statement that the Chief of Police and/or the Director of
Building Inspection has referred the cost of enforcement to the
Finance Director with a concise description of the nuisance
activities and the relevant sections of the ordinances.
(c) Notice of the property owner's and/or person in charge's right
to appeal pursuant to Subsection E.
D. Penalties and remedies.
(1) Cost recovery. The Chief of Police and the Director of Building
Inspection shall keep an accurate account of the cost of
enforcement and shall report it to the Finance Director. The
Finance Director shall annually prepare a statement of
enforcement expenses for each property reported by the Chief of
Police and/or the Director of Building Inspection and shall furnish
the statement to the City Clerk. The Clerk shall enter the amount in
the tax roll as a special charge against the lot or parcel of land
occupied by the property, and the charge shall be collected in all
respects like other taxes upon real estate. An administrative fee as
set forth in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule shall be
added to the special charge against the benefited property.
Alternatively, the cost may be charged to the person in charge if he
or she is determined to be responsible for the nuisance activities
pursuant to Subsection D(3) below.184
(2) Forfeiture. Any person who maintains a chronic nuisance property
in violation of this chapter after receipt of the notice provided in
Subsection C(1) may be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100
nor more than $1,000 for each enforcement action.
(3) No person or property shall be subject to the cost-recovery and
forfeiture provisions of Subsection D(1) or (2), unless the Chief of
Police or Director of Building Inspection determines the nuisance
activities which cause the property to constitute a chronic nuisance
property were due, in whole or in part, to an act or omission of said
person or a person in charge of the property.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 312-3 MONONA CODE § 312-3
1:328
§ 312-4. Public nuisances affecting health.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such enumeration
shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the
definition of § 312-2:
E. Appeal. Appeal of the determination of the Chief of Police and/or the
Director of Building Inspection pursuant to either Subsection C(1), or
the action of the Finance Director imposing special charges pursuant to
Subsection D(1) against the property or person in charge may be
submitted in accordance with Chapter 7, Administrative Review, of the
Code of the City of Monona.
F. Summary abatement. The Director of Building Inspection is authorized
to cause the abatement, including summary abatement, of any nuisance
found on any property, according to the procedure prescribed in
§ 312-7B.
G. Injunction. This section may be enforced by injunction.
H. Abatement in accordance with state law. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the City
or its officials in accordance with the laws of the state or other
provisions of this Code.
I. When nuisance is deemed abated. The public nuisance created by a
chronic nuisance property shall be deemed abated when no
enforcement action to address nuisance activities occurs for a period of
six consecutive months from the date stated on the notice declaring the
premise a chronic nuisance premises and/or there are no building
inspection cases generated for a period of six consecutive months from
the date stated on the notice declaring the premises a chronic nuisance
premises.
A. Adulterated food. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome
food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public.
B. Unburied carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended
for human consumption or foods which are not buried or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death.
C. Breeding places for vermin, etc. Accumulations of decayed animal or
vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing
material, scrap metal or any material whatsoever in which flies,
mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed.
D. Stagnant water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other
insects can multiply.
E. Garbage cans. Garbage cans which are not flytight.
§ 312-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-4
1:329
§ 312-5. Public nuisances offending morals and decency.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and
decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other
F. Noxious weeds. All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation
in violation of this Code.
G. Water pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream,
lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial
wastes or other substances.
H. Noxious odors, etc. Any use of property, substances or things within the
City causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or
disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to
the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoys, discomforts,
injures or inconveniences the health of any appreciable number of
persons within the City.
I. Street pollution. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or
unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter,
alley, sidewalk or public place within the City.
J. Animals at large. All animals running at large.
K. Accumulations of refuse. Accumulations of old cans, lumber, firewood
and other refuse.185
(1) Firewood should be neatly stacked and may be stacked not closer
than two feet to any lot line and not higher than six feet from grade,
except adjacent to a fence where firewood can be stacked against
the fence as high as the fence. "Fence," as used in this section, shall
not include hedges and other vegetation.
(2) All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be
promptly and properly disposed of and shall not be allowed to
remain on the premises.
(3) Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of
transmitting disease to healthy trees and woodpiles that harbor or
are infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin are public
nuisances and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of this
Code.
L. Air pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes,
gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the limits of the City in such
quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities
or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property.
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 312-4 MONONA CODE § 312-5
1:330
nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition
of § 312-2:
§ 312-6. Public nuisances affecting peace and safety.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting
public peace or safety coming within the definition of § 312-2:
A. Disorderly houses. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill
fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to
for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or
gambling.
B. Gambling devices. All gambling devices and slot machines, except as
permitted by state law.
C. Unlicensed sale of liquor and beer. All places where intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed,
bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as
provided for in the ordinances of the City.
D. Continuous violation of City ordinances. Any place or premises within
the City where City ordinances or state laws relating to public health,
safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly
and intentionally violated.
E. Illegal drinking. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of
drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of
the laws of the State of Wisconsin or ordinances of the City.
A. Signs, billboards, etc. All signs and billboards, awnings and other
similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or
places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to
endanger the public safety.
B. Illegal buildings. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation
of the provisions of the ordinances of the City relating to materials and
manner of construction of buildings and structures within the City.
C. Unauthorized traffic signs. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or
devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or
railway crossing which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official
traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which, because of color,
location, brilliance or manner of operation, interfere with the
effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal.
D. Obstruction of intersections. All trees, hedges, billboards or other
obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets,
alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when
approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
§ 312-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-6
1:331
§ 312-7. Abatement of public nuisances.186
E. Tree limbs. All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less
than 10 feet above the surface thereof and all limbs which project over
a public street less than 14 feet above the surface thereof.
F. Dangerous trees. All trees which are a menace to public safety or are
the cause of substantial annoyance to the general public.
G. Fireworks. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws
of the State of Wisconsin and ordinances of the City.
H. Dilapidated buildings. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or
out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit
for human use.
I. Wires over streets. All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds
which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface thereof.
J. Noisy animals or fowl. The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl
which, by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or
making of other noises, shall greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood
or any considerable number of persons within the City.
K. Obstructions of streets; excavations. All obstructions of streets, alleys,
sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same,
except as permitted by the ordinances of the City or which, although
made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for
an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has
been accomplished, or which do not conform to the permit.
L. Open excavations. All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or
unused basements accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
M. Abandoned refrigerators. All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from
which the doors and other covers have not been removed or which are
not equipped with a device for opening from the inside.
N. Flammable liquids. Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances
of the City or laws of the state relating to the storage of flammable
liquids.
O. Unremoved snow. All snow and ice not removed or sprinkled with ashes,
sawdust, sand or other chemical removers, as provided in this Code.
P. Yahara Cove Boardwalk at River Place: the operation of bicycles,
skateboards and in-line skates.
A. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the Building
Inspector to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Weed
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 312-6 MONONA CODE § 312-7
1:332
Commissioner shall have concurrent jurisdiction to enforce the
provisions of §§ 263-4, 263-5 and 263-6. Such officers shall make
periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure that
such provisions are not violated. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
provision of this chapter may be enforced by the City Administrator
and City employees designated by the Administrator to make such
inspections and reports. No action shall be taken under this section to
abate a public nuisance unless an officer shall have inspected or caused
to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and
has determined that a nuisance does in fact exist.
B. Summary abatement.
(1) Notice to owner. If the inspecting officer or agent determines that a
public nuisance exists within the City and that there is a great and
immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or
decency, he or she shall immediately report such determination to
the City Administrator, and the City Administrator may direct the
Chief of Police to serve notice on the person causing, permitting or
maintaining such nuisance or upon the owner or occupant of the
premises where such nuisance is caused, permitted or maintained
and to post a copy of said notice on the premises. Notice may be
served by the inspecting officer or an authorized deputy on the
person causing, maintaining or permitting such nuisance or on the
owner or occupant of the premises where such nuisance is caused,
maintained or permitted, and a copy of such notice shall be posted
on the premises. Such notice shall direct the person causing,
maintaining or permitting such nuisance or the owner or occupant
of the premises to abate or remove such nuisance within a period
not less than 24 hours or greater than seven days and shall state
that, unless such nuisance is so abated, the City will cause the same
to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner,
occupant or person causing, maintaining or permitting the
nuisance, as the case may be.
(2) Abatement by City. If the nuisance is not abated within the time
provided or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance
cannot be found, the officer having the duty of enforcement shall
cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance.
C. Nonsummary abatement.
(1) Order to abate nuisance. If the inspecting officer shall determine
that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the
nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten imminent danger
to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he/she shall
issue an order reciting the existence of a public nuisance and
requiring the owner or occupant of the premises to remove or
abate the condition described in the order within the time period
specified therein. The order shall be served personally on the
owner of the building as well as the occupant, if different from the
§ 312-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-7
1:333
§ 312-8. Cost of abatement. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
9-17-689]
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the City shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner,
such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
§ 312-9. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
owner and applicable to the described nuisance, or at the option of
the inspecting officer the notice may be mailed to the last known
address of the person to be served by registered mail with return
receipt. If the owner or the occupant cannot be served, the order
may be served by posting it on the main entrance of the premises
and by publishing as a class 3 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. The
time limit specified in the order runs from the date of service or
publication.
(2) Abatement by City. If the owner or occupant fails or refuses to
comply within the time period prescribed, the inspecting officer
shall enter upon the premises and cause the nuisance to be
removed or abated, and the City shall recover the expenses
incurred thereby from the owner or occupant of the premises or
from the person who has caused or permitted the nuisance.
(3) Remedy from order. Any person affected by such order shall, within
30 days of service or publication of the order, apply to the circuit
court for an order restraining the City and the inspecting officer
from entering on the premises and abating or removing the
nuisance or be forever barred. The court shall determine the
reasonableness of the order for abatement of the nuisance.
D. Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the City or its
officials in accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin or under
any other provision of this Code applicable to a particular type of
nuisance. No action taken to abate a nuisance shall preclude an action
seeking a forfeiture as provided in § 312-9 of this chapter. An action
may be commenced by citation issued by the Chief of Police, the Fire
Chief, Building Inspector or City Administrator.
E. Court order. Except where necessary under Subsection C, no officer
hereunder shall use force to obtain access to private property to abate a
public nuisance, but shall request permission to enter upon private
property if such premises are occupied and, if such permission is
denied, shall apply to any court having jurisdiction for an order
assisting the abatement of the public nuisance.
§ 312-7 MONONA CODE § 312-9
1:334
§ 312-10. Regulation of police alarm systems; false alarms. [Added
5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 5-19-716]
A. Enforcement. The Chief of Police, Fire Chief, City Engineer and
Building Inspector, and their authorized designees, shall enforce those
provisions of this chapter that come within the jurisdiction of their
offices, and they shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon
complaint to ensure that such provisions are not violated. No action
shall be taken under § 312-7 to abate a public nuisance unless the
officer has inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the
nuisance is alleged to exist and is satisfied that a nuisance does, in fact,
exist.
B. General penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code.
A. Prohibited. No person shall permit an alarm system to repeatedly emit
false signals.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any system, device or mechanism which, when
activated, transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video or other
form of message to an alarm-system-monitoring company or some other
number or emits an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen
by persons outside the protected premises or transmits a signal beyond
the premises in some other fashion, except a medical alert alarm.
FALSE SIGNAL — A signal which is emitted by an alarm system which
is not the result of an intrusion by persons, or a nonfire emergency.
A signal is emitted for the purpose of this section when it is directly
transmitted to the Police Department or transmitted to any person who
subsequently reports such signal to the Police Department.
OWNER — The person or legal entity that owns the property from
which the false signal is emitted, except that if the premises are leased
or rented, the lessee or occupant of the property or part thereof from
which the false signal is emitted shall be deemed the owner.
C. Responsibility for operation of alarm systems.
(1) Upon a finding that a signal from an alarm system is a false signal,
the Police Department shall notify the building owner of the false
signal. It shall then be the responsibility of the owner to secure the
building and prevent additional false signals. A second or
subsequent false alarm within a twelve-hour period shall constitute
a violation of this section and the building owner shall be liable for
such violation.
(2) No building owner shall permit an alarm system to emit more than
three false signals during any sixty-day period. A fourth false signal
§ 312-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-10
1:335
Chapter 321
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcohol beverages and licenses — See Ch.
272.
Animals — See Ch. 159.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 335.
§ 321-1. Park regulations.
during a sixty-day period shall constitute a violation of this section
and the building owner shall be liable for such violation.
D. Misuse of alarm system. No person shall use an alarm system in the
absence of an actual emergency situation, which results in the response
of police personnel; or use an alarm system rather than a telephone to
summon police personnel in any situation where such telephone use
would not create an immediate threat to the safety of the caller or other
persons.
E. Exceptions. None of the provisions of this section shall apply to any
official governmental body or subdivision thereof which owns, operates
and maintains its own alarm equipment.
F. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to penalties set forth in the Fees, Fines and Penalties
Schedule.187
A. Purpose and definition.
(1) In order to protect the parks, parkways, recreational facilities and
conservancy areas within the City of Monona from injury, damage
or desecration, these regulations are enacted.
(2) As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK — Includes all grounds, structures and watercourses which
are or may be located within any area dedicated to the public use
as a park, parkway, recreation facility, playground, swimming pool
or conservancy area in the City.
B. Specific regulations.
(1) Littering prohibited. No person shall litter, dump or deposit any
rubbish, refuse, earth or other material in any park.
(2) Use of amplification equipment.
187. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 312-10 MONONA CODE § 321-1
1:336
(a) No person shall use large amplification equipment in a City
park or parking lot located within, contiguous or adjacent to
any City park except upon permit granted by the Parks and
Recreation Director. The Parks and Recreation Director may
impose such restrictions on the use of amplification equipment
as will prevent disturbance of others using the parks or owners
of property adjacent to the City parks. If the event is open to
the general public, permission to use large amplification
devices must be secured from the Park and Recreation Board.
(b) The use of personal amplification devices is permitted in City
parks between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(3) Bill posting. No person shall post, paste, fasten, paint or attach any
placard, bill, notice, sign or advertising matter upon any structure,
tree or other natural object in any park, except park regulations
and other signs authorized by the Parks and Recreation Director or
designated committee thereof.
(4) Throwing stones and missiles prohibited. No person shall throw
stones or other missiles in or into any park, except as authorized in
advance by the Parks and Recreation Director.
(5) Removal of park equipment prohibited. No person shall remove
benches, bleachers, seats, tables or other park equipment from any
park, except that such items may be moved from park to park if
authorized by the Parks and Recreation Director.
(6) Trapping. "Trapping," when used in this section, includes the
taking, or the attempting to take, of any wild animal by means of
setting or operating any device, mechanism or contraption that is
designed, built or made to close upon, hold fast or otherwise
capture a wild animal or animals; live traps on a person's property
are excluded. The trapping of wild animals is hereby prohibited in
City parks, unless authorized by the Common Council, upon the
recommendation of the Park and Recreation Board. This subsection
does not prohibit fishing.
(7) Making of fires. No person shall start, tend or maintain a fire
except in personal grills or designated fireplaces, except as
authorized in advance by the Fire Marshal. Unburned fuel and
ashes shall be disposed of in such a manner as to prevent fire or
damage to any park property.
(8) Protection of park property.
(a) No person shall kill, injure or disturb or attempt to injure or
disturb waterfowl, birds or animals, wild or domestic, within
any park, except as permitted by this chapter. No person shall
remove flowers or fruit, wild or cultivated, or break, cut down,
trample upon, remove or in any manner injure, deface, write
upon or ill use any tree, shrub, flower, flower bed, turf, soil,
§ 321-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-1
1:337
sand, fountain, ornament, building, structure, apparatus,
bench, table, official notice, sign, fence or other property
within any park.
(b) No person shall deface by throwing stones, pebbles or other
debris in any of the toilets, bubblers or other sanitary facilities
located in any City park; or deface by drawing with crayon,
chalk, paint or anything else on any of the buildings or
equipment at any City park; or deface the equipment by means
of a sharp instrument.
(c) Except as authorized by the Parks and Recreation Director, no
person shall dig into the turf of any City-owned park or
recreational property for any purposes whatsoever or remove
any trees or flowers. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
9-17-689]
(d) Except as authorized by the Parks and Recreation Director, the
use of metal detectors and digging for buried objects on City
park or recreational property is prohibited. [Added
10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(9) Motorized vehicles. No person shall operate a motorized vehicle,
whether licensed or not, in a City park outside of areas specifically
designated as parking areas or areas where the operation of such
vehicles is specifically permitted, except vehicles authorized by the
Parks and Recreation Director which are at the time of operation
either performing work on behalf of the City or participating in
permitted events at the park. No person shall operate a motorized
vehicle within a City park for the purpose of accessing any private
property adjacent to the park. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 9-17-689]
(10) Snowmobiles. No person shall operate a snowmobile in a City park
except in designated areas.
(11) Swimming pool. The provisions of Ch. 172, Wis. Adm. Code,
pertaining to public swimming pools, as amended, is adopted and
incorporated herein by reference. [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 9-17-689]
(12) Parking in parks. No person shall park any motor vehicle in any
park in the City except in a designated parking area.
(13) Horse and carriages. No person shall ride a horse or drive a horsedriven
vehicle in any park, except on roads or designated bridle
paths, unless approval of the Parks and Recreation Director is first
obtained. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or drive
a horse-driven vehicle in a careless, negligent or reckless manner
which may endanger the safety and well-being of others.
[Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
§ 321-1 MONONA CODE § 321-1
1:338
(14) Golfing and sporting activities. No golfing or practicing golf in City
parks or recreation areas shall be allowed.
(15) Arrows. No person shall use or shoot any bow and arrow in any City
park, except in authorized areas, as permitted by the Parks and
Recreation Director. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
9-17-689]
(16) Fees and charges. The Common Council, upon the recommendation
of the Park and Recreation Board, shall have the authority to
establish such fees as deemed necessary for use of any park facility,
shelter or land area. It shall be unlawful to use such areas without
payment of such fee or charge when required.
(17) Pets. Except as permitted pursuant to § 321-9, pets, including
animals of any species, shall not be permitted in any City parks
unless assisting a disabled person or authorized in advance by the
Parks and Recreation Director. [Amended 9-19-2016 by Ord. No.
8-16-681]
(18) Firearms; hunting. Possessing or discharging of any air gun,
slingshot, explosive, firearm or weapon of any kind is prohibited in
all City parks.
(19) Fish cleaning. Cleaning of fish in shelters, toilet facilities or picnic
areas is prohibited in all City parks, except in the designated fish
cleaning station at Lottes Park. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 9-17-689]
(20) Vendors restricted. No person shall sell, vend or give away in any
City park any article of merchandise whatsoever without written
permission from the Parks and Recreation Director. [Amended
10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(21) Smoking. No person shall smoke or hold a lighted cigarette, cigar
or pipe within any park, or portion thereof, where notices
prohibiting smoking are posted. The Park and Recreation Board is
authorized to designate the parks, or portions thereof, where
smoking is prohibited and to implement the installation of
appropriate notices. The term "smoke" includes the use of any
electronic delivery device containing or delivering nicotine or any
other substance intended for human consumption that may be used
by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or
aerosol from the product. This includes any such device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, ecigar,
e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or any other product name or
descriptor. "Electronic delivery device" does not include any
product that has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product and is
being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
[Amended 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18-710]
§ 321-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-1
1:339
§ 321-2. Park hours.
(22) Camping. No camping shall be permitted in any park, unless
authorized by the Parks and Recreation Director.
(23) Interference with permittee. No person shall, in any manner,
harass, disturb or interfere with persons holding written permits
granted by the Common Council, Park and Recreation Board or
Parks and Recreation Director for the use of parks, shelter areas or
park facilities.
(24) Sparklers prohibited. Except as permitted by Chapter 238,
Fireworks, of the Code of the City of Monona, no person shall ignite
a sparkler in any City park.
(25) Public tennis courts. The operation of bicycles, skateboards and inline
skates is hereby prohibited on the surface of any public tennis
court located within the City of Monona.188
(26) Skate park. The concrete surface and permanent structures of the
skate park shall remain free and clear of all objects and debris,
including but not limited to any object serving as a hurdle, ramp or
obstacle. Except with the prior written permission of the Parks and
Recreation Director, no person shall bring onto the skate park any
such object or allow it to remain thereon other than skateboards
and personal safety equipment. [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
9-17-689]
A. Park closing hours. All City parks shall be closed from 10:00 p.m. to
sunrise, except for public functions approved by the Park and
Recreation Board. The Park and Recreation Board may approve of the
conduct of functions within the parks beyond 10:00 p.m. by private
organizations or individuals if satisfactory evidence is presented to the
Board that the function will be carried on so as not to disturb the public
peace and good order of the City. In granting such approval, the Park
and Recreation Board shall designate the area in which the function
shall be carried on and shall indicate the person responsible for the
conduct of such function. No person shall be in any City park between
10:00 p.m. to sunrise., except in compliance with this subsection.189
B. Exceptions. The regular closing hours of the City parks do not apply to
persons having a permit from the Chief of Police and Parks and
Recreation Director to be present in the City parks during closed hours
on specific days and for specific purposes.
188. Editor's Note: Original § 12-1-2, Turf protection on public property, which immediately
followed this section, was moved to § 321-1B(8)(c) and (d) at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 321-1 MONONA CODE § 321-2
1:340
§ 321-3. Exclusive use.
C. Emergency park closing and opening. The Chief of Police, Parks and
Recreation Director or Common Council will have full authority to open
and close any park, facility or area because of weather conditions,
physical condition, construction or when, in the interest of public safety,
it is deemed necessary.
A. Policy on reservation. City-owned park and park facilities and shelter
areas are primarily for the nonexclusive use of the residents and
visitors of the City. However, under proper circumstances, exclusive use
of the same or parts thereof may be permitted. This section is intended
to regulate exclusive use of municipally owned parks, park facilities,
park shelters or parts thereof.
B. Reservation of park space. A responsible person, age 18 or over, or
group, firm, organization, partnership or corporation may reserve the
use of a park facility or a park shelter by written application filed with
the Parks and Recreation Director for a permit for exclusive use of the
same. The Parks and Recreation Director shall issue permits for
exclusive use of a portion of a park or park shelter, while the Park and
Recreation Board shall issue permits for the exclusive use of an entire
City park. Reservation of a designated area shall give the party to whom
reserved the right to use such area to the exclusion of others for and
during the period of reservation. Areas not reserved shall be open to
use by all.190
C. Application. Applications shall be filed with the Parks and Recreation
Director at least 30 days prior to the date on which the exclusive use of
the entire park is requested.191
D. Action on application. The Parks and Recreation Director or Park and
Recreation Board shall act promptly on all applications for permits for
exclusive park use.
E. Reasons for denial. Applicants under this section may be denied for any
of the following reasons:
(1) If it is for a use which would involve a violation of federal or state
law or any provision of this Code.
(2) If the granting of the permit would conflict with another permit
already granted or for which application is already pending.
(3) If the application does not contain the information required.192
190. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
191. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
192. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 321-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-3
1:341
(4) The application is made less than the required days in advance of
the scheduled exclusive use.
(5) If it is for a use of the park or park facility at a date and time when,
in addition to the proposed use, anticipated nonexclusive use by
others of the park or park facility is expected and would be
seriously adversely affected.
(6) If the law enforcement requirements of the exclusive use will
require so large a number of persons as to prevent adequate law
enforcement to the park, park facility or shelter area involved or of
the rest of the City.
(7) The exclusive use will reasonably create a substantial risk of injury
to persons or damage to property.
(8) The exclusive use is so poorly organized that participants are likely
to engage in aggressive or destructive activity.
F. Indemnification. Prior to granting any permit for exclusive use of the
park, the City may require the permittee to file evidence of good and
sufficient sureties, insurance in force or other evidence of adequate
financial responsibility, running to the City and such other third parties
as may be injured or damaged, in an amount depending upon the
likelihood of injury or damage as a direct and proximate result of the
exclusive use sufficient to indemnify the City and such third parties as
may be injured or damaged thereby, caused by the permittee, its agents
or participants.
G. Permit not required for City activity. A permit is not required for
exclusive use of the park or a park facility for an activity sponsored by
the City of Monona.
H. Permit revocation. The Parks and Recreation Director or Chief of Police
may revoke a permit already issued if it is deemed that such action is
justified by an actual or potential emergency due to weather, fire, riot,
other catastrophe or likelihood of a breach of the peace or by a major
change in the conditions forming the basis of the issuance of the permit.
I. Form of permit. Each permit shall be in a form prescribed by the Parks
and Recreation Director and shall designate the park, park facility or
shelter area involved, date, hours of the exclusive use, purpose of the
exclusive use and the name of the person, group, firm, organization,
partnership or corporation to which the permit is issued.
J. Class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses. When fermented malt
beverages are sold at any event authorized by this section, a valid
fermented malt beverage license shall be obtained, and the provisions
of § 272-12 and Chapter 272, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt
Beverages, Article II, Offenses, shall be fully complied with. Said license
must be held by the person who filed the original license and shall be
presented to any law enforcement officer upon request.
§ 321-3 MONONA CODE § 321-3
1:342
§ 321-4. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in City parks.
K. Care of facilities. Persons reserving City facilities shall be completely
responsible for cleaning up the facilities after the event to the
satisfaction of City officials. All reserved areas shall be left in a clean
condition, with refuse placed in containers provided for such purpose.
Any organization or corporation reserving any area in a City park shall
agree to assume full responsibility for all damage to City property by
any invitee of said organization or corporation and shall make full
payment therefor upon billing by the City Administrator or his or her
designee. Failure to do so shall deny future use of park facilities until
such payment be made, in addition to any other remedy which the City
may have.193
L. Reservation. City park shelter facilities may be reserved on a daily basis
only from the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., unless otherwise
authorized by the Parks and Recreation Director.194
M. Fees.
(1) Fees established. Fees for uses under this section shall be
established by the Common Council upon the recommendation of
the Park and Recreation Board.
(2) Exemption from fee requirement. Where the Park and Recreation
Board is satisfied that the proposed use is by a group or
organization for civic, education, religious or charitable purposes,
and the Park and Recreation Board is satisfied that imposition of
the daily reservation fee would constitute a hardship on the group
or organization, the Park and Recreation Board may exempt such
group or organization from the daily reservation fee.
A. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in City parks.
(1) Restrictions. No person shall possess, serve or consume an
alcoholic beverage in a City park between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. except by permit issued by the City Administrator or
his or her designee.
(2) Permits.
(a) All requests for a permit to possess, serve or consume alcoholic
beverages under this section shall contain the name and
address of the individual responsible for the conduct of the
persons represented by the permit, the number of persons to
be included in the permit, the type/types of alcoholic beverages
to be possessed, served or consumed, and other information
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
194. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 321-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-4
1:343
§ 321-5. Community Center rules.
§ 321-6. Public waters. [Amended 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 11-09-609]
which may be required in the opinion of the City Administrator
or his or her designee or the Park and Recreation Board.
(b) All permits shall be made available to the appropriate agencies
by the applicant upon request. Failure to show proof of a
permit shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of the permit,
confiscation of alcoholic beverages, and subject the offender to
arrest.
(c) The following statement shall appear on all permits:
"The individual whose name appears above is responsible for
the conduct of all persons covered by this permit, as well as
all the condition of the permit as noted above. Violation of this
section of the City Code may result in confiscation of alcoholic
beverages, revocation of this permit, and may subject the
offender to arrest."
(d) The Board may waive the requirements of this section, upon
proper justification, for major public events, or other events of
benefit to the general public. The grant or denial of permits by
the City Administrator or his or her designee are appealable to
the Board.
B. Consumption prohibited in parking lots. No person shall at any time
serve or consume an alcoholic beverage in a parking lot of a City park.
A. Authority to establish rules relating to catering of parties. The Park and
Recreation Board is empowered to establish rules relating to the
catering of food and beverages at the Monona Community Center. The
Board may designate exclusive caterers, charge fees for the privilege of
providing catering services within the Community Center, and establish
regulations relating to the use of Community Center facilities by such
caterers. Nothing contained herein shall authorize the Board to prohibit
or establish a fee (other than rental fee for use of the Community
Center) to any individual who desires to provide his or her own food for
a party at the Community Center.
B. Council to approve rules. The rules of the Park and Recreation Board
relating to catering shall not be effective until approved by the Common
Council. The Park and Recreation Board shall review such rules on at
least an annual basis and report any recommendations for change
therein to the Council for approval.
A. Adoption of state statutes on regulation of boating. Sections 30.50
through 30.80, Wis. Stats., as amended, exclusive of any provisions
therein relating to the penalties to be imposed or the punishment for
violation of said statutes, are hereby adopted and by reference made a
§ 321-4 MONONA CODE § 321-6
1:344
part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any acts required to
be performed or prohibited by the said statute incorporated herein by
reference is required or prohibited by this section.
B. Swimming in lakes and rivers. Any swimmer using a public swimming
beach shall remain within the buoy line established by the City.
C. Fishing, swimming or loitering on bridge structures prohibited.
(1) No person shall fish, swim from or loiter on any bridge structure in
any City park.
(2) No person shall fish or swim from any bridge structure or the
adjacent dedicated right-of-way or the approach thereto, if:
(a) Said bridge structure, adjacent dedicated right-of-way, or
approach is maintained by the City.
(b) The City has determined that fishing from the bridge structure,
adjacent dedicated right-of-way, or approach would constitute
an undue traffic hazard.
(3) Following such a determination, the City may erect signs
prohibiting fishing or swimming off of such bridge structures,
adjacent dedicated right-of-way, or approach.
D. Launching boats.
(1) No person shall launch a motorboat, sailboat, iceboat, canoe, kayak
or all-terrain vehicle at Lottes Park, Tonyawatha and Winnequah
Trail boat landings in the City of Monona without first obtaining a
lake access permit and paying the fee for same. The fee shall be
established by the Common Council upon recommendation from
the Park and Recreation Board. Said permit shall be displayed in or
on the launcher's accompanying motor vehicle in such location as
designated by the Park and Recreation Board.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in any area in a
public park in the City of Monona that has been designated by
order of the Common Council as a lake access parking lot unless
said vehicle properly displays the permit required in Subsection
D(1) above.
(3) Storage and mooring of boats. No person shall store or moor any
boat or float device on or attached to any City property or public
pier between 10:00 p.m. and sunrise except under permit issued by
the Park and Recreation Board. Renters that pay the fee to store a
canoe or kayak at the Lottes Park canoe/kayak rack will also
receive a lake access permit at no additional charge.195
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 321-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-6
1:345
§ 321-7. Slow-no-wake areas of Yahara River designated;
enforcement provided.
§ 321-8. Feeding Canada geese in parks prohibited.197
(4) Hours. No person shall launch or dock a boat or float device in any
park in the City between 10:00 p.m. and sunrise, except for Lottes
Park.196
E. No person shall be allowed to fish at River Place from either the
constructed portion of the Yahara Cove Boardwalk and/or public/private
property abutting the Boardwalk/lands dedicated for that purpose,
except at authorized sites so designated by signage.
A. Slow-no-wake zones designated. In the interest of protection of the
health, safety and welfare of persons within the City, the following
designated portions of the waters of Lake Monona and the Yahara River
are declared to be slow-no-wake zones in which no person shall operate
a boat at a speed faster than the slowest possible speed so as to
maintain steerage:
(1) That portion of the Yahara River from the outlet of Lake Monona
downstream to the entrance of the Yahara River into Upper Mud
Lake, such slow-no-wake area to include that portion of the Yahara
River known as the "widespread."
(2) All of the channels passing from that portion of Lake Monona
known as "Squaw Bay" to Lake Monona proper, to include both
channels which intersect with Tecumseh Avenue and the channel
located immediately east of and running parallel to Tecumseh
Avenue.
B. Regulatory markers and buoys to be erected. When requested by law
enforcement officials of Dane County and approved by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources, and when all costs of acquisition and
erection of regulatory markers and buoys will be borne by Dane County
or the State of Wisconsin, the Chief of Police may authorize the
installation of regulatory markers and buoys in the waters of the Yahara
River and Lake Monona within the jurisdiction of the City, designating
and marking areas described in Subsection A as slow-no-wake areas.
C. Enforcement. When regulatory markers and buoys are installed as
provided in Subsection B, the provisions of this section shall be
enforced under § 30.66(3), Wis. Stats., and any complaints of violation
filed with the Monona Police Department or by a Monona police officer
shall be forwarded to the Dane County Sheriff's Department for arrest
and prosecution.
196. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 321-6 MONONA CODE § 321-8
1:346
§ 321-9. Conditions for permitting dogs in parks. [Added 9-19-2016
by Ord. No. 8-16-681198]
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 321-1B(17), canines shall be permitted
in City parks during times such parks are open to the public on the following
conditions:
A. Feeding Canada geese in parks prohibited. No person may feed
anything whatsoever to any Canada Geese in or adjacent to any City
park.
B. Enforcement. This section shall be enforced as set forth in § 1-4A of the
Code.
A. No canine shall be permitted within 20 feet of any of the following
within a City park: public building, picnic shelter, athletic field/court,
playground structure, delineated beach, gazebo and Native American
burial mound, and at such other locations temporarily posted by order
of the Parks and Recreation Director or his or her designee. Canines
may be present on nonfenced athletic fields when such fields are not
being actively used for athletic play.
B. No canine shall be permitted within any park facility or field
substantially enclosed by a fence; including but not limited to the
Ahuska Park tennis courts, baseball field and the Haukereid football
field, and Winnequah Park tennis courts.
C. Notwithstanding Subsections A and B above, canines shall be permitted
on any public sidewalk, public pathway or public street notwithstanding
their proximity to any public park building, picnic shelter, athletic field
or court whether in use or not, playground structure, gazebo or
delineated beach, unless temporarily posted otherwise by order of the
Parks and Recreation Director or his or her designee.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, canines may be allowed
at public or private events within a City park authorized by the Parks
and Recreation Director or his or her designee, at the discretion of the
event sponsor. The event sponsor shall post reasonable signage giving
notice whether or not canines are permitted at the event.
E. Except as provided in Subsection F below, all canines in City parks shall
be under the direct control of a person at all times by means of a
physical leash held by a person at all times. Control by means of radio
collar is prohibited.
F. Notwithstanding Subsection E above, canines shall be permitted off
leash while swimming, provided they are within direct sight and vocal
control of a person controlling the animal and on leash at all times they
198. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that City staff shall install signage at all City
parks giving reasonable notice of the conditions set forth in this ordinance.
§ 321-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-9
1:347
§ 321-10. Expulsion. [Added 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 12-18-711]
The Parks and Recreation Director may expel from any park for a period up
to 30 days any individual having previously been issued a warning, found
to be violating, or reasonably suspected based on credible reports to have
violated any provisions of this Chapter 321 or any provision of Chapter 335
while in any park. An individual so expelled may request an administrative
review of the decision of the Parks and Recreation Director in accordance
with Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The Park and Recreation Board
shall be the decision maker in any proceeding pursuant to § 68.11, Wis.
Stats. The expulsion order of the Parks and Recreation Director shall remain
in force during any administrative review proceedings.
Chapter 328
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Transient merchants — See Ch. 404.
§ 328-1. Definitions. [Amended 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 3-13-643]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARTICLE — Any of the following items except jewelry:
are not in the water. Canines shall not be allowed on the beaches at
Frost Woods Beach and Schluter Beach, whether or not on leash.
G. All waste from the canine shall be immediately picked up and disposed
of. Bags, scoops or other appropriate implements for the removal of
waste shall be carried by any person bringing a canine onto park
property.
H. The restrictions imposed in this section shall not apply to service
animals, as defined in state and federal law, assisting a person with a
disability, and any canine assisting law enforcement personnel in their
duties.
I. Any person owning or permitting a canine in a location in violation of
this section shall be subject to the penalty provided in the City's Fee,
Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule.
A. Audiovisual equipment;
B. Bicycles;
C. China;
§ 321-9 MONONA CODE § 328-1
1:348
AUCTIONEER — An individual who is registered as an auctioneer under Ch.
480, Wis. Stats., and who sells secondhand articles or secondhand jewelry
at an auction, as defined in § 480.01(1), Wis. Stats.200
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — A corporation, trust or community chest,
fund or foundation organized and operated exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary or educational purposes or for the prevention
of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures
to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
CONSIGNMENT — A method of selling secondhand merchandise whereby
the owner of the merchandise places the item with a seller to sell the
merchandise, with the sales proceeds being paid to the owner and the seller
being compensated by the owner, commonly in the form of a percentage of
the sales proceeds.
CUSTOMER — A person with whom a pawnbroker, secondhand article
dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer or an agent thereof engages in a
transaction of purchase, sale, receipt or exchange of any secondhand article
or secondhand jewelry.
JEWELRY — Any tangible personal property ordinarily wearable on the
person and consisting in whole or in part of any metal, mineral or gem
customarily regarded as precious or semiprecious.
PAWNBROKER — Any person who engages in the business of lending money
on the deposit or pledge of any article or jewelry or purchasing any article
D. Computers, printers, software and computer supplies;
E. Computer toys and games;
F. Crystal;
G. Electronic equipment;
H. Fur coats and other fur clothing;
I. Ammunition and knives;
J. Microwave ovens;
K. Office equipment;
L. Pianos, organs, guitars and other musical instruments;
M. Video tapes or discs, audio tapes or discs, and other optical media.199
N. Silverware and flatware;
O. Small electrical appliances;
P. Telephones.
199. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
200. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 328-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-1
1:349
or jewelry with an expressed or implied agreement or understanding to sell
it back at a subsequent time at a stipulated price.
SECONDHAND — Owned by any person, except a wholesaler, retailer or
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer licensed under this
chapter, immediately before the transaction at hand.
SECONDHAND ARTICLE DEALER — Any person, other than an auctioneer,
who primarily engages in the business of purchasing or selling secondhand
articles, except when engaging in any of the following:201
SECONDHAND JEWELRY DEALER — Any person, other than an auctioneer,
who engages in the business of any transaction consisting of purchasing,
selling, receiving or exchanging secondhand jewelry, except for the
following:202
Any transaction at an occasional garage or yard sale; an estate sale; a
gun, knife, gem or antique show; a convention or an auction.
A.
Any transaction entered into by a person while engaged in a business
for which the person is licensed under §§ 328-2 and 328-4 or while
engaged in the business of junk collector, junk dealer or scrap
processor or described in § 70.995(2)(x), Wis. Stats.
B.
Any transaction while operating as a charitable organization or
conducting a sale, the proceeds of which are donated to a charitable
organization.
C.
Any transaction between a buyer of a new article and the person who
sold the article when new, which involves any of the following:
(1) The return of the article.
(2) The exchange of the article for a different, new article.
D.
Any transaction as a purchaser of a secondhand article from a
charitable organization if the secondhand article was a gift to the
charitable organization.
E.
Any transaction as a seller of a secondhand article which the person
bought from a charitable organization if the secondhand article was a
gift to the charitable organization.
F.
Any transaction at an occasional garage or yard sale; an estate sale; a
gun, knife, gem or antique show or a convention.
A.
B. Any transaction with a licensed secondhand jewelry dealer.
Any transaction entered into by a person while engaged in a business
of smelting, refining, assaying or manufacturing precious metals, gems
C.
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 328-1 MONONA CODE § 328-1
1:350
§ 328-2. License for pawnbroker.203
No person may operate as a pawnbroker unless the person first obtains a
pawnbroker's license under this chapter. A license issued to a pawnbroker
by the governing body of a municipality authorizes the licensee to operate
as a pawnbroker in that municipality. The fee for such license shall be paid
to the City Clerk at the time of application. The annual fee for this license
shall be prescribed in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule.
§ 328-3. License for secondhand article dealer.
or valuable articles, if the person has no retail operation open to the
public.
Any transaction between a buyer of new jewelry and the person who
sold the jewelry when new, which involves any of the following:
(1) The return of the jewelry.
(2) The exchange of the jewelry for different, new jewelry.
D.
Any transaction as a purchaser of secondhand jewelry from a charitable
organization if the secondhand jewelry was a gift to the charitable
organization.
E.
Any transaction as a seller of secondhand jewelry which the person
bought from a charitable organization if the secondhand jewelry was a
gift to the charitable organization.
F.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, no person may operate as a
secondhand article dealer unless the person first obtains a secondhand
article dealer's license under this chapter. A license issued to a
secondhand article dealer authorizes the licensee to operate as a
secondhand article dealer anywhere in the state. The fee for such
license shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time of application. The
annual fee for this license shall be as prescribed in the City's Fee,
Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule.204
B. A person who operates as a secondhand article dealer only on premises
or land owned by a person having a secondhand dealer mall or flea
market license under § 328-9 need not obtain a secondhand article
dealer's license.
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 328-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-4
1:351
§ 328-4. License for secondhand jewelry dealer.205
No person may operate as a secondhand jewelry dealer unless the person
first obtains a secondhand jewelry dealer's license under this chapter. A
license issued to a secondhand jewelry dealer authorizes the licensee to
operate as a secondhand jewelry dealer anywhere in the state. The fee for
such license shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time of application. The
annual fee for this license shall be as prescribed in the City's Fee, Forfeiture
and Deposit Schedule.
§ 328-5. License application.206
A person wishing to operate as a pawnbroker shall apply for a license to the
City Clerk; a person wishing to operate as a secondhand article dealer or a
secondhand jewelry dealer and have a principal place of business in the City
shall apply for a license to the City Clerk The Clerk shall furnish application
forms, which shall require the following:
A. The applicant's name, place and date of birth, and residence address.
B. The names and addresses of the business and of the owner of the
business premises.
C. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted within the
preceding 10 years of a felony or within the preceding 10 years of a
misdemeanor, statutory violation punishable by forfeiture or county or
municipal ordinance violation in which the circumstances of the felony,
misdemeanor or other offense substantially relate to the circumstances
of the licensed activity and, if so, the nature and date of the offense and
the penalty assessed.
D. Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, limited liability
company or partnership, and:
(1) If the applicant is a corporation, the state where incorporated and
the names, addresses and birth dates of all officers and directors.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, the names, addresses and birth
dates of all partners.
(3) If the applicant is a limited liability company, the names and
addresses of all members.
E. The name of the manager or proprietor of the business, including
address and birth date.
F. Any other information that the City Clerk may reasonably require.
205. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
206. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 328-4 MONONA CODE § 328-6
1:352
§ 328-6. Investigation of applicant.207
The Police Department shall investigate each applicant for a pawnbroker's,
secondhand article dealer's or secondhand jewelry dealer's license to
determine whether the applicant has been convicted within the preceding
10 years of a felony or within the preceding 10 years of a misdemeanor,
statutory violation punishable by forfeiture or county or municipal
ordinance violation described under § 328-5C and, if so, the nature and date
of the offense and the penalty assessed. The Police Department shall furnish
the information derived from that investigation in writing to the City Clerk.
§ 328-7. License issuance.
§ 328-8. Pawnbroker and dealer requirements. [Amended 4-16-2013
by Ord. No. 3-13-643]
A. The City Clerk shall grant the license if all of the following apply:
(1) The applicant, including an individual, a partner, a member of a
limited liability company or an officer, director or agent of any
corporate applicant has not been convicted within the preceding 10
years of a felony or within the preceding 10 years of a
misdemeanor, statutory violation punishable by forfeiture or county
or City ordinance violation in which the circumstances of the felony,
misdemeanor or other offense substantially relate to the
circumstances of being a pawnbroker, secondhand jewelry dealer,
secondhand article dealer or secondhand article dealer mall or flea
market owner.208
(2) With respect to an applicant for a pawnbroker's license, the
applicant provides to the City a bond of $500, with not less than
two sureties, for the observation of all City ordinances relating to
pawnbrokers.
B. No license issued under this section may be transferred.
C. Term of license:
(1) Each license for a pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer is valid from July 1 until the following
June 30.
(2) Each license for a secondhand article dealer mall or flea market is
valid for one year, from July 1 of an odd-numbered year until June
30 of the next odd-numbered year.
A. Identification. No pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer may engage in a transaction of purchase,
207. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
208. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 328-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-8
1:353
receipt or exchange of any secondhand article or secondhand jewelry
from a customer without first securing adequate identification from the
customer. At the time of the transaction, the pawnbroker, secondhand
article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer shall require the customer
to present and record one of the following types of identification (all
which include birth date):
(1) A county identification card.
(2) A state identification card.
(3) A valid Wisconsin motor vehicle operator's license.
(4) A valid motor vehicle operator's license, containing a picture,
issued by another state.
(5) A military identification card.
(6) A valid passport.
(7) An alien registration card.
(8) A senior citizen's identification card containing a photograph.
(9) Any identification document issued by a state or federal
government, whether or not containing a picture, if the
pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer obtains a clear imprint of the customer's right index finger.
B. Transactions with minors.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B(2) below, no pawnbroker,
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer may
engage in a transaction of purchase, receipt or exchange of any
secondhand article or secondhand jewelry from any minor.
(2) A pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer may engage in a transaction described under Subsection
B(1) above, if the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian at the time of the transaction or if the minor provides a
pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer with the parent's or guardian's written consent to engage in
the particular transaction.
C. Records.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B, for each transaction of
purchase, receipt or exchange of any secondhand article or
secondhand jewelry from a customer, a pawnbroker, secondhand
article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer shall require the
customer to complete and sign, in ink, the appropriate form. No
entry on such a form may be erased, mutilated or changed. The
pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer shall retain an original and a duplicate of each form for not
§ 328-8 MONONA CODE § 328-8
1:354
less than one year after the date of the transaction, except as
provided in Subsection E, and during that period shall make the
duplicate available to any law enforcement officer for inspection at
any reasonable time.
(2) For every secondhand article purchased, received or exchanged by
a secondhand article dealer from a customer off the secondhand
article dealer's premises or consigned to the secondhand article
dealer for sale on the secondhand article dealer's premises, the
secondhand article dealer shall keep a written inventory. In this
inventory, the secondhand article dealer shall record the name and
address of each customer, the date, time and place of the
transaction and a detailed description of the article which is the
subject of the transaction. The customer shall sign his or her name
on a declaration of ownership of the secondhand article identified
in the inventory and shall state that he or she owns the secondhand
article. The secondhand article dealer shall retain an original and a
duplicate of each entry and declaration of ownership relating to the
purchase, receipt or exchange of any secondhand article for not
less than one year after the date of the transaction, except as
provided in Subsection E, and shall make duplicates of the
inventory and declarations of ownership available to any law
enforcement officer for inspection at any reasonable time.209
(3) Electronic reporting. For each purchase, receipt or exchange of any
pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer from a customer, the pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer
or secondhand jewelry dealer shall electronically submit the
property transaction information specified by the Monona Police
Department to an electronic reporting service specified by the
Monona Police Department by the close of business each day,
according to the following procedures.
(a) Pawnbrokers, secondhand article dealer and secondhand
jewelry dealers using point-of-sale software shall ensure
compatibility of their software with the specified electronic
reporting service and shall electronically transfer all required
information from their computer to the specified electronic
reporting service via Internet connection.
[1] If a pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand
jewelry dealer is unable to successfully transfer the
required property transaction information electronically
due to a problem with the system, he or she shall notify the
Monona Police Department of the reason and provide the
Monona Police Department with printed copies of all
reportable transactions by 12:00 noon the next business
day.
209. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 328-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-8
1:355
[2] If the problem is determined to be in the pawnbroker's,
secondhand article dealer's or secondhand jewelry
dealer's system and is not corrected by the close of the
first business day following the failure, the pawnbroker,
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer
shall be charged a daily reporting failure fee as set forth in
the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule until the
error is corrected. If the problem is determined to be
outside the pawnbroker's, secondhand article dealer's or
secondhand jewelry dealer's system, he or she shall not be
charged the reporting failure fee.210
[3] Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems
that prevented the pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer
or secondhand jewelry dealer from uploading the
reportable transactions, upon correction of the problem,
he or she shall electronically upload the information
required in Subsection C(3)(a)[1] from every reportable
transaction that occurred since the problem began.
[4] The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the
Monona Police Department may, upon presentation of
extenuating circumstances, delay or waive the
implementation of a daily reporting penalty.
(b) Pawnbrokers, secondhand article dealers and secondhand
jewelry dealers not using point-of-sale software shall either
acquire point-of-sale software and adhere to the requirements
set forth in Subsection C(3)(a) above or, if the specified
electronic reporting service allows, manually enter all
reportable transactions into the database via Internet
connection.
(c) Pawnbrokers, secondhand article dealers and secondhand
jewelry dealers subject to electronic reporting shall take a
color, digital photograph of every item purchased, received or
exchanged that does not have a unique serial or identification
number affixed. This section specifically includes jewelry,
coins, currency and bullion. One group photo shall suffice for
mass items acquired in one transaction. When a photograph is
taken it must be maintained in such a manner that it can be
readily matched and correlated with all other records of the
same transaction and must be made available for inspection by
law enforcement for a period of not less than one year from the
date of transaction.
210. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 328-8 MONONA CODE § 328-8
1:356
(d) This Subsection C(3) shall not apply to any secondhand article
dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer engaged in the sale of
secondhand merchandise exclusively by consignment.
(e) All pawnbrokers, secondhand article dealers and secondhand
jewelry dealers subject to electronic reporting pursuant to this
Subsection C(3) shall pay to the City an electronic reporting
and tracking system fee as set forth in the City's Fee,
Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule. The fee shall be paid at the
same time the fee is paid for the corresponding pawnbroker,
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer
license. Failure to pay the billable transaction fee shall result in
termination of rights to access the electronic reporting system
and may result in revocation of any applicable pawnbroker,
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer
license.211
D. Holding period.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection D(5), any secondhand article
purchased or received by a pawnbroker shall be kept on the
pawnbroker's premises or other place for safekeeping for not less
than 30 days after the date of purchase or receipt, unless the
person known by the pawnbroker to be the lawful owner of the
secondhand article or secondhand jewelry recovers it.
(2) Except as provided in Subsection D(5), any secondhand article
purchased or received by a secondhand article dealer shall be kept
on the secondhand article dealer's premises or other place for
safekeeping for not less than 21 days after the date of purchase or
receipt.212
(3) Except as provided in Subsection D(5), any secondhand jewelry
purchased or received by a secondhand jewelry dealer shall be kept
on the secondhand jewelry dealer's premises or other place for
safekeeping for not less than 21 days after the date of purchase or
receipt.213
(4) If a pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer is required to submit a report under Subsection E
concerning a secondhand article or secondhand jewelry purchased
or received by the pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer, and the report is required to be
submitted in an electronic format, the secondhand article or
secondhand jewelry shall be kept on the pawnbroker's, secondhand
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
213. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 328-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-8
1:357
article dealer's or secondhand jewelry dealer's premises or other
place for safekeeping for not less than seven days after the report
is submitted.214
(5) During the periods set forth in Subsection D(1), (2), (3) and (4)
above, the secondhand article or secondhand jewelry shall be held
separate and apart and may not be altered in any manner. The
pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry shall
permit any law enforcement officer to inspect the secondhand
article or secondhand jewelry during this period. Within 24 hours
after a written request of a law enforcement officer during this
period, a pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand
jewelry dealer shall make available for inspection any secondhand
article or secondhand jewelry which is kept off the premises for
safekeeping. Any law enforcement officer who has reason to
believe any secondhand article or secondhand jewelry was not sold
or exchanged by the lawful owner may direct a pawnbroker,
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer to hold
that secondhand article or secondhand jewelry for a reasonable
length of time which the law enforcement officer considers
necessary to identify it.215
(6) Subsection D(1) through (5) above do not apply to any of the
following:
(a) A coin of the United States, any gold or silver coin, or gold or
silver bullion.
(b) A secondhand article or secondhand jewelry consigned to a
pawnbroker, secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry
dealer.
E. Report to law enforcement agency. With 24 hours after purchasing or
receiving a secondhand article or secondhand jewelry, a pawnbroker,
secondhand article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer shall make
available for inspection by a law enforcement officer the original form
or the inventory under Subsection C above, whichever is appropriate.
Notwithstanding § 19.35(1), Wis. Stats., a law enforcement agency
receiving the original form or inventory or a declaration of ownership
may disclose it only to another law enforcement agency.
F. Exception for customer return or exchange. Nothing in this section
applies to the return or exchange, from a customer to a secondhand
article dealer or secondhand jewelry dealer, of any secondhand article
or secondhand jewelry purchased from the secondhand article dealer or
secondhand jewelry dealer.
214. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
215. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 328-8 MONONA CODE § 328-9
1:358
§ 328-9. Secondhand article dealer mall or flea market.
§ 328-10. License revocation.
The Common Council may revoke any license issued by it under this chapter
for fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application
for a license or for any violation of this chapter or § 943.34, 948.62 or
948.63, Wis. Stats.
Chapter 335
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See § 1-4.
Fireworks — See Ch. 238.
Offenses related to alcohol beverages — See
Ch. 272, Art. II.
Juveniles — See Ch. 281.
Nuisances — See Ch. 312.
A. The owner of any premises or land upon which two or more persons
operate as secondhand article dealers may obtain a secondhand article
dealer mall or flea market license for the premises or land, if the
following conditions are met:
(1) Each secondhand article dealer occupies a separate sales location
and identifies himself or herself to the public as a separate
secondhand article dealer.
(2) The secondhand article dealer mall or flea market is operated
under one name and at one address and is under the control of the
secondhand article dealer mall or flea market license holder.
(3) Each secondhand article dealer delivers to the secondhand article
dealer mall or flea market license holder, at the close of business on
each day that the secondhand article dealer conducts business, a
record of his or her sales that includes the location at which each
sale was made.216
B. The secondhand article dealer license holder and each secondhand
article dealer operating upon the premises or land shall comply with
§ 328-8.
216. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 328-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 328-10
1:359

ARTICLE I
State Statutes Adopted
§ 335-1. Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture. [Amended
8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 08-09-600; 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 08-09-607;
5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 5-13-645; 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689;
2-5-2018 by Ord. No. 1-18-694]
A. The following Wisconsin Statutes sections defining offenses against the
peace and good order of the state are adopted by reference to define
offenses against the peace and good order of the City of Monona,
provided the penalty for commission of such offenses hereunder shall
be limited to a forfeiture imposed under the general penalty provisions
of this Code. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the
statutes incorporated herein by reference are intended to be made part
of this Code.
(1) Section 118.08, School zones; crossings.
(2) Section 118.09, Safety zones.
(3) Section 118.10, School safety patrols.
(4) Section 118.105, Control of traffic on school premises.
(5) Section 118.11, School fences.
(6) Section 118.123, Reports and records.
(7) Section 125.07, Underage and intoxicated persons; presence on
licensed premises; possession.
(8) Section 125.085, Proof of age.
(9) Section 125.09, General restrictions.
(10) Section 134.65, Cigarette and tobacco products retailer license.
(11) Section 134.66, Restrictions on sale or gift of cigarettes or tobacco
products.
(12) Section 167.10, Regulation of fireworks.
(13) Section 173.10, Investigation of animal cruelty complaints.
(14) Section 173.24, Reimbursement for expenses.
(15) Section 175.25, Storage of junked automobiles.
(16) Section 254.92, Purchase or possession of cigarettes or tobacco
products by person under 18 prohibited.
(17) Chapter 346, Subchapter VIII, Restrictions on stopping and
parking, and § 346.94(23), Commercial quadricycles
[§ 346.94(23)(f), Wis. Stats., is expressly not adopted by reference,
§ 335-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-1
1:361
and shall be regulated pursuant to § 272-24E of the Code of the
City of Monona].
(18) Section 939.05(2)(b), Aiding and abetting.
(19) Section 939.22, Words and phrases defined.
(20) Section 940.19(1), Battery.
(21) Section 940.291, Failure of a police officer to render aid.
(22) Section 941.01, Negligent operation of a vehicle.
(23) Section 941.10, Negligent handling of burning materials.
(24) Section 941.12(2), (3), Interfering with firefighting.
(25) Section 941.13, False alarms.
(26) Section 941.20(1), Reckless use of weapon.
(27) Section 941.23 Carrying concealed weapon.
(28) Section 941.235, Carrying a firearm in a public building.
(29) Section 941.24, Possession of switchblade knife.
(30) Section 941.35, Emergency telephone calls.
(31) 941.36, Fraudulent tapping of electric wires or gas or water meters
or pipes.
(32) Section 941.37(1), (2), Obstructing emergency or rescue
personnel.
(33) Section 942.05, Opening letters.
(34) Section 943.01(1), Criminal damage to property.
(35) Section 943.11, Entry into locked vehicle.
(36) Section 943.125, Entry into locked coin box.
(37) Section 943.13, Trespass to land.
(38) Section 943.14, Criminal trespass to dwellings.
(39) Section 943.145, Criminal trespass to a medical facility.
(40) Section 943.15, Entry onto a construction site or into a locked
building, dwelling or room.
(41) Section 943.20, Theft of property.
(42) Section 943.21(3), Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper,
recreational attraction, taxicab operator, or gas station.
§ 335-1 MONONA CODE § 335-1
1:362
(43) Section 943.22, Cheating tokens.
(44) Section 943.23(5) Operating vehicle without owner's consent.
(45) Section 943.24, Issuance of worthless check.
(46) Section 943.34(1)(a), Receiving stolen property.
(47) Section 943.37, Alteration of property identification marks.
(48) Section 943.38(3), Forgery.
(49) Section 943.41, Financial transaction card crimes.
(50) Section 943.45, Theft of telecommunications service.
(51) Section 943.455, Theft of commercial mobile service.
(52) Section 943.46, Theft of video service.
(53) Section 943.47, Theft of satellite cable programming.
(54) Section 943.50(4)(a), Retail theft.
(55) Section 943.55, Removal of a shopping cart.
(56) Section 944.15, Public fornication.
(57) Section 944.17, Sexual gratification.
(58) Section 944.20, Lewd and lascivious behavior.
(59) Section 944.21, Obscene material or performance.
(60) Section 944.23, Making lewd, obscene or indecent drawings.
(61) Section 944.30, Prostitution.
(62) Section 944.31, Patronizing prostitutes.
(63) Section 944.33, Pandering.
(64) Section 944.36, Solicitation of drinks prohibited.
(65) Section 945.01, Definitions relating to gambling.
(66) Section 945.02, Gambling.
(67) Section 945.04, Permitting premises to be used for commercial
gambling.
(68) Section 946.40, Refusing to aid officer.
(69) Section 946.41, Resisting or obstructing officer.
(70) Section 946.42(2), Escape.
§ 335-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-1
1:363
(71) Section 946.46, Encouraging violation of probation, extended
supervision or parole.
(72) Section 946.66, False complaints of police misconduct.
(73) Section 946.69, Falsely assuming to act as public officer or
employee or a utility employee.
(74) Section 946.70, Impersonating peace officers, fire fighters or other
emergency personnel.
(75) Section 946.72(2), Tampering with public records and notices.
(76) Section 947.01, Disorderly conduct.
(77) Section 947.012, Unlawful use of telephone.
(78) Section 947.0125, Unlawful use of computerized communication
systems.
(79) Section 947.013, Harassment.
(80) Section 947.02, Vagrancy.
(81) Section 947.06, Unlawful assemblies.
(82) Section 948.01, Definitions relating to crimes against children.
(83) Section 948.09, Sexual intercourse with a child age 16 or older.
(84) Section 948.10, Exposing genitals, pubic area, or intimate parts.
(85) Section 948.11(1)(b), Exposing a child to harmful material.
(86) Section 948.21, Neglecting a child.
(87) Section 948.40, Contributing to the delinquency of a child.
(88) Section 948.50, Strip search by school employee.
(89) Section 948.51(3)(a), Hazing.
(90) Section 948.60, Possession of a dangerous weapon by a person
under 18.
(91) Section 948.61(2)(a), Dangerous weapons other than firearms on
school premises.
(92) Section 948.63, Receiving property from a child.
(93) Section 951.01, Definitions relating to crimes against animals.
(94) Section 951.015, Construction and application.
(95) Section 951.02, Mistreating animals.
(96) Section 951.03, Dognapping or catnapping.
§ 335-1 MONONA CODE § 335-1
1:364
§ 335-2. Violations and penalties; attempts; parties to acts.
(97) Section 951.04, Leading animal from motor vehicle.
(98) Section 951.05, Transportation of animals.
(99) Section 951.06, Use of poisonous and controlled substances.
(100) Section 951.07, Use of certain devices prohibited.
(101) Section 951.08, Instigating fights between animals.
(102) Section 951.09, Shooting at caged or staked animals.
(103) Section 951.10, Sale of baby rabbits, chicks and other fowl.
(104) Section 951.11, Artificially colored animals; sale.
(105) Section 951.13, Providing proper food and drink to confined
animals.
(106) Section 951.14, Providing proper shelter.
(107) Section 951.15, Abandoning animals.
(108) Section 961.573, Possession of drug paraphernalia — ADULTS.
(109) Section 961.574, Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia.
(110) Section 961.575, Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor.
A. Penalty. In addition to the general penalty provisions of this Code in
§ 1-4 or any other penalty imposed for violation of any section of this
chapter; Chapter 272, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt
Beverages, Article II, Offenses; Chapter 281, Juveniles; and Chapter
312, Nuisances, any person who shall cause physical damage to or
destroy any public property shall be liable for the cost of replacing or
repairing such damaged or destroyed property. The parent or parents of
any unemancipated minor child who violates § 335-22 may also be held
liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed
property in accordance with the Wisconsin Statutes. Nothing in this
Code shall prevent the Police Department from referring violations of
the provisions of this chapter to the District Attorney's office in the
interest of justice.
B. Attempt.
(1) Whoever attempts to commit an act prohibited by this chapter;
Chapter 272, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages,
Article II, Offenses; Chapter 281, Juveniles; and Chapter 312,
Nuisances, may be required to forfeit amounts not to exceed 1/2
the maximum penalty for the completed act.
(2) An attempt to commit an act prohibited by this chapter; Chapter
272, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages, Article II,
§ 335-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-2
1:365
Offenses; Chapter 281, Juveniles; and Chapter 312, Nuisances,
requires that the actor have an intent to perform acts and attain a
result which, if accomplished, would constitute a violation of these
ordinances and that he or she does acts towards the commission
of the violation which demonstrate unequivocally, under all the
circumstances, that he or she formed that intent and would commit
the violation except for the intervention of another person or some
other extraneous factor.
C. Parties to acts prohibited in this chapter; Chapter 272, Intoxicating
Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages, Article II, Offenses; Chapter
281, Juveniles; and Chapter 312, Nuisances.
(1) Whoever is concerned in the commission of an act prohibited by
this chapter; Chapter 272, Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt
Beverages, Article II, Offenses; Chapter 281, Juveniles; and
Chapter 312, Nuisances, is a principal and may be charged with
and convicted of the commission of said act although he or she did
not directly commit it and although the person who directly
committed it has not been convicted of some other act prohibited
by these ordinances.
(2) A person is concerned in the commission of an act prohibited by
these ordinances if he:
(a) Directly commits the act; or
(b) Intentionally aids and abets the commission of it; or
(c) Is a party to a conspiracy with another to commit it or advises,
hires, counsels or otherwise procures another to commit it.
Such party is also concerned in the commission of any other
act which is committed in pursuance of the intended violation
and which, under the circumstances, is the natural and
probable consequence of the intended violation. This
paragraph does not apply to a person who voluntarily changes
his or her mind and no longer desires that the act be
committed and notifies the other parties concerned of his or
her withdrawal within a reasonable time before the
commission of the violation so as to allow the others also to
withdraw.
§ 335-2 MONONA CODE § 335-2
1:366
ARTICLE II
Offenses Against Public Safety and Peace
§ 335-3. Regulation of firearms, explosives and other missiles.
[Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 08-09-601]
A. Discharge of firearms regulated. No person, except a law enforcement
officer in the performance of an official duty, shall fire or discharge any
firearm, rifle, spring gun, air gun or pneumatic pellet gun, BB gun or
paintball gun, or bow and arrow of any description in his or her
possession or under his or her control within the City of Monona.
[Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
B. Hunting prohibited. Hunting within the City of Monona is prohibited.
C. Shooting into City limits. No person shall in the territory adjacent to the
City discharge any firearm in such manner that the discharge shall
enter or fall within the City of Monona.
D. Shooting ranges. This section shall not prevent the maintenance and
use of duly supervised rifle or pistol ranges or shooting galleries
approved by the Common Council, upon the recommendation of the
Chief of Police, where proper safety precautions are taken.
E. Explosive devices. No person shall discharge or detonate any dynamite,
nitroglycerin or other explosive within the City without first obtaining a
permit to do so from the Common Council or its designee.
F. Throwing or shooting of arrows, stones or other missiles prohibited.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause the
discharge of any dangerous missile from any slingshot, bow and
arrow or other means within 300 feet of any inhabited dwelling or
building or any public park, square or enclosure.
(2) This subsection shall not apply:
(a) To the shooting or discharging of toy arrows or arrows which
have a tip made of rubber or similar material.
(b) To a supervised archery range approved by the Common
Council.
(c) Within the interior of a single-family dwelling.
G. Storage of gunpowder. No person shall keep or have, in any building or
place owned or occupied by him or her, any greater quantity of
gunpowder than 25 pounds for any period longer than 10 hours. All
gunpowder shall be securely kept in a metallic canister with a metallic
cap or cover, and no such canister shall be opened at night.
H. Definitions. For purposes of this section, "firearm" is defined as any
instrumentality from or with which a shot, bullet, paintball or pellet may
§ 335-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-3
1:367
§ 335-4. Firearms in public buildings; certain weapons prohibited.
[Amended 12-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-11-630; 8-6-2018 by Ord. No.
7-18-704]
be discharged or expelled, regardless of whether the propelling force
is provided by air, spring or other similar mechanical device, or
gunpowder.
A. Weapons in public buildings.
(1) Pursuant to § 943.13(lm)(c)4, Wis. Stats., no person shall enter or
remain in any part of a building owned, occupied or controlled by
the City of Monona while carrying a "weapon," as that term is
defined in § 175.60(1)(j), Wis. Stats. This prohibition shall not apply
to a person who leases residential or business premises in any such
building or if the weapon is in a vehicle driven or parked in a
parking facility.
(2) The City Administrator shall cause signs to be erected at all
entrances to all such buildings, providing notice that no person is
to enter or remain in any such building while carrying such a
weapon. Such signs shall be in the form and location as provided in
§ 943.13(2)(bm), Wis. Stats.
(3) No person shall enter or remain in any part of any "educational
facility," as that term is defined in § 101.123(1)(ae), Wis. Stats.,
educational facility grounds, or a building owned, occupied or
controlled by the City of Monona, while carrying a "facsimile
firearm," as that term is defined in § 941.2965(1), Wis. Stats. This
prohibition shall not apply to a person who leases residential or
business premises in any such building or if the firearm is in a
vehicle driven or parked in a parking facility.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a peace
officer or armed forces or military personnel armed in the line of
duty or any person duly authorized by the Chief of Police to possess
a weapon or facsimile firearm in any educational facility or public
building. Notwithstanding § 939.22(22), Wis. Stats., for purposes of
this paragraph, peace officer does not include a commission
warden who is not a state-certified commission warden.
(5) Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the carrying
of any firearm or dangerous weapon contrary to §§ 941.23 or
941.235, Wis. Stats.
(6) Any person violating this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of
up to $500 for each violation.
B. Possession, sale and manufacture of certain weapons prohibited.
(1) No person shall sell, manufacture, purchase, possess or carry
metallic knuckles or knuckles of any substance which could be put
§ 335-3 MONONA CODE § 335-4
1:368
§ 335-5. Sale and discharge of fireworks restricted.
to the same use with the same or similar effect as metallic
knuckles, a "numchuk" (also called a "nunchaku") or any similar
weapon, a "cestus" or similar material weighted with metal or
other substance and worn on the hand, a "churkin" (also called a
"suriken") or any similar object intended to injure a person when
thrown, a "sucbai" or similar weapon, a "manrikigusari" or a similar
length of chain having weighted ends, or any other martial arts
device or instrumentality which, in the manner it is used or
intended to be used, is calculated or likely to produce injury or
death to another person within the City of Monona.
(2) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
CHURKIN — A round throwing knife consisting of several sharp
points protruding from a rounded disc.
NUMCHUK or NUNCHAKU — An instrument consisting of two or
more sticks, clubs or rods connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain.
SUCBAI — A short length of wood or metal or similar material
which, when gripped in the hand, protrudes on either side of the
fist. Such prohibited instrument may or may not have spikes or
short pointed protrusions from either end.
C. Reckless use of weapons.
(1) Acts prohibited.
(a) No person shall endanger another's safety by reckless conduct
in the operation or handling of a firearm, air gun, knife, or bow
and arrow.
(b) No person shall operate or go armed with a firearm, air gun,
knife, or bow and arrow while he or she is under the influence
of an intoxicant.
(c) No person shall intentionally point a firearm, air gun, knife, or
bow and arrow at or toward another person.
(2) Reckless conduct defined. "Reckless conduct" consists of an act
which creates a situation of unreasonable risk and high probability
of death or great bodily harm to another and which demonstrates a
conscious disregard for the safety of another and a willingness to
take chances of perpetrating an injury.
A. (Reserved)217
217. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A, Fireworks permit required, was repealed 2-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 1-18-694.
§ 335-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-5
1:369
§ 335-6. Obstructing streets and sidewalks prohibited.
§ 335-7. Loitering prohibited.
B. State laws adopted. Section 167.10, Wis. Stats., regulating the sale and
use of fireworks, exclusive of any penalty imposed thereby, is adopted
by reference and made a part of this Code as if fully set forth herein.
A. Obstructing streets. No person shall obstruct, loiter, cause a nuisance
or engage in any sport or exercise on any public street, sidewalk, bridge
or public ground within the City of Monona in such a manner as to:
(1) Prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic thereon;
(2) Prevent or hinder free ingress or egress to or from any place of
business or amusement, church, public hall or meeting place; or
(3) Cause a nuisance by congregating and hindering the free passage
of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
B. Obstructing sidewalk prohibited. No person shall block any sidewalk or
bridge by obstructing the same so that it is impossible for a pedestrian
to travel along the sidewalk without leaving the sidewalk and walking
on adjacent property or on the street.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended:
NUISANCE — Unnecessary conduct which may tend to annoy,
intimidate, threaten or otherwise disturb another in or about any public
street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground, which is offensive to the
public morals or decency of the citizens of the City of Monona.
OBSTRUCT — To interfere with unobstructed travel by any means,
including but not limited to standing on the part of the walk that is fit
for travel or placing any object or vehicle whatsoever on such sidewalk.
SIDEWALK — Any sidewalk owned or maintained by the City. The term
shall not include sidewalks or walkways on private property in shopping
centers, apartment complexes, office building sites or any other private
property.
D. Free speech. This section shall not be interpreted as prohibiting any
person from stopping on any sidewalk to talk or to make a speech,
provided that such person shall not stand in such a location that it is
impossible for any pedestrian to travel along the sidewalk without
leaving the sidewalk and walking on adjacent property or on the street.
If two or more persons are engaged in talking while stopped on a
sidewalk, they shall not stand in such locations as to completely prevent
any pedestrian from passing them on the sidewalk.
§ 335-5 MONONA CODE § 335-7
1:370
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended:
LOITER — To sit, stand, loaf, lounge, wander or stroll in an aimless
manner, pause or remain in an area for no obvious reason.
NUISANCE — Unnecessary conduct which may tend to annoy,
intimidate, threaten or otherwise disturb another in or about any public
street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground, which is offensive to the
public morals or decency of the citizens of the City of Monona.
B. Public property loitering prohibited.
(1) No person shall loiter in or about any public street, public sidewalk,
street crossing, alley, bridge, public parking lot or other place of
assembly or public use after being requested to move by any police
officer.
(2) Upon being requested to move, a person shall immediately comply
with such request by leaving the premises or area thereof at the
time of the request.
(3) No person shall loiter in or about any toilet open to the public for
the purpose of engaging in or soliciting any lewd or lascivious
conduct or any unlawful act.
(4) No person shall loiter in or about any school or public place at or
near which children or students attend or normally congregate. As
used in this subsection, "loiter" means to delay, to linger or to idle
in or about any said school or public place without a lawful purpose
for being present.
C. Private property loitering prohibited.
(1) No person shall loiter in or about any private premises or adjacent
doorways or entrances or upon private property held out for public
use, including, but not limited to, business or industry parking lots
or shopping malls, without invitation from the owner or occupant or
any person in authority at such places. No person shall loiter in or
about the doorway, stairway, steps or entrance of any business
place or private residence without the expressed consent of the
owner thereof or at any time other than usual business hours.
Under this subsection, "business place" shall include public
building at such times that the same shall be closed for the usual
and normal business conduct thereat.
(2) Upon being requested to move by any such person in authority or
by any police officer, a person shall immediately comply with such
request by leaving the premises or area thereof at the time of the
request.
§ 335-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-7
1:371
(3) No person shall sit, lie or otherwise recline upon or against any
parked motor vehicle without the expressed consent of the owner
thereof, whether such be parked upon a public street, alley, parking
lot, driveway or private premises.
(4) No person shall stand or loiter on any roadway other than in a
safety zone if such act interferes with the lawful movement of
traffic.
D. Loitering or prowling prohibited. No person shall loiter or prowl in a
place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals
under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or
property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be
considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact
that the person takes flight upon appearance of a law enforcement
officer, refuses to identify himself/herself or manifestly endeavors to
conceal himself/herself or any object. Unless flight by the person or
other circumstances makes it impracticable, a law enforcement officer
shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the
person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be
warranted, by requesting him or her to identify himself/herself and
explain his or her presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted
of an offense under this subsection if the law enforcement officer did
not comply with the preceding sentence or if it appears at trial that the
explanation given by the person was true and, if believed by the law
enforcement officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.218
E. Loitering for purposes of prostitution prohibited. No person shall loiter
in or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public in a manner and
under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing,
soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution. Among
the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether
such purpose is manifested: that such person is a known prostitute or
panderer; that such person repeatedly beckons to stop or attempts to
stop, or engages male or female passersby in conversation, or
repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing,
waving of arms or any other bodily gesture. The violator's conduct must
be such as to demonstrate a specific intent to induce, entice, solicit or
produce another to commit an act of prostitution. No arrest shall be
made for a violation of this subsection unless the sworn police officer
first affords such person an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no
one shall be convicted of violating this subsection if it appears at trial
that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. As
used in this subsection:
(1) "Public place" is an area generally visible to public view and
includes streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks,
218. Editor's Note: Original subsection (e), Loitering by underage persons where alcohol
beverage is dispensed, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 335-7 MONONA CODE § 335-7
1:372
§ 335-8. Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited.
driveways, parking lots, automobiles, whether moving or not, and
buildings open to the general public, including those which serve
food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorway and
entrance to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
(2) "Known prostitute or panderer" means a person who within five
years previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section had,
within the knowledge of the sworn police officer, been convicted in
any municipal court or circuit court in the State of Wisconsin of an
offense involving prostitution.
F. No person shall congregate on any public sidewalk or on any part of a
public street or street corner so as to obstruct the same, nor shall any
person use any sidewalks or any part of a street as a place for vending,
selling or dealing in merchandise, except as permitted in Chapter 404,
Transient Merchants, of this Code.
A. Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited. No person shall use within the
City any equipment for the amplification of sound so as to cause such
amplified sound to be transmitted into a public street, alley or public
place unless a permit has been granted, which states the time and place
of the event, by the Chief of Police. It shall be unlawful for any person
knowingly or wantonly to use or operate or to cause to be used or
operated any mechanical device, machine, apparatus or instrument for
intensification or amplification of the human voice or any sound or noise
in any public or private place in such manner that the peace and good
order of the neighborhood is disturbed or that persons owning, using or
occupying property in the neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed.
B. Types of loud and unnecessary noises. The following acts are declared
to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this
section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street
or public place in the City for longer than three seconds in any
period of one minute or less, except as a danger warning; the
creation of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound by means of any
signaling device and the sounding of any plainly audible device for
an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any
signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use
of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust
and the use of any signaling device when traffic is for any reason
held up.
(2) Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving
set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for
the producing or reproducing of sound in a loud and unnecessary
§ 335-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-8
1:373
manner. The operation of any set, instrument, phonograph,
machine or device between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
in a manner as to be plainly audible at the properly line of the
building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this section. [Amended
10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(3) Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving
set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier
or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of
commercial advertising or attracting attention of the public to any
building or structure. Announcements over loudspeakers can only
be made by the announcer in person and without the aid of any
mechanical device.
(4) Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which causes
frequent or long-continued unnecessary noise.
(5) Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop
work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper
City authorities.
(6) Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motorboat
except through a muffle or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(7) Construction or repair of buildings. The erection (including
excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, as well
as the operation of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic
hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or any other similar
equipment attended by loud or unusual noise, other than between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays; provided,
however, the Building Inspector shall have the authority, upon
determining that the loss of inconvenience which would result to
any party in interest would be extraordinary and of such nature as
to warrant special consideration, to grant a permit for a period
necessary within which time such work and operation may take
place within the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. [Amended
10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(8) Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church or court while in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which
unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that
institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the
hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in those
streets indicating a school, hospital or court street. No person,
§ 335-8 MONONA CODE § 335-8
1:374
§ 335-9. Disorderly conduct.
while on public or private grounds adjacent to any building or while
within any building in which a school or any class thereof is in
session, shall willfully make or assist in the making of any noise
or diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace or good
order and operation of such school session or class thereof.
(9) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(a) Any vehicle of the City while engaged in necessary public
business.
(b) Excavations or repairs of streets or other public construction
by or on behalf of the City, county or state at night when public
welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such
work during the day.
(c) The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course
of public addresses which are noncommercial in nature.
C. Permits for amplifying devices.
(1) Permit required. The use of loudspeakers or amplifying devices on
the streets or in the parks of the City of Monona is prohibited
unless the party desiring to use such loudspeaker or amplifying
device first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police or his/her
designee. [Amended 8-6-2018 by Ord. No. 7-18-705]
(2) Grounds or reasons for denial or allowance. The Chief of Police
shall have the authority to revoke such permit when he or she
believes such loudspeaker or amplifying device is becoming a
nuisance because of the volume, the method in which it is being
used or the location in which it is being operated.
(3) Time restrictions. The Chief of Police shall not grant a permit to use
a loudspeaker or amplifying device before the hours of 9:00 a.m. or
after 9:00 p.m. No permit shall be granted to anyone who, in the
opinion of the Chief of Police, uses said loudspeaker or amplifying
device in such a manner or for such a purpose as to constitute a
nuisance. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
A. Disorderly conduct prohibited. No person within the City of Monona
shall:
(1) In any public or private place, engage in violent, noisy, riotous,
abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or
otherwise disorderly conduct which tends to cause or provoke an
immediate disturbance of public order or tends to annoy or disturb
any other person;
(2) Intentionally cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, riot or
noisy altercation;
§ 335-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-9
1:375
§ 335-10. Unauthorized presence on school property.
(3) With intent to annoy another, make a telephone call, whether or not
conversation ensues;
(4) Indecently expose his or her person;
(5) Be in any business or private structure, private vehicle or upon any
private grounds without the consent of the owner.
B. Defecating or urinating in public places. It shall be unlawful for any
person to defecate or urinate outside of designated sanitary facilities,
upon any sidewalk, street, alley, public parking lot, park, playground,
cemetery or other public area within the City, or upon any private
property in open view of the public or in the halls, rooms without
restroom facilities, stairways or elevators of public or commercial
buildings.219
A. Unauthorized presence.
(1) No student who is under suspension, expulsion or other
disciplinary procedures excluding him or her from attending any
school located within the City, or any person not a student
presently enrolled or not an employee of such schools or not a
parent or guardian of a student, or not an otherwise "authorized
person," shall be present within any school building or upon any
school grounds adjacent thereto without having first secured
authorization to be there from the principal or other person in
charge of the school building or school grounds, except while in
direct route to secure such authorization.
(2) Any unauthorized person who shall come upon school property and
refuses to leave upon request by the school principal or any person
acting under the direction of the school principal, in addition to
violating Subsection A(1), shall be guilty of trespass.
(3) "Authorized person" shall be:
(a) Any person who is present at any school building or school
grounds for the purpose previously authorized by the school or
its designee;
(b) Any person transporting a student and who utilizes the
driveway specified for loading and unloading personnel;
(c) Any person utilizing a designated area for attending an athletic
or other organized school event.
B. Disorderly conduct on public school property.
219. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 335-9 MONONA CODE § 335-10
1:376
(1) No person shall, on any school property or building, engage in
violent, abusive, loud or otherwise disorderly conduct which causes
or provokes an immediate disturbance of public order or disturbs
or annoys any other person; nor shall a person intentionally engage
in any fight, brawl, riot or noisy altercation other than a bona fide
athletic contest.
(2) Nonstudents, students from schools other than the school on the
property or students from a school who are not in compliance with
the school system's published rules and regulations shall be
considered in violation of this section. The published rules and
regulations of the school system are incorporated as if fully set
forth herein.
(3) All entrances to the school buildings referred to in Subsection A
shall be posted with a notice stating "Entry into School Building by
Unauthorized Person Prohibited."
(4) "Unauthorized presence" shall include any vehicle that is found on
school property which has not received permission to be there. If
the occupants or owners are not on school property for some
legitimate business or activity or are parked in an area that
regulates parking to certain authorized vehicles, they are in
violation. Such vehicle may be issued a City summons that
regulates parking or may be towed away at the direction of the
school principal or person in charge of such school building. Law
enforcement officers may also have any vehicle towed away which,
because of its location, creates a hazard to life or property.
C. Loitering near school prohibited. No person not in official attendance or
on official school business shall enter into, congregate, loiter or cause a
nuisance in any school building in the City of Monona or upon any
Monona Grove School District grounds or within adjacent posted school
zones on any day when such schools are in session.
D. Possession of intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages. No
person shall possess intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages
while on any school property.
E. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended.
LOITER — To sit, stand, loaf, lounge, wander or stroll in an aimless
manner or to stop, pause or remain in an area for no obvious reason.
NUISANCE — Unnecessary conduct which may tend to annoy,
intimidate, threaten or otherwise disturb another in or about any public
street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground, which is offensive to the
public morals or decency of the citizens of the City of Monona.
§ 335-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-11
1:377
§ 335-11. Possession and use of controlled substances; marijuana.
[Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 08-09-605; 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
2-17-686]
§ 335-12. Obstruction of aisles and approaches in public halls.
No owner, lessee or occupant of any room or hall used for public meetings
shall permit the approaches, aisles, halls, passageways or aisles leading to
or between the seats to be obstructed with any benches, chairs, stools or by
any other means whereby the free passage to, through or from such room
shall be in any manner impeded.
A. Possession of controlled substances. It is unlawful for any person to
possess a controlled substance, other than a controlled substance
classified in Schedule I and II which is a narcotic drug, unless the
substance was obtained directly from or pursuant to a valid
prescription or order of a practitioner, as defined in § 961.01(19), Wis.
Stats., while acting in the course of his or her professional practice, or
except as otherwise authorized by this Code.
B. Possession and use of marijuana.
(1) No person shall possess or use marijuana, as defined in the
Wisconsin Statutes, unless it was obtained directly from or
pursuant to a valid prescription or order of a practitioner, as
defined in § 961.01(19), Wis. Stats., while acting in the course of his
or her professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by
the Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) Subsection B(1) shall not apply to marijuana use by individuals 21
years of age or older while in or on (indoors or outdoors) either
their personal residence or as a lawful invite of the owner of the
residence
(3) Subsection B(1) shall not apply to marijuana possession by
individuals 21 years of age or older at any location.
C. Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be subject to a forfeiture
as set forth in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule.
D. Definitions. As used in this section the following terms shall have the
definitions given in this subsection:
POSSESS — To have actual physical control of a substance which the
person knows, believes or should reasonably believe is a controlled
substance whose possession is prohibited by law. This definition is
intended to be interpreted in a manner set forth in Section 6030 of the
Wisconsin Criminal Jury Instructions.
USE — To take any action intended to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance whose
possession is prohibited by law.
§ 335-11 MONONA CODE § 335-13
1:378
§ 335-13. Theft of taxi service.
Any person who hires a taxicab at any place and fails to pay the fare for such
service upon exiting the taxicab in the City shall be subject to the penalties
provided in § 1-4 of the Code of the City of Monona.
§ 335-14. Merchandise not to be placed on sidewalk or terrace.
§ 335-15. Sleeping in vehicles. [Added 8-17-2009 by Ord. No.
08-09-603]
A. Unlawful to place articles on sidewalk. Except as provided in this
section, no person shall place or deposit on any sidewalk or terrace or
in any roadway, any cask, bottles, cans or other substances or
materials, excepting newspapers or magazines on sale and stands for
the sale thereof, when consent therefor has been obtained from the
occupant or owner of the abutting property and when the same are
placed only upon such portion of the sidewalk or terrace as shall be
designated therefor by the Chief of Police.
B. Merchandise not to be left on sidewalk. No person shall place and leave
for more than two hours on the outer edge of the sidewalk in front of his
or her store or building dry goods, wares or merchandise for purposes
of loading and unloading or in business districts in actual use for
merchandising purposes.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep or camp between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., whether inside or outside of a vehicle, in or
on any:
(1) Public road.
(2) Public property.
(3) Private property, including but not limited to beaches, vacant lots,
parking areas and commercial properties, unless the person
sleeping or camping in or on such private property:
(a) Is an owner or lessee of such property or the house guest of
such owner or lessee; or
(b) Has the permission of the owner of such property, his or her
agent or the person in lawful possession of such property, and
suitable sanitary facilities are available on such property to the
person sleeping or camping in or on such property.
B. Notwithstanding the above prohibition against sleeping on a public
road, it is not the intent of this section to prohibit persons, when
necessary for their safety or the safety of others, to pull off the public
road and sleep, whether inside or outside their vehicles.
C. Anyone found to have violated this section shall be subject to the
penalty as set forth in § 1-4 of this Code.
§ 335-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-16
1:379
§ 335-16. Inhaling toxic vapors. [Added 8-17-2009 by Ord. No.
08-09-603]
§ 335-17. Menacing or aggressive panhandling prohibited. [Added
8-17-2009 by Ord. No. 08-09-598]
A. No person shall inhale any substance or vapor, including but not limited
to those containing ketone, aldehydes, organic acetates, ether
chlorinated hydrocarbons, with intent to cause intoxication,
stupefaction or hallucination, while the person is on a street, sidewalk,
alley, public right-of-way, public park, other publicly owned facility, or
premises open to the general public, whether the premises is publicly
or privately owned and whether or not a fee is charged for the use of the
premises.
B. Anyone found to have violated this section shall be subject to the
penalty as set forth in § 1-4 of this Code.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure unimpeded pedestrian
traffic flow, to maintain and protect the physical safety and well-being
of pedestrians, and to otherwise foster a safe and harassment-free
climate in public places in the City of Monona.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings given:
AGGRESSIVE OR INTIMIDATING BEHAVIOR — Behavior shall be
construed as aggressive or intimidating if a reasonably prudent
individual could be deterred from passing through or remaining in or
near any thoroughfare or place open to the public because of fear,
concern or apprehension.
INTERSECTION — Has the meaning designated in § 340.01(25), Wis.
Stats.
KNOWN PANHANDLER — A person who within one year previous to
the date of arrest for violation of this section has been convicted in a
court of competent jurisdiction of any civil or criminal offense involving
panhandling.
PUBLIC PLACE or PLACE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC — An area generally
visible to public view and includes streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys,
plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles (whether moving or
not), and buildings open to the general public, including those which
serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways or
entrances in buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
THREATENING CONVERSATION OR GESTURE — A conversation,
gesture, or both, shall be construed as threatening if a reasonably
prudent individual would perceive such conduct as intending to result
in the procurement of money or goods by threat or coercion.
C. In or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public, no person
either individually or as part of a group shall procure or attempt to
§ 335-16 MONONA CODE § 335-17
1:380
§ 335-18. Bullying, harassment. [Added 5-20-2013 by Ord. No.
5-13-645]
procure a handout from another in a manner or under circumstances
manifesting an express or implied threat or coercion. Among the
circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such
purpose or behavior is manifested are the following: that such person is
a known panhandler; that such person repeatedly and in a threatening
fashion beckons to, stops or attempts to stop passersby; that such
person engages passersby in threatening conversation; or that such
person utilizes threatening bodily gestures. The violator's conduct must
be such as to demonstrate a specific intent to induce, solicit or procure
from another goods or money by threat or coercion. No arrest shall be
made for a violation of this subsection unless the arresting officer first
affords such person an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one
shall be convicted of violating this subsection if it appears at trial that
the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose.
D. In or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public, no person
either individually or as part of a group shall procure or attempt to
procure a handout from another in an aggressive or intimidating
manner. Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether such purpose or behavior is manifested are the
following: that such person is a known panhandler; that such person
continues to beckon to, accost or follow or ask passerby for a handout
after the passerby has failed to respond or has told the person "no"; that
such person engages in a course of conduct or commits any act which
harasses or intimidates the passerby; or that such person utilizes or
attempts to utilize bodily gestures or physical contact to impede the
path of any passersby, including but not limited to unwanted touching
or blocking the path or impeding the free movement of the passersby.
The violator's conduct must be such as to demonstrate a specific intent
to induce, solicit or procure from another goods or money by aggressive
or intimidating behavior. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this
subsection unless the arresting officer first affords such person an
opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one shall be convicted of
violating this subsection if it appears at trial that the explanation given
was true and disclosed a lawful purpose.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to procure or attempt to procure a
handout within 50 feet of an automatic teller machine (ATM) or within
25 feet of any open sidewalk cafe.
F. Anyone found to have violated this section shall be subject to the
penalty as set forth in § 1-4 of this Code.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended:
§ 335-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-18
1:381
§ 335-19. Synthetic chemical cannabinoid prohibited. [Added
6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 6-16-679]
BULLYING — A form of harassment, defined as an intentional course
of conduct which is reasonably likely to intimidate, emotionally abuse,
slander, threaten or intimidate another person and which serves no
legitimate purpose.
COURSE OF CONDUCT — A pattern of conduct composed of a series
of acts over a period of time, however short, evidencing a continuity of
purpose.
HARASSMENT — Any conduct, whether verbal, physical, written or by
means of any mode of communication, which:
Is prohibited by § 947.01, 947.012, 947.0125 or 947.013, Wis.
Stats.; or
(1)
Is any intentional course of conduct which is likely to create an
intimidating, hostile or offensive environment, and which serves no
legitimate purpose.
(2)
B. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any bullying
or harassment of a person or induce another person to engage in such
bullying or harassment.
C. Retaliation prohibited. No person shall retaliate against any person who
reports any conduct which is prohibited by this section.
D. Constitutionally protected activity. This section shall not be construed
to apply to any constitutionally protected activity or speech.
E. Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any custodial parent or
guardian of any unemancipated person under 18 years of age to allow
or permit such person to violate the provisions of Subsection B above.
The fact that, prior to the present offense, a parent, guardian or
custodian was informed in writing by a law enforcement officer of a
separate violation of Subsection B by the same minor occurring within
90 days prior to the present offense shall constitute a rebuttable
presumption that such parent, guardian or custodian allowed or
permitted the present violation.
F. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of this Code.
A. Adoption of § 961.14(4)(tb), Wis. Stats. Pursuant to § 66.0107(1), Wis.
Stats., which authorizes the enactment and enforcement of an
ordinance to prohibit the possession of a controlled substance specified
in § 961.14(4)(tb), Wis. Stats., the City of Monona does hereby adopt
and incorporate into this section of the Monona Code, § 961.14(4)(tb),
Wis. Stats.
§ 335-18 MONONA CODE § 335-19
1:382
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DELIVER — The same meaning given in § 961.01(6) Wis. Stats., with
respect to a controlled substance or controlled substance analog.
DISTRIBUTE — Has the same meaning given in § 961.01(9), Wis. Stats.
with respect to a controlled substance or controlled substance analog.
C. Prohibited sale, use and possession. It shall be unlawful for any person
to use, possess, sell, publicly display for sale or attempt to sell, give,
deliver, distribute or barter any one or more of the following chemicals,
whether under the common street or trade names of "Spice," "K2,"
"Genie," "Yucatan Fire," "Blaze," "Scubby Snacks," "Red X Dawn,"
"Zohia," "Spike Diamond," "Route 69," "Smoke XXXX," "Citron," "fake"
or "new" marijuana, or by any other name, label or description as set
forth in § 961.14(4)(tb), Wis. Stats.
D. Medical and dental use allowed. Acts prohibited under Subsection C
shall not be unlawful if done by or under the direction or prescription of
a licensed physician, dentist or other medical health professional
authorized to direct or prescribe such acts, provided use is permitted
under state and federal laws and the practitioner is acting in the course
of his or her professional practice.
E. Penalties.
(1) Any person violating this section shall be subject to the penalty as
provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each day a violation continues
constitutes a separate offense.
(2) Any commercial establishment displaying or offering synthetic
cannabinoids for sale shall be subject to the penalty as provided in
§ 1-4 of this Code. Each day a violation continues constitutes a
separate offense.
(3) Violation of this section by a commercial establishment is a public
nuisance.
§ 335-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-19
1:383

ARTICLE III
Offenses Against Property
§ 335-20. Littering prohibited.
A. Littering prohibited. No person shall throw any glass, refuse or waste,
filth or other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or
other property of the City of Monona, or upon property within the City
owned by the Monona Grove School District or any private person, or
upon the surface of any body of water within the City.
B. Litter from conduct of commercial enterprise.
(1) Scope. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all sales,
promotions and other commercial ventures that result in litter
being deposited on any street, alley or other public way.
(2) Litter to be cleaned up. Any person, firm, corporation or association
carrying on an enterprise that results in litter being deposited on
any street, alley or other public way shall clean up the same within
12 hours of the time the same is deposited. If any such litter is
subject to being blown about, it shall be picked up immediately. If
any such litter is likely to attract animals or vermin, such litter shall
be picked up immediately.
(3) Litter picked up at litterer's expense. If any person, firm,
corporation or association fails to pick up any litter as required by
Subsection B(2) within the time specified, the City shall arrange to
have the same picked up by City crews or by private enterprise.
The entire expense of picking up such litter, together with an
additional charge of 20% for administrative expenses, shall be
charged to the person, firm, corporation or association that did the
littering. If such sum is not promptly paid, steps shall be taken,
with the advice of the City Attorney's office, to collect the same.
This charge shall be in addition to any forfeiture or other penalty
for violation of this section.
C. Depositing of materials prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
deposit, cause or permit to be deposited, placed or parked, any
vegetation, grass, leaves, foliage, earth, sand, gravel, water, snow, ice,
debris, waste material, foreign substance, construction materials,
equipment or object upon any street, sidewalk or public property
without authorization of the Common Council or City Engineer
pursuant to the provisions of this Code, or upon any private property
without the consent of the owner or lessee of the property. Any person
who deposits, causes or permits to be deposited, placed or parked any
such materials, equipment or objects upon any street, sidewalk or
property shall be responsible to properly mark or barricade the area so
as to prevent a safety hazard.
§ 335-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-20
1:385
§ 335-21. Theft of library material.
D. Distribution of commercial handbills and advertising matter prohibited.
No person, except the owner, shall place or cause to be placed in or
upon any automobile standing on the streets, alleys or public places in
the City for advertising purposes any commercial handbill, advertising
material, cards, pamphlet, sticker or paper of any kind. It shall be
unlawful to deliver any handbills or advertising material to any
premises in the City except by being handed to the recipient, placed on
the porch, stoop or entranceway of the building or firmly affixed to a
building so as to prevent any such articles from being blown about,
becoming scattered or in any way causing litter.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, certain words and terms
are defined as follows:
ARCHIVES — A place in which public or institutional records are
systematically preserved.
LIBRARY — Any public library, library of an educational or historical
organization or society or museum, and specifically the public libraries
within the City of Monona and school libraries.
LIBRARY MATERIAL — Includes any book, plate, picture, photograph,
engraving, painting, drawing, map, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet,
broadside, manuscript, document, letter, public record, microform,
sound recording, audiovisual materials in any format, magnetic or other
tapes, electronic data-processing records, or other tapes, artifacts or
other documents, written or printed materials, regardless of physical
form of characteristics, belonging to, on loan to or otherwise in the
custody of a library.
B. Possession without consent prohibited. Whoever intentionally takes and
carries away, transfers, conceals or retains possession of any library
material without the consent of a library official, agent or employee and
with intent to deprive the library of possession of the material may be
subject to a forfeiture as provided by the general penalty provisions of
this Code. The failure to return library material after its proper return
date, after written notice from the Library and City Attorney, shall be
deemed to be theft. Notice shall be considered given when written
notice is mailed to the last-known address of the person with the
overdue material; the notice date shall be the date of mailing.
C. Concealment. The concealment of library material beyond the last
station for borrowing library material in a library is evidence of intent
to deprive the library of possession of the material. The discovery of
library material which has not been borrowed in accordance with the
library's procedures or taken with consent of a library official, agent or
employee, and which is concealed upon the person or among the
belongings of another, is evidence of intentional concealment on the
part of the person so concealing the material.
§ 335-20 MONONA CODE § 335-21
1:386
§ 335-22. Damage to public property.
D. Detention based on probable cause. An official or adult employee or
agent of a library who has probable cause for believing that a person
has violated this section in his or her presence may detain the person in
a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time to deliver the
person to a law enforcement officer or to the person's parent or
guardian in the case of a minor. The detained person shall be promptly
informed of the purpose of the detention and be permitted to make
telephone calls but shall not be interrogated or searched against his or
her will before the arrival of a law enforcement officer, who may
conduct a lawful interrogation of the accused person. Compliance with
this section entitles the official, agent or employee effecting the
detention to the same defense in any action as is available to a peace
officer making an arrest in the line of duty.
E. Damaging material prohibited. No person shall mar, deface or in any
other way damage or mutilate any book, periodical, pamphlet, picture
or other article or property belonging to or in charge of the library. Any
person convicted of violating this subsection shall be subject to the
penalties as set forth in § 1-4 of this Code.
F. Return demanded. No person shall fail, on demand, to return any book,
periodical, pamphlet, picture or other articles or property belonging to
or in charge of the Monona Public Library according to the rules or
regulations duly made and adopted by the Library Board, and no person
shall remove from the Library any book, periodical, pamphlet, picture
or other articles or property without first having it charged as provided
by such rules and regulations. Any person convicted of violating any
provision of this subsection shall be subject to the penalties as set forth
in § 1-4 of this Code.
A. Damaging public property. No person shall climb any tree or pluck any
flowers or fruit, wild or cultivated, or break, cut down, trample upon,
remove, or in any manner injure or deface, write upon, defile or ill use
any tree, shrub, flower, flower bed, turf, fountain, ornament, statue,
building, fence, apparatus, bench, table, official notice, sign, bridge,
structure or other property within any park or parkway, or in any way
injure, damage or deface any public building, sidewalk or other public
property in the City of Monona.
B. Breaking of street lamps or windows. No person shall break glass in any
street lamps or windows of any building owned or occupied by the City.
C. Damaging fire hydrants and water mains. No person shall, without the
authority of City authorities, operate any valve connected with the
street or water supply mains or open any fire hydrant connected with
the water distribution system, except for the purpose of extinguishing a
fire. No person shall injure or impair the use of any water main or fire
hydrant.
§ 335-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-23
1:387
§ 335-23. Trespass to property.
§ 335-24. Employee theft. [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
08-09-604]
Any employee who intentionally takes and carries away, uses, transfers,
conceals or retains possession of movable property or money of his or her
employer with a value of less than $2,500 without the employer's consent
and with intent to deprive the owner permanently of possession of such
property shall be guilty of employee theft. Anyone found to have violated
this section shall be subject to the penalty as set forth in § 1-4 of the Code.
§ 335-25. Advertisements on public or private property prohibited.
No person shall place any advertisement on any public property, in any
street, alley or public ground or upon any street, alley or public ground, or
upon any private property except by the permission of the owner thereof,
but this section shall not apply to the posting of notices required by law.
§ 335-26. Graffiti.
A. Trespass to property. No person shall enter or remain on any property
after having been notified by the owner or occupant not to remain on
the premises.
B. Trespass to dwelling. No person shall intentionally enter the dwelling of
another without the consent of some person lawfully upon the premises,
under circumstances tending to create or provoke a breach of the
peace.
A. Definition. For purposes of this section, the following term is defined as
indicated:
GRAFFITI — Any unauthorized drawing, figure inscription or painting
appearing on sidewalks, streets, walls or any other place in public view.
B. Prohibition. Anyone who defaces or causes damage to the property of
another by affixing graffiti to the property without the owner's consent
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 1-4 of this Code.
C. Cleanup required. Graffiti shall be removed by the property owner
within two weeks of its application to the property.
§ 335-23 MONONA CODE § 335-26
1:388
Chapter 342
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 312. Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 420.
§ 335-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-26
1:389

ARTICLE I
Junked Vehicles and Appliances
[Adopted as § 10-5-8 of the 1994 Code]
§ 342-1. Storage of automobiles restricted.
No disassembled, inoperable, unlicensed, junked or wrecked motor
vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, trailers, farm machinery, vehicle parts or
tires, or appliances shall be stored upon private residential property or
unenclosed within a building upon nonresidential property within the City
of Monona for a period exceeding 10 days unless it is in connection with an
authorized business enterprise located in a properly zoned area maintained
in such a manner as to not constitute a public nuisance.
§ 342-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISASSEMBLED, INOPERABLE, JUNKED OR WRECKED MOTOR
VEHICLES, TRUCK BODIES, TRACTORS, TRAILERS — Motor vehicles,
recreational vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, farm machinery or trailers in
such state of physical or mechanical ruin as to be incapable of propulsion, of
being operated upon the public streets or highways, or which are otherwise
not in safe or legal condition for operation on public streets or highways
due to missing or inoperative parts, flat or removed tires, expired or missing
license plates or other defects.
INOPERABLE APPLIANCE — Any stove, washer, refrigerator or other
appliance which is no longer operable in the sense for which it was
manufactured.
MOTOR VEHICLE — As defined in § 340.01(35), Wis. Stats.
UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES, TRUCK BODIES, TRACTORS OR
TRAILERS — Motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, recreational vehicles or
trailers which do not bear lawful current license plates.
§ 342-3. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to any motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories
stored within an enclosed building or on the premises of a business
enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner in a properly zoned
area when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, in a
storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner, or
seasonal-use vehicles such as snowmobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters
and nonmotorized campers, provided such vehicles are stored in
compliance with the ordinances of the City. Also excepted are motor
vehicles registered pursuant to §§ 341.265 and 341.266, Wis. Stats. In other
situations the Common Council may issue temporary permits permitting an
extension of not to exceed an additional 30 days' time to comply with this
article where exceptional facts and circumstances warrant such extension.
§ 342-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-4
1:391
§ 342-4. Enforcement.
§ 342-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall interfere with the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this article and shall be found guilty thereof shall be subject to a penalty
as provided in § 1-4 of this Code. Each motor vehicle or appliance involved
shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Whenever the Police Department or Building Inspector shall find any
vehicles, vehicle parts or tires, or appliances, as described herein,
placed or stored in the open upon private property within the City, they
shall notify the owner of said property on which said vehicle or
appliance is stored of the violation of this article. If said vehicles, part
thereof or appliance is not removed within five days, the Police
Department or Building Inspector shall cause to be issued a citation to
the property owner or tenant of the property upon which said vehicle or
appliance is stored.
B. If such vehicle or appliance is not removed within 20 days after
issuance of a citation, the Chief of Police or Building Inspector shall
cause the vehicle or appliance to be removed and impounded, and it
shall thereafter be disposed of as prescribed in §§ 420-3 through 420-6
of the Code by the Chief of Police or Building Inspector or duly
authorized representative. Any cost incurred in the removal and sale of
said vehicle or appliance shall be recovered from the owner. However, if
the owner of the vehicle or appliance cannot readily be found, the cost
of such removal shall be charged to the property from which it is
removed, which charges shall be entered as a special charge on the tax
roll.
§ 342-4 MONONA CODE § 342-5
1:392
Chapter 360
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 7. Water and sewer utilities — See Ch. 443.
§ 360-1. Sanitary sewer utility system.
§ 360-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Monona Common Council or its duly
authorized committee, agent or representative.
CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (CBOD) — The
quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical degradation of organic material
in five days at 20° C. when the oxidation of reduced forms of nitrogen is
prevented by the addition of an inhibitor. This analytical procedure shall be
performed in accordance with Standard Methods.
A. Creation. It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive
for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public to
charge and collect sewer charges or rentals upon all lots, lands and
premises served or benefited by the sanitary sewerage system of the
City, which includes all constructions for the collection, transportation,
pumping, treatment and final disposition of sewage and consisting
generally of pipes, conduits, manholes, sewer mains, intercepting
sewers, pumps, facilities for the treatment and disposal of raw sewage,
whether such facilities are owned and operated directly by the City or
are provided under or impose a cost or charge upon the City for the
services afforded by such facilities.
B. Revenues; rules of construction. This chapter provides a means for
determining wastewater volumes, constituents and characteristics, the
setting of charges and fees, and the issuing of permits to certain users.
Revenues derived from the application of this chapter shall be used to
defray the costs of operating and maintaining adequate wastewater
collection and treatment systems and to provide sufficient funds for
capital outlay, debt service costs and capital improvements. The
charges and fees herein have been established pursuant to
requirements of the Wisconsin Statutes. This chapter shall supersede
any previous ordinances, rules or regulations and shall repeal all parts
thereof that may be inconsistent with this chapter. If there is any
conflict between this chapter and any applicable statute, the state
statute shall be controlling.
§ 342-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-2
1:393
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the public sewer or other place of
disposal beginning outside the inner face of the building wall.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, plus additional pollutants identified in the WPDES permit for the
Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District Treatment Plant receiving the
pollutant, if such works were designed to treat such additional pollutants to
a substantial degree.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater or septage shall be considered free of
floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not
interfere with the collection or treatment system.
GARBAGE — The residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce.
GROUND GARBAGE — The residue from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be no greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension and will be carried freely
in suspension under normal flow conditions in sewers.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS OR WASTEWATER — Wastewater or
septage with pollutants of such a strength that will adversely affect or
disrupt the wastewater treatment processes or effluent quality or sludge
quality if discharged to the sewerage system facility.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The wastewater from an industrial process, trade
or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage, including cooling water and
the discharge from sewage pretreatment facilities.
MMSD ORDINANCE — The Sewer Use Ordinance of the Madison
Metropolitan Sewerage District adopted in September 1984, and any
amendments thereto, and incorporated herein by reference.
MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER — The wastewater of a community. From the
standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater
that may have inadvertently entered the sewerage system.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a
watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or
groundwater.
PARTS PER MILLION — A weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million
value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million
gallons of water.
§ 360-2 MONONA CODE § 360-2
1:394
PERSON — Any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporations, association, society, institution,
enterprise, government agency, or other entity.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a hydrogen ion
concentration of 10.
PUBLIC SEWER — Any sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of
the City of Monona.
SANITARY SEWAGE — A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes
discharged from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities, together with
such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may have inadvertently
entered the sewerage system.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions,
together with small quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface
water that are not admitted intentionally.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — All structures, conduits and pipes by which sewage
is collected, treated and disposed of, except plumbing inside and in
connection with buildings served and service pipes from building to street
main.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — A service charge levied on users of the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities for payment of use-related
capital expenses as well as the operation and maintenance costs, including
replacement costs, of said facilities.
SEWER SYSTEM — The public sanitary sewers within a sewerage system.
The facilities which convey wastewater from individual structures, from
private property to the public sanitary sewer or its equivalent, are
specifically excluded from the definition of "sewer system," except that
pumping units and pressurized lines for individual structures or groups of
structures may be included as part of a sewer system when such units are
cost-effective and are owned and maintained by the City.
SLUG LOAD — Any substance release at a discharge rate and/or
concentration which cause interference to wastewater treatment processes
or plugging or surcharging of the sewer system.
STANDARD METHODS — Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, promulgated by the American Public Health Association,
American Water Works Association and Water Environment Federation, the
analytical procedures performed in accordance with 40 CFR 136, or as the
United States Environmental Protection Agency otherwise determines.220
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 360-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-2
1:395
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "STORM SEWER") — Drain or sewer
for conveying surface water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted
water from any source.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — That portion of the rainfall that is collected and
drained into the storm sewers.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in, water, wastewater, septage or other liquids, and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods and is
referred to as "nonfilterable residue."
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN) — The quantity of organic nitrogen
and ammonia as determined in accordance with Standard Methods.
TOTAL PHOSPHORUS (TP) — The quantity of total phosphorus as
determined in accordance with the 40 CFR Part 136 or as the EPA otherwise
determines.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away, store and treat domestic and industrial
waste and septage and dispose of the effluent and sludge.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, septage, industrial waste and sludge.
Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment."
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water,
either continuously or intermittently.
§ 360-3. Management, operation and control.
The management, operation and control of the sewer system for the City
shall be vested in the Common Council; all records, minutes and all written
proceedings thereof shall be kept by the City Clerk; the City Treasurer shall
keep all financial records.
§ 360-4. Construction.221
The Common Council shall have the power to construct sewer lines for
public use and shall have the power to lay sewer pipes in and through the
alleys, streets and public grounds of the City and, generally, to do all such
work as may be found necessary or convenient in the management of the
sewer system. The Common Council shall have power by itself, its officers,
agents and servants, to enter upon any land in the City for the purpose
of making examination or supervise in the performance of its duties under
this chapter without liability therefor, and the City Public Works Director
shall have power to purchase and acquire for the City all real and personal
property which may be necessary for construction of the sewer system or
for any repair, remodeling or additions thereto.
221. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 360-2 MONONA CODE § 360-5
1:396
§ 360-5. Maintenance of sewer services.
The property owner shall maintain sewer service from the street main to the
house, including all controls between the same, without expense to the City,
except when they are damaged as a result of negligence or carelessness
on the part of the City. All sewer services must be maintained free of
defective conditions by and at the expense of the owner or occupant of
the property. When any sewer service is to be relaid and there are two
or more buildings on such service, each building shall be disconnected
from such service, and a new sewer service shall be installed for each
building. If maintenance activities require that driveways, landscaping, etc.,
be disturbed or removed, the property owner shall be responsible for such
costs.
§ 360-6. User rules and regulations.
A. General. The rules, regulations and sewer rates of the City of Monona
hereinafter set forth shall be considered a part of the contract with
every person, company or corporation who is connected to or uses a
City sewer system, and every such person, company or corporation by
connecting with the sewer system shall be considered as expressing its
assent to be bound thereby. Whenever any of said rules and regulations,
or such others as the City may hereafter adopt, are violated, the use or
service shall be shut off from the building or place of such violation
(even though two or more parties are receiving service through the
same connection) and shall not be reestablished except by order of the
Public Works Committee and on payment of all arrears, the expenses
and established charges of shutting off and putting on, and such other
terms as the Common Council may determine, and a satisfactory
understanding with the party that no further cause for complaint shall
arise. In case of such violation, the Public Works Committee,
furthermore, may declare any payment made for the service by the
party or parties committing such violation to be forfeited, and the same
shall thereupon be forfeited. The right is reserved to the Public Works
Committee to change these said rules, regulations and sewer rates from
time to time as it may deem advisable and make special rates and
contracts in all proper cases.
B. Adoption of rules. The following rules and regulations in this section for
the government of licensed plumbers, sewer users and others, are
hereby adopted and established.
C. Plumbers. No plumber, pipe fitter or other person will be permitted to
do any plumbing or pipe fitting work in connection with the sewer
system without first receiving a license from the State of Wisconsin and
obtaining permission from the sanitary district in which the work is to
be performed. All service connections to the sewer main shall comply
with the State Plumbing Code.
D. Mandatory connection.
§ 360-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-6
1:397
§ 360-7. Sewer user charge system.
(1) Within the City of Monona, the owner of each parcel of land
adjacent to a sewer main on which there exists a building usable for
human habitation or in a block through which such system is
extended shall connect to such system within 365 days of notice in
writing from the City. Upon failure to do so, the Public Works
Committee may cause such connection to be made and bill the
property owner for such costs. If such costs are not paid within 30
days, such costs shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the
property. However, the owner may, within 30 days after the
completion of the work, file a written request with the Public Works
Committee stating that he or she cannot pay such amount in one
sum and ask that the sum be levied in eight or less equal
installments. The amount shall be so collected with interest at the
rate of 1% above the City's current borrowing rate per annum from
the completion of the work, the unpaid balance being a special tax
lien, all pursuant to § 281.45, Wis. Stats.
(2) In lieu of the above, the Public Works Committee, at its option, may
impose a penalty for the period that the violation continues after 10
days' written notice to any owner failing to make a connection to
the sewer system as set forth in § 1-4 of the Code. Upon failure to
make such payment, said charge shall be assessed as a special tax
lien against the property, all pursuant to § 281.45, Wis. Stats.222
(3) This section ordains that the failure to connect to the sewer system
is contrary to the minimum health standards of the City of Monona
and fails to assure preservation of public health, comfort and safety.
E. Application for sewer service.
(1) Every person desiring to connect property to the sewer system
shall file an application in writing to the City on such forms as are
prescribed for that purpose. Blanks for such applications will be
furnished at the Monona City Hall. The application must state fully
and truthfully all the wastes which will be discharged. If the
applicant is not the owner of the premises, the written consent of
the owner must accompany the application. Persons connected to
the sewer system of the City of Monona are referred to herein as
"users."
(2) If it appears that the service applied for will not provide adequate
service for the contemplated use, the Public Works Committee may
reject the application. If the Public Works Committee approves the
application, it shall issue a permit for services as shown on the
application.
222. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 360-6 MONONA CODE § 360-7
1:398
A. Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings
under this section:
DEBT SERVICE CHARGES — All costs associated with repayment of
debts incurred for the construction and/or rehabilitation of wastewater
collection system and treatment facility.
NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER — Wastewater with
concentrations of CBOD, suspended solids, total kjeldahl nitrogen, and
total phosphorus no greater than 200, 250 and 40, and 10 milligrams
per liter (mg/l), respectively.
NORMAL USER — A user whose contributions to the sewerage system
consist only of normal domestic strength wastewater originating from
a house, apartment, flat or other living quarters occupied by a person
or persons constituting a district household, business or commercial
enterprise.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — All costs associated with
the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system.
REPLACEMENT COSTS — All costs necessary to replace equipment as
required to maintain capacity and performance during the design life of
the facility. A separate, segregated, distinct replacement fund shall be
established and used only for replacement of equipment.
B. Policy. It shall be the policy of the City of Monona to obtain sufficient
revenues to pay the costs of the operation and maintenance of the
sewerage system, including a replacement fund (i.e., a cash account to
be used for future expenditures for obtaining or installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the
capacity and performance of the sewage system during the service life
for which such facilities were designed and constructed), through a
system of sewer service charges as defined in this section. The system
shall assure that each user of the sewerage system pays his or her
proportionate share of the cost of such facilities.
C. Basis for service charge.
(1) The annual service charge shall be sufficient to pay the billing and
customer-related administration expenses and the operation and
maintenance expenses, including any replacement costs, of the
sewerage system.
(2) The rates in this chapter shall be reviewed not less than biennially.
Rates shall be adjusted, as required, to reflect actual number and
size of users and actual costs. Users will be notified annually of the
portion of service charges attributable to operation and
maintenance.
D. Sewer service charges. The sewer service charge is hereby imposed
upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premise served by the public
sewer and wastewater facilities or otherwise discharging sewage,
including industrial wastes, into the public sewerage system. Such
§ 360-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-7
1:399
sewer service charge shall be payable as hereinafter provided and in
amount determinable as follows:
E. Category.
(1) Category A service charges shall be imposed on users whose water
use is metered and whose sewer discharges are normal domestic
strength wastewater. A Category A sewer service charge is of the
following form:
Service Charge = Customer Charge + Volume Charge
Customer Charge = A flat rate based on the size of the water
meter.
Volume Charge = The volume of metered water in thousands of
gallons multiplied by the volume rate.
Volume Rate = The volume unit price expressed in dollars per
1,000 gallons.
(2) Category B service charges shall be imposed on users whose water
use is not metered and whose sewage discharges are normal
domestic strength wastewater. The Category B sewer service
charge shall be of the form as follows:
Service Charge = Equivalent Residential Units multiplied by the
Equivalent Residential Units Rate.
No user shall be assigned less than one equivalent residential
unit. The number of residential unit equivalents for nonresidential
users shall be as determined by the approval authority.
(3) Category C service charges shall be imposed on users whose
sewage discharges are high-strength wastewater having organic
concentrations of carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand
(CBOD) greater than 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and/or
suspended solids greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and/
or total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) greater than 40 milligrams per liter
(mg/l), and/or total phosphorus (TP) greater than 10 milligrams per
liter (mg/l). The minimum Category C service charge shall be based
on a concentration of 200 mg/l CBOD, 250 mg/l suspended solids,
and 40 mg/l TKN, and 10 mg/l total phosphorus. The form of the
Category C service charge is as follows:
Service Charge = Customer Charge + Volume Charge + High
Strength Surcharge.
The customer charge and the volume charge are similar to those
components of the Category A service charge.
§ 360-7 MONONA CODE § 360-7
1:400
§ 360-8. Regulations.223
Use of the public sewers shall be in accordance with Chapter V of the
Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District Sewer Use Ordinance.
§ 360-9. Excavations.
High Strength Surcharge = The excessive CBOD, suspended
solids, TKN, and total phosphorus multiplied by the respective
CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and total phosphorus rates. The
excessive CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and total phosphorus are
the portions of each of these constituents that are in excess of
normal domestic strength wastewater. The excessive amounts of
CBOD, suspended solids, TKN, and total phosphorus are expressed
in pounds, and their respective rates are expressed in dollars per
pound.
F. Reassignment of sewer users. The sanitary district will reassign sewer
users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if wastewater
sampling programs and other related information indicate a change of
categories is necessary.
A. General requirements.
(1) In making excavations in streets or highways for laying service pipe
or making repairs, the paving and the earth removed must be
deposited in a manner that will result in the least inconvenience to
the public.
(2) No person shall leave any such excavation made in any street or
highway open at any time without barricades, and during the night,
warning lights must be maintained at such excavations.
(3) In refilling the opening, after the service pipes are laid, the earth
must be laid in layers of not more than nine inches in depth, and
each layer thoroughly compacted to prevent settling. This work,
together with the replacing of sidewalks, ballast and paving, must
be done so as to make the street as good, at least, as before it was
disturbed and satisfactory to the City of Monona. No opening of the
streets for tapping the pipes will be permitted when the ground is
frozen.
B. Tapping the mains. Connections to the sewer system, other than
building sewer connections, shall be done in accordance with Chapter
IV of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District Sewer Use
Ordinance.
C. Installation of building sewers (house laterals).224
223. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 360-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-9
1:401
§ 360-10. User to permit inspection.
Every user shall permit the City of Monona or its duly authorized agent,
at all reasonable hours of the day, to enter his or her premises or building
to examine the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the drains and
sewer connections operate, and he or she must at all times, frankly and
without concealment, answer all questions put to him or her relative to its
use, all in accordance with this chapter and § 196.171, Wis. Stats.
§ 360-11. Utility responsibility.
It is expressly stipulated that no claim shall be made against the City of
Monona or its acting representative by reason of the breaking, clogging,
stoppage or freezing of any service pipes, nor from any damage arising from
repairing mains, making connections or extensions, or any other work that
may be deemed necessary. The right is hereby reserved to cut off the service
at any time for the purpose of repairs or any other necessary purpose, any
(1) All building sewers (laterals) on private property will be installed in
accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 382,
Design, Construction, Installation, Supervision, Maintenance and
Inspection of Plumbing.
(2) All laterals shall be inspected in accordance with § SPS 382.21,
Wis. Adm. Code.
D. Connection charge. Persons attaching to a public sewer shall have the
building sewer or lateral installed at their own expense.
E. Tap permits. After sewer connections have been introduced into any
building or upon any premises, no plumber shall make any alterations,
extensions or attachments unless the party ordering such tapping or
other work exhibits the proper permit for the same from the sanitary
district.
F. User to keep in repair. All users shall keep their own service pipes in
good repair and protected from frost at their own risk and expense and
shall prevent any unnecessary overburdening of the sewer system.
G. Backflow preventor. All floor drains shall have a backflow prevention
valve installed at the owner's expense.
H. User use only. No user shall allow other persons or other services to
connect to the sewer system through his or her lateral.
I. Vacating of premises and discontinuance of service. Whenever
premises served by the system are to be vacated or whenever any
person desires to discontinue service from the system, the City must be
notified in writing.
224. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 360-9 MONONA CODE § 360-11
1:402
permit granted or regulations to the contrary notwithstanding. Whenever it
shall become necessary to shut off the sewer within any sanitary district,
that sanitary district shall, if practicable, give notice to each and every
customer within the affected area of the time when such service will be shut
off.
§ 360-12. Control of industrial and septage wastes.
A. Control manholes.
(1) Each person discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer shall
construct and maintain one or more control manholes or access
points to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling his or
her waste, including domestic sewage.
(2) Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in a
manner acceptable to the City and the Madison Metropolitan
Sewerage District. If measuring devices are to be permanently
installed, they shall be of a type acceptable to the Madison
Metropolitan Sewerage District.
(3) Control manholes, access facilities and related equipment shall be
installed by the person discharging the industrial waste, at his or
her expense, and shall be maintained by the person discharging the
waste so as to be in safe condition, accessible and in proper
operating condition at all times. Plans for installation of the control
manholes or access facilities and related equipment shall be
approved by the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District prior to
the beginning of construction.
B. Wastewater measurement, sampling and reporting. Wastewater flow
measurements, sampling and reporting shall be done in accordance
with Chapter VII of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District Sewer
Use Ordinance.
C. Grease and sand traps.
(1) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be installed at all industrial
and commercial establishments when, in the opinion of the
Building Inspector, they are necessary to prevent discharge of
sand, flammable wastes, oil or grease into the sewer system in
amounts exceeding the limits set forth in the MMSD Ordinance
("an improper discharge"). All such interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the Building Inspector, located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection, and
constructed in accordance with the Wisconsin Plumbing Code.
(2) The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining all such
interceptors on the property at his or her expense. In maintaining
the interceptors, the owner shall properly remove and dispose of all
captured material in an appropriate and lawful manner. The owner
shall maintain a written record of the dates and means of all such
§ 360-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-12
1:403
§ 360-13. Payment of service charges.
disposal which are subject to review by the Building Inspector and
Utility employees upon demand. The interceptor shall be subject
to inspection by the Building Inspector and Utility employees at all
reasonable hours in accordance with § 443-4 of the Code.
(3) If the Building Inspector determines the condition of an interceptor
is such that it has caused or will likely cause an improper discharge
of any material into the sewer system, the Building Inspector may
order the property owner to take any and all action necessary, in
the opinion of the Building Inspector, to terminate or prevent the
discharge. If the property owner fails to fully and timely comply
with any such order, the Building Inspector shall take such
appropriate action, and the City shall recover all expenses incurred
thereby from the owner.
(4) Should any improper discharge into the sewer system occur, the
owner shall be financially liable for the cost of any cleanup or
attempted cleanup deemed necessary or desirable and undertaken
by the City or its designated agent in an effort to minimize the
polluting effects of the discharged substance.
A. Payment and penalty. The sewer service charge shall be payable to the
City not later than 20 days after the end of each billing period. A penalty
of 1% per month shall be added to all bills not paid by the date fixed for
final payment.
B. Charges a lien. All sewer service charges shall be a lien upon the
property serviced pursuant to § 66.0821, Wis. Stats., and shall be
collected in the manner therein provided.
C. Disposition of revenue. The amounts received from the collection of
charges authorized by this chapter shall be credited to a sanitary
sewerage account, which shall show all receipts and expenditures of
the sewerage system. Charges collected for replacement expenses shall
be credited to a segregated, nonlapsing replacement account. These
funds are to be used exclusively for replacement. When appropriated by
the Public Works Committee of the sanitary district, the credits to the
sanitary sewerage account shall be available for the payment of the
requirements for operation, maintenance, repairs and depreciation of
the sewerage system consistent with 40 CFR 35.2140. Any surplus
outside the purview of 40 CFR 35.2140 in said account shall be
available for the payment of principal and interest of bonds issued and
outstanding, or which may be issued, to provide funds for said
sewerage system or part thereof and all or a part of the expenses for
additions and improvements and other necessary disbursements or
indebtedness, and the Public Works Committee may resolve to pledge
such surplus or any part thereof for any such purpose. All present
outstanding sewer system general obligation bonds, including the
§ 360-12 MONONA CODE § 360-13
1:404
§ 360-14. Violations and penalties.
refunding bonds, shall be paid from this fund as to both principal and
interest.225
D. Excess revenues. Excess revenues collected from a user class will be
applied to operation and maintenance costs attributable to that class
for the next year.
A. Damages. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure of pertinence or equipment which is a part of the sewerage
system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to
immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
B. Written notice of violation. Any person connected to the sewerage
system found to be violating a provision of this chapter shall be served
by the sanitary district with a written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such
notice, permanently cease all violations.
C. Accidental discharge. Any person found to be responsible for
accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewerage system
which causes damage to the sewerage system and/or receiving water
body shall, in addition to a fine, pay the amount to cover all damages,
both of which will be established by the City.
D. Accidental discharge reporting. Any person responsible for an
accidental discharge that may have a detrimental impact on the
sewerage system shall immediately report the nature and amount of the
discharge to the City or the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District.
E. Continued violations. Any person, partnership or corporation, or any
officer, agent or employee thereof, who shall continue any violation
beyond the aforesaid notice time limit provided shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable as set forth in § 1-4 of the Code. In default of
payment of such forfeiture and costs, said violator shall be imprisoned
in the County Jail for a period not to exceed five days. Each day in which
any violation is continued beyond the aforesaid notice time limit shall
be deemed a separate offense.226
F. Liability to City for losses. Any person violating any provision of this
chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned by reason of such violation which the City may suffer as a
result thereof.
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
226. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 360-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-14
1:405
Chapter 374
SNOWMOBILES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 434.
§ 374-1. State snowmobile and all-terrain vehicle laws adopted.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the statutory
provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles
in the following enumerated sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are hereby
adopted by reference and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. Acts required to be performed or prohibited by such statutes are
required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or
modifications of the statutes incorporated herein by reference are intended
to be made part of this chapter.
G. Damage recovery. The system shall have the right of recovery from all
persons of any expense incurred by said system for the repair or
replacement of any part of the sewerage system damaged in any
manner by any person by the performance of any work under his or her
control or by any negligent acts.
H. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or rules or regulations of the sanitary district or who shall
connect a service pipe or discharge without first having obtained a
permit therefor, or who shall violate any provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative Code, or any other materials which
are incorporated by reference, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable as set forth in § 1-4 of the Code. This, however, shall not bar
the City from enforcing the connection duties set out for mandatory
hookup.227
I. Appeal procedures. Any user affected by any decision, action or
determination, including cease and desist orders, made by interpreting
or implementing provisions of this section may file with the City a
written request for reconsideration with the Public Works Committee in
accordance with Chapter 7, Administrative Review, of the Code.228
A. Section 350.01, Definitions.
B. Section 350.02, Operation of snowmobiles on or in the vicinity of
highways.
227. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
228. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 360-14 MONONA CODE § 374-1
1:406
§ 374-2. Applicability of traffic regulations to snowmobiles.
No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any street, highway or alley
within the City of Monona in violation of the traffic regulation provisions
of §§ 346.04, 346.06, 346.11, 346.14(1), 346.18, 346.19, 346.20, 346.21,
346.26, 346.27, 346.33, 346.35, 346.37, 346.39, 346.40, 346.44, 346.46,
346.47, 346.48, 346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52, 346.53, 346.54, 346.55,
346.87, 346.88, 346.89, 346.90, 346.91, 346.92(1) and 346.94(1) and (9),
Wis. Stats.
§ 374-3. Operation on sidewalks prohibited.229
No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any sidewalk, pedestrianway or
upon the area between the sidewalk and the curbline of any street in the
City.
§ 374-4. Snowmobile routes and trails designated.
C. Section 350.03, Right-of-way.
D. Section 350.04, Snowmobile races, derbies and routes.
E. Section 350.045, Public utility exemption.
F. Section 350.125, Completion of application for registration by
snowmobile dealers.
G. Section 350.13, Uniform trail signs and standards.
H. Section 350.15, Accidents and accident reports.
I. Section 350.17, Enforcement.
J. Section 350.18, Local ordinances.
K. Section 350.19, Liability of landowners.
L. Section 350.99, Parties to a violation.
A. Routes designated. Except as provided in §§ 350.02 and 350.045, Wis.
Stats., or for snowmobile events authorized in accordance with
§ 350.04, Wis. Stats., no person shall operate a snowmobile upon any
public right-of-way, in any public park or on any other public municipal
property in the City except upon snowmobile routes and trails
designated by resolution of the Common Council.
B. Trail markers. The Director of Public Works is directed and authorized
to procure, erect and maintain appropriate snowmobile route, trail and
limit signs and markers as approved by the State Department of
Natural Resources under § 350.13, Wis. Stats. The Chief of Police shall
229. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 374-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-4
1:407
§ 374-5. Violations and penalties.230
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $20 and not more than $500 and
be punishable as set forth in § 1-4 of the Code, provided no person shall
forfeit an amount in excess of the maximum fine or forfeiture allowed in
the Wisconsin Statutes for the same offense, and further provided that
the penalty and forfeiture for parking violations on highways shall be the
amount applicable to such violations by owners or operators of motor
vehicles under Chapter 434, Vehicles and Traffic, of the Code of the City of
Monona.
§ 374-6. Enforcement.
have the power to declare the stated snowmobile routes and trails
either open or closed.
C. Markers to be obeyed. No person shall fail to obey any route or trail
sign, marker or limit erected in accordance with this section.
A. Uniform citation for highway violations. The uniform traffic citation
promulgated under § 345.11, Wis. Stats., shall be used for violations of
this chapter relating to highway use, except as herein provided.
B. Parking violations. The special traffic citation described and defined in
Chapter 434, Vehicles and Traffic, of the Code of the City of Monona
shall be used for enforcement of violations of rules of the road relating
to parking of vehicles adopted by reference in § 374-1 of this chapter.
C. Other violations. All violations of this chapter not described in
Subsection A or B shall be enforced in accordance with §§ 66.0114 and
66.0111, Wis. Stats. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made as
provided in § 66.0114(1)(b), Wis. Stats., in substantially the form
provided in the uniform traffic citation within five days of the date of the
citation for such violation. Bail deposits may also be made under
§ 66.0114, Wis. Stats.
D. Police Department to receive stipulations and penalties. Stipulations,
forfeited penalties and deposits for obtaining release from arrest
authorized under this chapter may be accepted at the Police
Department offices.
E. Forfeited penalties and deposits. Except as otherwise provided in
§ 345.26, Wis. Stats., and the deposit schedule adopted by the
Wisconsin Judicial Conference thereunder, required penalties and
deposits or bail, not including costs or fees for violation of this chapter,
shall be as established by the schedule adopted by the Common
Council.
230. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 374-4 MONONA CODE § 374-6
1:408
Chapter 381
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Composting — See § 263-8. Zoning — See Ch. 480.
§ 381-1. Purpose.
§ 381-2. Definitions.
The following words or phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings set out below:
BRUSH — Clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in
diameter. This item shall not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root
balls.231
BULK ITEMS — Classified as any item too large to fit into the collection cart
when permitted.
CART — A container authorized and provided by the City for use in the
collection of solid waste and recyclable materials from residential
properties.
COLLECTABLE RECYCLABLES — Collectable recyclables shall include
aluminum containers, corrugated paper and other container board, glass
containers, magazines, newspaper, office paper, rigid plastic containers
including those made of PETE and HDPE, steel containers, and bimetal
containers. The items listed as collectable recyclables in this definition
A. The purpose of this chapter shall be to maintain and protect public
health and sanitation by removal of garbage, rubbish and other waste
material generated in the City of Monona, to eliminate dispersal of
garbage, waste and other waste material along the streets, roads and
other public and private properties in and near the City of Monona, and
to provide a comprehensive City recycling program.
B. The City of Monona finds participation in a mandatory sourceseparation
recycling program appropriate in this jurisdiction to
conserve available local landfill capacity. The City further finds it
appropriate to participate in both county-wide and state-wide recycling
programs to conserve energy, recycle valuable resources, and protect
public health, welfare and the environment. The City also finds
participation in these programs appropriate to achieve consistency with
county-wide recycling policies to ensure that the City will be able to use
the county-owned landfill and the county material recycling facility.
231. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 374-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 381-2
1:409
may be modified by the Director of Public Works in accordance with the
effective date of Wisconsin law or applicable Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources regulations or variances therefrom. The Director of
Public Works shall be responsible for informing the public of all acceptable
collectable recyclables.
COLLECTABLE SOLID WASTE — All solid waste that is subject to collection
by the City-authorized contractor by contract and does not include yard
waste, recyclable materials, special haul items and materials defined as
nondisposable in § 381-8.232
COLLECTOR — The person or persons specifically authorized by the
Common Council to collect garbage, refuse and recyclable materials and
dispose of the same.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — That portion of solid wastes consisting of
wastes from the construction, repair, remodeling or reconstruction of
buildings, such as lumber, roofing and sheathing scraps, rubble, broken
concrete, asphalt and plaster, conduit, pipe, wire, insulation and any other
materials resulting from the demolition of buildings and improvements.
DISPOSAL — The orderly process of discarding useless or unwanted
material.
GARBAGE — Any waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter,
liquid or solid, that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or
storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables, including that from houses,
butcher shops and similar establishments, and including natural content of
moisture. Any combination of garbage and refuse shall always be deemed
to be garbage for the purpose of this section.
GENERAL APPLIANCE — A residential or commercial air conditioner,
clothes dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven,
refrigerator, furnace, boiler, dehumidifier, water heater or stove.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any radioactive, volatile, highly flammable,
explosive, toxic or hazardous materials. Hazardous materials shall include,
but not be limited to, any amount of waste listed or characterized as
hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or any
state agency pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of
1976, as amended, and applicable state law.
LEAD-ACID BATTERY — Automotive and related batteries that are
composed of lead plates with an acid electrolyte which is designated as
a recyclable, but does not include nickel-cadmium batteries, dry cell
(flashlight) batteries or batteries used in calculators, watches, hearing aids
or similar devices.
MEDICAL WASTE — Any container, package or material that contains
infectious waste or that is from a treatment area and is mixed with
infectious waste.
232. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 381-2 MONONA CODE § 381-2
1:410
NONCOLLECTABLE RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials which are
recyclable but not eligible for pickup in the City's curbside recyclables
collection program; includes lead-acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil
and yard waste.
NONRECYCLABLE MATERIAL — All PYREX® glass, window glass, light
bulbs, mirrors, broken glass and china, all polystyrene foam, and melaminetype
plastics, all waxed paper, waxed cardboard, garbage and rubbish, etc.,
not defined as recyclable materials.
NOXIOUS AND/OR OFFENSIVE WASTE — Those wastes that are
unwholesome, have an unpleasant smell, or are otherwise noxious and/or
offensive, such as manure, filth, slop, carcasses, carrion meat, fish, entrails,
hides and hide scrapings, paint, kerosene, oil or greasy substances, and
objects that may cause injury to any person or animal or damage to vehicles,
such as barbed wire, briar thorns, and similar materials.
PLASTIC — A rigid or semirigid container made of high-density
polyethylene (HDPE) or polyethylene terphalate (PET) which is coded with
a Society of the Plastics Industry code 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or 7.
SHARPS — Any needle or other device used for the administering and/
or transfer of any medicine, drug, solution or substance for the medical
treatment of any disease or condition of any human or animal; and any
scalpel, knife, tool or appliance used for the treatment, correction or
modification of any disease, condition or physical state of any human or
animal, where exposure to such thing in an uncontained or unprotected
state could subject a human or animal to a needle stick, cut, laceration
or other type wound or to contact with any blood or other bodily fluid of
another or any bacteria, virus or any other infectious, toxic or hazardous
substance.
SHARPS CONTAINER — A red container for sharps of a type of construction
that will reasonably resist penetration of sharps, and which has been
generally approved for such a medical use, and which is labeled as
containing sharps and, if appropriate, infectious waste and/or biohazard
substances.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and all other discarded or salvable solid
materials, including solid waste materials resulting from industrial,
commercial and agricultural operations and from domestic use and public
service facilities, but does not include solids or dissolved materials in
wastewater effluent or other water pollutants.233
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, including
clean woody vegetative material no greater than 1/2 inch in diameter.234
§ 381-3. Refuse collection.
233. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
234. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 381-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 381-3
1:411
A. Administration. The weekly collection of solid waste shall be
administered by the Director of Public Works.
B. Carts, residential.
(1) The owner or occupant of each residence will be provided one Cityowned
solid waste collection cart. Residents can obtain one
additional collection cart (as offered by the collector) by
contracting directly with the collector for the additional cart and
extra collection therefrom.
(2) Cart sizes provided by the City are 64 gallons and 96 gallons.
(3) The volume of garbage placed for collection on one day shall be no
more than 96 gallons as offered through the City curbside solid
waste collection program. The option of a second cart and weekly
collection therefrom must be contracted directly between the
property owner and the collector.
(4) Before placing any garbage in the cart for collection, each patron,
when possible, shall wrap it in paper or secure it in a plastic bag.
(5) Food waste shall be drained and wrapped before being placed in
carts or bags.
C. Commercial and multifamily establishments.
(1) The City or its authorized collectors shall provide refuse collection
services only to residential properties and multifamily properties
with eight or fewer residential units.
(2) Multifamily properties of three to eight units shall receive one solid
waste dumpster of appropriate size as provided by the collector.
(3) The City or its authorized collectors shall not provide refuse
collection services to multifamily properties with nine or more
units or to commercial/residential structures.
D. Condominiums. Each condominium association in the City shall be
responsible for establishing compliance with this chapter by the owner
of each condominium unit and shall submit its plan for compliance to
the City for approval and shall submit for approval of the City any
changes in such plan. Each condominium unit shall be treated the same
as a single residential dwelling or the entire condominium shall be
treated for such purposes as a multifamily dwelling. In approving such
a plan, the City shall consider which plan under the circumstances
would better promote the purpose of this chapter.
E. Limitations on placement.
(1) Carts shall be placed for collection by 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled
collection day. No carts shall be placed for collection prior to 7:00
p.m. the day before collection day and shall be removed within 24
§ 381-3 MONONA CODE § 381-3
1:412
§ 381-4. Recycling.
hours after collection. To accommodate street parking by the
Monona Grove High School students, the contractor shall begin
collection at 6:30 a.m. at the following locations:235
(a) Gordon Avenue: Dean to Coldspring.
(b) Wallace Avenue: Dean to Shore Acres.
(c) Lofty Avenue: Monona Drive to Wallace Avenue.
(d) Coldspring: Monona Drive to Winnequah Road.
(e) Parkway Drive: Monona Drive to Winnequah Road.
(2) Carts shall be placed on the driveway apron or in the grassy area
behind the curb edge, with the opening facing the street or curb.
(3) During the winter months, carts shall be placed on the driveway
apron or on the grassy area behind the curb edge which has been
cleared of snow accumulation.
(4) Carts shall not be placed in the street, gutter or on a snowbank.
(5) State law prohibits electronics, yard waste, oil and filters from
being placed in a solid waste cart and landfill.
(6) Construction debris shall not be collected by the City's contracted
collector. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or
contractor to dispose of construction debris as provided by law.
F. Lawn wastes. Lawn wastes (grass clippings, leaves and garden debris)
will not be collected through a curbside collection program. Residents
are encouraged to compost these items. These items may also be placed
in the yard waste dumpsters located at the City Public Works Garage
(851 Femrite Drive). Lawn waste must be removed from bags, and no
brush or garbage is allowed in the yard waste dumpsters. Collectors,
landscapers and residents who live outside of the City limits are
prohibited from placing yard waste material in the yard waste
dumpsters.
A. Applicability. This section shall be applied to all persons and/or entities,
however organized, within the City of Monona.
B. Administration. The biweekly collection of collectable recyclables shall
be administered by the Director of Public Works.
C. Carts, residential.
235. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 381-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 381-4
1:413
(1) The owner or occupant of each residence will be provided one Cityowned
recyclables collection cart. Residents can obtain one
additional collection cart (as offered by the collector) by
contracting directly with the collector for the additional cart and
collection therefrom.
(2) Cart sizes provided by the City are 64 gallons and 96 gallons.
(3) The volume of collectable recyclables placed for collection on one
day shall be no more than 96 gallons as offered through the City
curbside solid waste collection program. The option of a second
cart and collection therefrom must be contracted directly between
the property owner and the collector. Residents may, on occasion,
place a limited amount of additional recyclables, secured in a clear
plastic bag, next to the cart for pick up. Residents who consistently
place extra recyclables outside the cart, however, will be required
to purchase a second cart.
(4) Residents shall separate collectable recyclables from garbage and
other solid waste and shall keep the collectable recyclables clean
and free of contaminants, oil, grease and other nonrecyclable
materials, including, but not limited to, household hazardous waste
and medical waste.
D. Commercial and multifamily establishments.
(1) The City or its authorized collectors shall provide refuse collection
services only to residential properties and multifamily properties
with eight or fewer residential units.
(2) Multifamily properties of three to eight units shall receive one
recycling dumpster of appropriate size as provided by the collector.
(3) The City or its authorized collectors shall not provide refuse
collection services to multifamily properties with nine or more
units or to commercial/residential structures.
E. Condominiums. Each condominium association in the City shall be
responsible for establishing compliance with this chapter by the owner
of each condominium unit and shall submit its plan for compliance to
the City for approval and shall submit for approval of the City any
changes in such plan. Each condominium unit shall be treated the same
as a single residential dwelling or the entire condominium shall be
treated for such purposes as a multifamily dwelling. In approving such
a plan, the City shall consider which plan under the circumstances
would better promote the purpose of this chapter.
F. Limitations on placement.
(1) Carts shall be placed for collection by 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled
collection day. No carts shall be for collection prior to 7:00 p.m. the
day before collection day and shall be removed within 24 hours
§ 381-4 MONONA CODE § 381-4
1:414
after collection. To accommodate street parking by the Monona
Grove High School students, the contractor shall begin collection
at 6:30 a.m. at the following locations:236
(a) Gordon Avenue: Dean to Coldspring.
(b) Wallace Avenue: Dean to Shore Acres.
(c) Lofty Avenue: Monona Drive to Wallace Avenue.
(d) Coldspring: Monona Drive to Winnequah Road.
(e) Parkway Drive: Monona Drive to Winnequah Road.
(2) Carts shall be placed on the driveway apron or in the grassy area
behind the curb edge, with the opening facing the street or curb.
(3) During the winter months, carts shall be placed on the driveway
apron or on the grassy area behind the curb edge which has been
cleared of snow accumulation.
(4) Carts shall not be placed in the street, gutter or on a snowbank.
G. Prohibited recyclable material disposal. No person shall:
(1) Mix or permit the mixing of recyclable material with nonrecyclable
material intended for collection by the City or its authorized
collector or a third party.
(2) Deposit or cause to be deposited any recyclable material at any
authorized collection site while the site is closed.
(3) Deposit or cause to be deposited any lead-acid battery in any
container designated for the collection of recyclable or
nonrecyclable material or place out for collection by the City or its
authorized collector or a third party.
(4) Deposit or cause to be deposited any recyclable material in or upon
any public street, water or grounds in the City of Monona except
for specified collection periods.
(5) Deposit or cause to be deposited any recyclable material in any
container not specifically intended for the collection of recyclable
material.
(6) Deposit or cause to be deposited any nonrecyclable material in any
container specifically intended for the collection or deposit of
recyclable material.
(7) Place refuse, garbage or debris on the property of another or on
public property without permission.
236. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 381-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 381-4
1:415
§ 381-5. Special charge for collection of bulk items and
noncollectable recyclable material.
H. Residential separation.
(1) All owners or occupants of single-family, two-family, condominium
or multifamily (units up to a total of eight units in size) dwellings
shall comply with all procedures adopted by the City for the
separation of recyclable materials and shall further utilize the carts
or dumpsters as designated by the City or its designee. Multifamily
properties of three to eight units shall receive one solid waste
dumpster of appropriate size as provided by the collector.237
(2) Residents not receiving solid waste collection service from the City
or its authorized collector shall provide adequate separate carts for
the collection and disposal of recyclable material.
I. Multifamily residential separation.
(1) For the purpose of this subsection, "multifamily dwelling" means a
dwelling intended to be the residence of nine or more families.
(2) All owners of multifamily dwellings shall provide, at the owner's
expense, adequate separate carts of a type approved by the City for
the collection and disposal of recyclable material.238
J. Commercial separation. Owners or occupants of commercial, retail,
industrial and governmental facilities shall provide, at the owner's
expense, adequate separate carts or dumpsters for the collection and
disposal of recyclable material.
K. Notification required.
(1) Owners of two-, three- and four-family dwellings and all multifamily
dwellings shall notify all tenants on move-in and on a semiannual
basis thereafter of City and county recycling requirements.
(2) Owners of commercial, retail, industrial and governmental facilities
will notify all users, including employees, agents and customers, on
a regular basis of City and county recycling requirements.
L. City-provided services. The City or its authorized collectors shall
provide recycling services only to residential properties and multifamily
properties with eight or fewer residential units.
A. Program authorized. The City authorizes the collector to administer a
City Council-approved fee-based bulk-item collection program, which
provides an opportunity for residents to coordinate independently,
237. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
238. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 381-4 MONONA CODE § 381-5
1:416
§ 381-6. Yard waste and brush disposal.
based on need, with the City's authorized collector to collect items such
as, but not limited to, bulk items, junk, appliances, tires, electronics,
etc.
B. Program operating procedures. Persons wishing to have bulk items and
noncollectable recyclable material picked up must call the City's
authorized collector in advance to arrange for such service. Bulk items
and noncollectable recyclable materials are items that are not eligible
for pickup in the City's curbside solid waste and recyclables collection
program. Bulk items and noncollectable recyclable materials include,
but are not limited to, the following items: general appliances,
appliances containing freon, tires, batteries, electronics, large metal,
furniture, junk, etc. Items that are requested to be collected by the
City's authorized collector shall occur on the second and fourth Fridays
of each month and shall be placed curbside by 7:00 a.m. on collection
day. Items can be placed at the curb 24 hours in advance of collection.
Items placed at the curb outside of the specified date and times are
prohibited. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
C. Electronics recycling and disposal. Wisconsin's Recycling Law prohibits
disposal of certain electronic devices in Wisconsin landfills, burning in
an incineration facility, or placing these devices in a container intended
for disposal or incineration. This prohibition is placed on any person,
business or entity in the State of Wisconsin. All persons in the City shall
separate the following electronic devices from their post-consumer
waste and recycle with an authorized or licensed collector: televisions,
monitors, all types of computers and peripherals, printers, copiers, fax
machines, video recorders and players, telephones and cell phones, and
stereo components. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
A. 239Applicability. This section shall apply to all persons and entities who,
directly or through the services of the City of Monona or another third
party, dispose of or attempt to dispose of solid wastes at any Dane
County-owned landfill and includes all persons, governmental
operations and businesses, commercial, retail and industrial
enterprises, however organized and of whatever type.
B. Prohibited yard waste and brush disposal. No person shall:
(1) Dispose of yard materials in a solid waste landfill or incinerator,
and as regulated by § 287.07(2), Wis. Stats.
(2) Mix or permit the mixing of yard waste or brush with solid waste
for City curbside garbage collection or place or permit the placing
of yard waste or brush out for City curbside garbage collection.
239. Editor's Note: Original Subsection A, Definitions, which immediately preceded this
subsection, was moved to § 381-2 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689.
§ 381-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 381-6
1:417
(3) Deposit yard waste at any authorized yard waste or compost site
while the site is closed.
(4) Deposit yard waste or brush in or upon any public street, water or
grounds in the City of Monona.
(5) Intentionally deposit or mow grass clippings from his or her
property onto any City street. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
9-17-689]
C. Permitted yard waste disposal. It shall be lawful to:
(1) Deposit yard waste at any authorized City of Monona yard waste
dropoff site or any authorized compost site while such authorized
sites are open in accordance with the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Director of Public Works and approved by the
Common Council.
(2) Compost yard waste in side or rear yards pursuant to § 263-8 of this
Code.
D. Owner responsibility. Every owner or operator shall be responsible for
maintaining all property under his or her control in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
E. Brush collection. [Amended 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 12-14-667]
(1) The City operates a curbside residential brush collection and
chipping service through an authorized contracted service
provider. Department of Public Works staff may also complete this
task as needed, or assist, as directed, with the brush collection
program in the event of severe weather. This service is for the
disposal of brush generated from routine yard maintenance and is
intended to provide residents with a means for disposing of tree
and/or brush trimmings. The brush collection program is not a
means for disposing of entire trees. [Amended 2-19-2018 by Ord.
No. 2-18-696]
(2) Brush shall be placed at the curb no more than 14 days prior to the
scheduled collection week.
(3) Brush shall be placed at the curbside by 7:00 a.m. on Monday of the
collection week. Collection is not available for stumps, logs or tree
roots. Collection is not available for brush trimming performed by a
private contractor. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
9-17-689; 2-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-18-696]
(4) Brush shall be placed in an orderly manner, uniformly stacked,
behind the curb with all cut ends facing the street or parallel with
the street facing the direction of traffic. Brush piles that are not
uniformly stacked or piles that are tangled will not be collected.
[Amended 2-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-18-696]
§ 381-6 MONONA CODE § 381-6
1:418
§ 381-7. Municipal leaf collection program.
§ 381-8. Nondisposable materials.
(5) The City's contractor will collect one brush pile per address per
scheduled collection period. Limbs shall not exceed six inches in
diameter or be greater than 10 feet in length. Overall brush pile
dimensions are not to exceed four feet by four feet by 10 feet (or six
cubic yards). Any excess brush shall be removed from the terrace
by the property owner within seven days after the scheduled
collection. [Added 2-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-18-696]
(6) Brush and other refuse shall be kept separate at the curbside and
shall not be placed in the street.
(7) Holiday trees shall be placed at the curb for collection by the
contracted service provider.
A. The City authorizes a municipal leaf collection program. The leaf
collection program normally begins during the month of October of
each year. The curbside leaf collection shall continue as long as
seasonal conditions permit. Collection schedules may vary depending
on weather conditions and leaf collection volume.
B. Prohibited acts. No person shall intentionally place leaves on the
property of another or on public property, including streets, parks or
gutters.
C. Collection requirements.
(1) Residents shall rake their leaves to the curbside terrace (not into
the gutter) in windrows no wider than three to four feet. Leaves
containing yard waste, brush or garbage will not be collected.
(2) No bags of leaves or brush will be collected by the City.
(3) Residents who want to bag their leaves or dispose of them on days
other than the regular collection day can dispose of them at the
disposal site located at the City Public Works Garage (851 Femrite
Drive).
A. The following items will not be picked up either in the curbside garbage
collection program or the curbside bulk item collection program:
(1) Hazardous waste;
(2) Toxic waste;
(3) Chemicals;
(4) Explosives or ammunition;
(5) Drain or waste oil, antifreeze or flammable liquids;
§ 381-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 381-8
1:419
§ 381-9. Hospital/medical wastes.
§ 381-10. Refuse from outside City.
It shall be unlawful to bring refuse or lawn waste from outside the City of
Monona limits into the City limits for disposal unless specifically authorized
by written agreement with the City.
(6) Large quantities of paint;
(7) Dead animals;
(8) Stumps;
(9) Gravel or concrete;
(10) Building waste and construction debris;
(11) Animal or human waste;
(12) Hot ashes (ashes that are fully extinguished and dry may be left for
collection in noncombustible carts);
(13) Any metal barrels or other petroleum-containing vessels.
B. The aforementioned materials shall be disposed of in the manner
prescribed by federal or state laws or as provided for herein.
A. Household sharp medical waste disposal.
(1) Household sharp medical waste is not to be deposited in any other
place or manner in the City of Monona than as hereinafter
provided.
(2) Acceptable means of disposing of household sharp medical waste
include:
(a) Disposal in an approved medical waste box, such as a sharps
container; or
(b) Disposal in a heavy plastic container, such as a laundry soap
bottle, providing that the lid is permanently affixed thereto
using tape or another means, and the container is marked
"Medical Waste: Do Not Open."
(3) No container for household sharp medical waste or loose household
sharp medical waste may be mixed with recyclables.
B. Collector to refuse pickup of nonconforming household sharp medical
waste. The City's collector shall refuse to pick up any solid waste or
recyclables containing household sharp medical waste not separately
contained and prepared as provided in this section.
§ 381-8 MONONA CODE § 381-11
1:420
§ 381-11. Garbage accumulation as nuisance.
The accumulation or deposit of garbage, trash or putrescible animal or
vegetable matter in or upon any lot or land or any public or private place
within the City, which causes the air or environment to become noxious
or offensive or to be in such a condition as to promote the breeding of
flies, mosquitoes or other insects, or to provide a habitat or breeding place
for rodents or animals, or which otherwise becomes injurious to the public
health, is prohibited and declared to constitute a nuisance. Refuse areas
shall be kept in a nuisance-and odor-free condition. Refuse shall not be
allowed to accumulate. Violation will result in the occupant and/or owner
being notified to clean up his or her area, with continued violations resulting
in the owner being prosecuted under provisions of this and other City
ordinances.
§ 381-12. Federal and state regulations.
It is expected that from time to time federal and state statutes and
regulations will require that items other than the items which have been
deemed to be recyclable herein shall be recycled. In such event, this
chapter shall be deemed to include and shall require such other items to be
recyclable hereunder.
§ 381-13. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 388
STORMWATER UTILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Erosion and stormwater control — See Ch.
216.
Water and sewer utilities — See Ch. 443.
A. General penalty. Except as provided in Subsection B below, any person
who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the general
penalty provisions of § 1-4 of the Code of the City of Monona. Collection
crews may refuse to collect refuse placed in violation of this chapter.
B. Violations relative to mandatory recycling. Any person who violates any
provision of this chapter mandating recycling shall be subject to a
forfeiture as prescribed in the Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule as
approved by the Common Council.240
240. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 381-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-1
1:421
§ 388-1. Purpose and necessity; authorization.
The Common Council finds that the management of stormwater and other
surface water discharges within the Yahara River and Lake Monona
Watershed is a matter that affects the health, safety and welfare of the City,
its citizens and businesses and others in the surrounding area. Failure to
effectively manage stormwater affects the sanitary sewer utility operations
of the City by, among other things, increasing the likelihood of infiltration
and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. Surface water runoff may cause
erosion of lands, threaten residences and businesses with water damage,
and create environmental damage to the rivers, streams and other bodies
of water within and adjacent to the City. A system for the collection and
disposal of stormwater provides services to and benefits all properties
within the City and surrounding areas, including those properties not
currently served by the systems. The cost of operating and maintaining
the City stormwater management system and financing necessary repairs,
replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent
practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services and benefits
received from the system. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the public, the Common Council hereby exercises its authority to
establish a stormwater utility and establish the rates for stormwater
management services pursuant to authority granted by Chapters 62 and 66
of the Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 388-2. Creation.
Pursuant to the authority granted under § 66.0821, Wis. Stats., there is
hereby established a stormwater utility in the City. The operation of the
Stormwater Utility shall be under the general supervision of the Public
Works Committee and the Common Council. The Director or his/her
designee will oversee and be in charge of the day-to-day operations of the
Utility.
§ 388-3. Authority of Stormwater Utility.
The City, acting through the Stormwater Utility, may acquire, construct,
lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge,
repair, conduct, manage and finance such facilities, operations and
activities as are deemed by the City to be proper and reasonably necessary
for a system of storm and surface water management. These facilities may
include, without limitation due to enumeration, surface and underground
drainage facilities, sewers, watercourses, retaining walls, ponds, basins,
streets, roads, ditches and such other facilities as will support a stormwater
management system.
§ 388-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in this section:
CITY — The City of Monona.
§ 388-1 MONONA CODE § 388-4
1:422
DIRECTOR — The City of Monona Director of Public Works.
DUPLEX — A residential dwelling having two dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms within a building providing
or intended to provide living quarters for not more than one family.
EQUIVALENT RUNOFF UNIT (ERU) — The estimated impervious area of a
parcel relative to the statistical average impervious area of a single-family
unit residential property within the City, as determined from time to time by
the Director.
IMPERVIOUS AREA or IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface, measured
on a horizontal plane, which has been compacted or covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by rain water or
the runoff from snowmelt. It includes, but is not limited to, streets, roofs,
sidewalks, parking lots, driveways, porches, patios, decks, other similar
surfaces, and semi-impervious surfaces such as highly compacted clay or
gravel.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — A residential property comprised of three or more
dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments and condominiums.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any developed lot or parcel not
exclusively residential, as defined herein, including, but not limited to,
transient rentals (such as hotels and motels), commercial, industrial,
institutional, governmental property and parking lots.
ON-SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — A system designed to
both mitigate flood impacts and provide adequate treatment of pollutants
in stormwater runoff that has been constructed on the parcel for which the
customer is billed. It includes, but is not limited to, rain gardens, cisterns,
infiltration trenches, pretreatment systems, and wet basins.
PARCEL — The legal unit of land division as recorded by the Dane County
Register of Deeds. Multiple contiguous parcels with the same owner(s) shall
be considered to be one parcel for the purposes of calculating billing units.
PREDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — Land that has not been changed by
any land-disturbing activities. For the purpose of determining credits for
stormwater quantity controls, predevelopment conditions shall be assumed
to be grass lands in good condition.
RAIN GARDEN — A shallow depression planted with deep-rooted native
prairie, wet prairie, or wetland vegetation, designed to infiltrate
stormwater.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any lot or parcel developed exclusively for
residential purposes, containing, but not limited to, single family units,
duplex or multifamily units.
SINGLE-FAMILY UNIT — A residential property, including manufactured
homes, consisting of one dwelling unit.
STORMWATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — Refers to the system of streets,
curbs, gutters, berms, swales, landscaping, detention and retention ponds
§ 388-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-4
1:423
or basins, pipes, outfalls, inlets, and other components of City infrastructure
owned and/or maintained by the City for the purpose of managing,
gathering, transmitting or conveying stormwater. This term includes
tributaries, creeks, rivers and streams improved by the City to enhance
their ability to convey stormwater.
STORMWATER UTILITY — Refers to the utility established under this
chapter for the purpose of managing stormwater and imposing charges for
the recovery of costs connected with such stormwater management.
STORMWATER UTILITY CHARGE — The fee imposed under this chapter for
the rendering of Stormwater Utility services by the City. It is comprised of
two components: the base charge and the runoff unit charge.
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY — Property that contains no improvement,
such as buildings, structures, change in grade, addition of impervious
surface, or substantial impervious landscaping. A property shall be
considered developed if: (1) a certificate of occupancy has been issued for a
building or structure on the property; or (2) construction of an improvement
on a property is at least fifty-percent completed and such construction has
ceased for a period of at least three months, whether consecutive or not.
§ 388-5. Connection.241
Whenever public storm sewers or storm laterals are laid along and within
any public street, alley or place in the City and ready for use, property
owners shall, upon notice from the City, connect to the facility provided to
their particular property. All connections shall be in a manner in accordance
with the State Plumbing Code. Failure of the property owner to connect
within the time period specified in said notice shall result in said connection
being made by the City and all charges being assessed against the property
as a special charge. Connection to the public storm sewer shall only be
made after obtaining permits issued by the Stormwater Utility. Failure to
obtain required permits required by this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
subject to § 1-4, the general penalty of the Code. Each day that a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 388-6. Customer classification.
A. For the purposes of imposing the Stormwater Utility charge, all lots and
parcels within the City shall be classified into the following customer
classes:
(1) Residential property – single family unit.
(2) Residential property – duplex.
(3) Residential property – multifamily.
(4) Nonresidential property.
241. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 388-4 MONONA CODE § 388-6
1:424
§ 388-7. Stormwater Utility rates.
(5) Undeveloped.
B. The Director shall prepare a list of lots and parcels within the City and
assign one of the customer classifications to each lot or parcel.
A. There shall be established a charge for stormwater services to all lots
and parcels of land within the municipal boundaries of the City. The
charge schedule shall be based on a rate per equivalent runoff unit
(ERU). All lots and parcels shall be assigned an ERU value as follows:
(1) Residential property – single family unit. As per nonresidential
property stated in Subsection A(4).
(2) Residential property – duplex. As per nonresidential property
stated in Subsection A(4).
(3) Residential property – multifamily. As per nonresidential property
stated in Subsection A(4) below.
(4) Nonresidential property. The number of ERUs assigned to the
property shall be determined by the Director based upon the
property's actual impervious area (in square feet) divided by the
one ERU equivalent area (in square feet) established in the
definition of the term "equivalent runoff unit (ERU)" in § 388-4 of
this chapter and carried out to the nearest tenth of a decimal point
(0.1). The Director shall determine the impervious area of the lot or
parcel of land using any available information, including aerial
photography, site or building plans submitted by the property
owner, or actual on-site surveys.
(5) Undeveloped: 0 ERU.
(6) Calculation:
ERU = parcels total impervious area\average impervious area on
single-family residential parcels
Rate per ERU = stormwater revenue\total ERU
Stormwater fee per parcel = rate per ERU x parcel ERU
B. Adjustments to the measured impervious areas. Any property owner
may apply for an adjustment to the ERUs assigned to their property if
the owner believes the impervious area measurements on which the
ERU calculation is based are inaccurate. Property owners may submit
to the Director any relevant information, including site and building
surveys and documentation of mitigation or treatment measures, which
more accurately determines or reflects the impervious area. It shall be
the burden of the property owner to demonstrate by a preponderance of
the evidence that an adjustment is warranted.
§ 388-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-7
1:425
C. Appeals. Appeals of the Director's determination shall be made
pursuant to § 388-10 of this chapter.
D. Rate structure. A schedule of rates and charges shall be approved
annually by the Common Council. Copies of the schedule of rates and
charges shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and shall be available
for public inspection during normal business hours.
E. Collection of ERU charge. The Director shall divide the City into
sections for billing purposes, which shall coincide with the billing
schedule of the Water Utility. The ERU charge shall be payable to the
City Treasurer at the same time that the Water Utility bills are payable.
All charges established by this chapter shall be a lien on the property
served pursuant to §§ 66.0809 and 66.0821, Wis. Stats.
F. Exemptions. Exemptions to the charges comprising the Stormwater
Utility charge are established in recognition that, in limited
circumstances, properties may not benefit directly from all services and
facilities provided by the Stormwater Utility. Owners of property
satisfying the following criteria may apply to the Director for an
exemption of up to 65% of the ERU charge.
(1) Discharges to surface water bodies. If more than half, as
determined by the Director, of a customer's property drains directly
into the Yahara River, Lake Monona or any tributaries draining to
these water bodies, the City may, upon customer request, exempt
the customer from that portion of the parcel draining directly into
the lake, river or tributary, provided that:
(a) The discharge is direct and not through any portion of the
stormwater conveyance system owned or operated by the
Stormwater Utility, nor may it cross any City street; and
(b) The drainage is not in violation of any environmental code or
federal, state or local surface water drainage requirements,
and all required permits for said discharges have been
granted.
(2) From time to time the Public Works Committee may recommend
and the Common Council may adopt additional criteria under
which owners may be eligible for exemptions to the charges
comprising the Stormwater Utility charge.
G. Credits. Credits may be granted to owners of properties who have
significantly reduced the impacts of stormwater discharge on the
Stormwater Utility system. Owners of property which discharge all or a
portion of their stormwater into privately owned and maintained
facilities that result in retention, detention or infiltration of stormwater
on the property, and such facilities demonstrably reduce the financial
obligation of the Stormwater Utility, may receive a prorated credit to
the ERU charge assigned to their property, as determined by the
§ 388-7 MONONA CODE § 388-7
1:426
Director. No owner may be given a credit in excess of 65% of his or her
total ERU charge.
(1) Fee credit criteria.
(a) Stormwater quantity. A credit of up to 35% of the ERU charge
may be granted for parcels that meet the requirements of
Chapter 216, Erosion and Stormwater Control. All hydrologic
calculations shall be according to the methodology described
in Chapter 216. A maximum credit of 50% of the values listed
below may be considered for parcels that are not in full
compliance with Chapter 216. The following is a breakdown of
the maximum credits under the quantity criteria:
[1] Five percent: detain two-year storm and/or release at a
flow rate of the predeveloped two-year storm;
[2] Ten percent: detain five-year storm and/or release at a flow
rate of the predeveloped five-year storm;
[3] Fifteen percent: detain ten-year storm and/or release at a
flow rate of the predeveloped five-year storm;
[4] Twenty-five percent: detain twenty-five-year storm and
release at a flow rate of the predeveloped five-year storm;
[5] Thirty-five percent: detain a larger than twenty-five-year
storm and release at a flow rate of the predeveloped fiveyear
storm.
(b) Stormwater quality. A credit of up to 30% of the ERU charge
may be granted for parcels that provide a quantifiable
stormwater quality benefit for the one-year storm, based on the
below listed criteria. A maximum credit of 50% of the values
listed below may be considered for parcels that are not in full
compliance with Chapter 216, Erosion and Stormwater
Control. The following is a breakdown of the maximum credits
under the quality criteria:
[1] Five percent: for 20% to 29% reduction in total suspended
solids (minimum particle size trapped between 42 and 72
microns).
[2] Ten percent: for 30% to 40% reduction in total suspended
solids (minimum particle size trapped between 24 and 41
microns) or the use of oil filters/separators.
[3] Fifteen percent: for 41% to 54% reduction in total
suspended solids (minimum particle size trapped between
12 and 23 microns) or a 20% to 40% reduction in total
suspended solids and the use of oil filters/separators.
§ 388-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-7
1:427
[4] Twenty percent: for 55% to 69% reduction in total
suspended solids (minimum particle size trapped between
6 and 11 microns) or a 41% to 54% reduction in total
suspended solids and the use of oil filters/separators.
[5] Twenty-five percent: for 70% to 100% reduction in total
suspended solids (minimum particle size trapped 5
microns or less) or a 55% to 69% reduction in total
suspended solids and the use of oil filters/separators.
[6] Thirty percent: for 70% to 100% reduction in total
suspended solids (minimum particle size trapped five
microns or less) and the use of oil filters/separators.
H. Access. Prior to receiving a credit or exemption, the Director or
designee shall be allowed access to the property to determine the
amount of credit or exemption to be granted.
I. Credit and exemption application process. The City of Monona will
accept applications from property owners requesting consideration for
ERU charge credits and exemptions. Applications forms may be
obtained from the Director.
(1) Credit application review fee. Prior to review by the Director or
designee, the applicant shall pay a refundable review fee in the
amount of the annual charge, but not to exceed the fee set in the
City's Fee Schedule. The refund of the review fee is contingent
upon the approval of the credit application. Applicants submitting
an erosion control and/or stormwater management plan for a
redevelopment or new development will be exempt from this fee.242
(2) Exemption application review fee. Prior to review by the Director
or designee, the applicant shall pay a refundable review fee as set
in the City's Fee Schedule or a fee not to exceed the annual charge.
The refund of the review fee is contingent upon the approval of the
exemption application. Applicants submitting an erosion control
and/or stormwater management plan for a redevelopment or new
development will be exempt from this fee.243
(3) Credit application documentation. The application for ERU charge
credits shall include the following information:
(a) Tax parcel number.
(b) Address of parcel requesting credit.
(c) Owner name, address and phone number.
242. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
243. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 388-7 MONONA CODE § 388-7
1:428
(d) Type and amount of requested credit.
(e) Owner's certification of installation and maintenance.
[1] Certification that the facilities that are submitted for credit
consideration have been properly installed.
[2] A manual for operation, inspection and maintenance for
the facilities submitted for credit consideration.
[3] An executed maintenance of stormwater management
measures agreement permitting the City to access the site
to inspect the condition of the stormwater facility. Credits
may be adjusted for lack of proper maintenance based on
the City's inspection.
(f) Plans and calculations:
[1] Hydrologic/hydraulic studies using the TR-55 model or
other model approved by the Director, plans, diagrams and
other supporting documentation required to substantiate
the credits requested.
[2] Pollutant reduction studies using the WinSLAMM model or
other model approved by the Director, plans, diagrams and
other supporting documentation required to substantiate
the credits requested.
[3] The owner/applicant shall be responsible for submitting
any requests for credit in writing to the Director. The
owner/applicant shall provide all supporting
documentation, surveys and engineering reports as may
be necessary to document the justification for the request
for credit. Incomplete documentation shall be grounds for
rejection of credit application.
[4] A credit of up to 65% of the ERU charge may be granted
for parcels less that 50,000 square feet in area. The owner/
applicant may submit a simplified credit application form.
Credits will be available on a 2-to-1 percentage basis of
total area basis based on the top area of the rain garden.
Example: ten-percent credit granted for a five-hundredsquare-
foot rain garden on a ten-thousand-square-foot
parcel [(500/10,000) x 2] = 10%.
(4) Exemption application documentation. The application for ERU
charge exemption shall include the following information:
(a) Tax parcel number.
(b) Address of parcel requesting exemption.
(c) Owner name, address and phone number.
§ 388-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-7
1:429
§ 388-8. Billing.
§ 388-9. New construction/ additions/reconstruction.244
A property owner shall be responsible for submitting a Stormwater Utility
service application at the time a building permit is applied for or a site plan
review is conducted. The application shall be made on a form prescribed
by the City and provided with each application for a building permit or
application for site plan review. Failure to submit such Stormwater Utility
(d) Amount of requested exemption.
(e) Plans:
[1] All supporting documentation, surveys and engineering
reports as may be necessary to document the justification
for the request for exemption. Incomplete documentation
shall be grounds for rejection of exemption application.
A. The City Clerk is hereby appointed as the collection agent for the City
Stormwater Utility. The City Clerk may contract for the billing and
collection of stormwater fees. The City Clerk shall allocate the actual
cost incurred of billing and collecting to the expense of system-wide
management and administration of the Stormwater Utility.
B. The bills for Stormwater Utility charges shall be mailed to the
designated utility bill recipient, but this mailing shall not relieve the
owner of the property from liability for rental property in the event
payment is not made as required in this chapter. The owner of any
property served which is occupied by tenants shall have the right to
examine collection records of the City for the purpose of determining
whether such rates and charges have been paid for such tenants,
provided that such examination shall be made at the office at which the
records are kept and during the hours that such office is open for
business.
C. Stormwater Utility charges shall not be payable in installments. If
Stormwater Utility charges remain unpaid by the date specified on the
bill, a late payment charge of 1 1/2% per month shall be added, and the
City Clerk shall proceed to collect the dues with the late payment
charge. The City Clerk has the authority for collecting outstanding
Stormwater Utility charges as a special charge. Said charges shall be a
lien on the real estate to which the Stormwater Utility service was
furnished, and all sums that have accrued during the preceding year
and are delinquent as of October 15 shall be inserted on the tax roll as
delinquent utility charges against the property. All proceedings in
relation to the collection, return and sale of property for delinquent City
taxes shall apply to said charges.
244. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 388-7 MONONA CODE § 388-9
1:430
service application or providing false information on such form shall be a
violation of this chapter and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture
as prescribed in the Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule as adopted by the
Common Council.
§ 388-10. Method of appeal.
The Stormwater Utility charge and determinations pursuant to § 388-6 may
be appealed as follows:
§ 388-11. Special charge authority.
In addition to any other method for collection of the charges established
pursuant to this chapter for Stormwater Utility costs, the Common Council
finds that these charges may be levied on property as a special charge
pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
A. A written appeal of any decision pursuant to § 388-6 shall be filed with
the City Clerk within 30 days of the date of the decision,
B. Any other challenge to the Stormwater Utility charge must be filed with
the City Clerk on behalf of the customer within 30 days of payment of
the charge, specifying all bases for the challenge and the amount of the
Stormwater Utility charge the customer asserts in inappropriate.
Failure to file a challenge within 30 days of payment waives all right to
later challenge the charge.
C. The pendency of an appeal of a decision or determination of the
Director shall not excuse payment of any stormwater charge. If a
decision or determination of the Director is reversed or modified, the
Committee may grant a refund to the aggrieved party, prorated and
retroactive to the date on which an application for fee adjustment was
filed with the Director.
D. The Public Works Committee shall determine whether the Stormwater
Utility charge is fair and reasonable or whether a refund is due the
customer. The Committee may act with a hearing and will inform the
customer in writing of its decision. The Committee may, at its
discretion, require access to the property to assist in its determination.
E. The customer has 30 days from the decision of the Public Works
Committee to file a written appeal to the Common Council, which shall
be directed to the City Clerk.
F. If the Common Council or the Public Works Committee determines that
a refund is due the customer, the refund will be applied as a credit on
the customer's next quarterly stormwater billing if the refund will not
exceed the customer's next quarterly stormwater billing or will be
refunded, at the discretion of the City Treasurer.
§ 388-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-12
1:431
§ 388-12. Budget excess revenues.
The Stormwater Utility finances shall be accounted for in a separate
stormwater enterprises fund by the City. The Utility shall prepare an annual
budget, which is to include all administration, management operation,
maintenance, debt service, capital improvement and other costs related to
the operation of the Stormwater Utility. The budget is subject to approval by
the Common Council. The costs shall be spread over the rate classifications
as determined by the Common Council. Any excess of revenues over
expenditures in a year will be retained by the stormwater enterprise fund
for subsequent years' needs.
§ 388-13. Transfer of assets and outstanding debt.
Chapter 395
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Erosion and stormwater control — See Ch.
216.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 335.
A. The land rights and improvements of the City or such rights determined
to exist for the following components of the public stormwater system
are hereby transferred to the land assets of the Monona Stormwater
Utility.
(1) Stormwater sewers;
(2) Inlets, catch basins, retention ponds and related stormwatercontrol
features;
(3) Access structures;
(4) Greenways.
(5) Fees collected for stormwater management and fees collected in
lieu of land dedication for stormwater management.
B. Upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the Stormwater
Utility shall assume the responsibility for debt obligation on all
outstanding general debt issued for storm drainage purposes.245
245. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 388-12 MONONA CODE § 388-13
1:432
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted as §§ 6-1-1 to 6-1-11 of the 1994 Code]
§ 395-1. Grades.
§ 395-2. Excavations in streets.
A. On file in the office of the City Engineer. The grades of all streets, alleys
and sidewalks as established by the Common Council shall be kept on
file in the office of the City Engineer.
B. Recorded by the City Clerk. The grades of all streets, alleys and
sidewalks shall be established and described and the adoption of such
grades and all alterations shall be recorded by the City Clerk. No street,
alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade thereof is established.
C. Altering grades prohibited. All persons are prohibited from altering the
grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground, or any part thereof
in the City by taking from or adding to the surface of such street, alley,
sidewalk or public ground, and from digging, plowing or otherwise
changing or disturbing the surface thereof unless authorized or
instructed to do so by the City Engineer.
A. Permit required. No person or utility shall make or cause to be made
any excavation in or under any street, alley or sidewalk in the City
without first obtaining from the City Engineer a written permit therefor.
B. Excavator to save City harmless. The application for the permit shall
state the purpose for which the permit is desired and the location of the
proposed excavation, which shall contain an agreement that the
applicant will pay all damages to persons or property, public or private,
caused by the applicant, the applicant's agents, employees or servants
in the doing of the work for which the permit is granted, and that the
applicant will save the City free and harmless of any damages or claims
against it by reason of the execution of the work for which the permit is
granted. Any applicant may be required as a condition to the granting
of a permit, in the discretion of the Council, to file an undertaking in
such amount as the Council shall determine to leave the street,
sidewalk or alley in as good condition as the same was in when the work
was commenced; to at all times keep the place where the excavation is
made properly guarded by day and lighted by night; and to save the City
harmless from any and all damages, costs and charges that may accrue
from the applicant's use of such street, alley or sidewalk by reason of
such excavation.
C. Permit does not grant occupancy privilege. No permit for an excavation
granted under this section shall convey or grant any privilege to occupy
the space within or below any street or sidewalk or any utility, vault,
pipe, drain or any other thing.
§ 395-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-2
1:433
§ 395-3. Vision to be maintained at public street intersections.
No person shall place or allow within the vision triangle at any intersection
in the City, without written permit granted by the Common Council, an
obstruction between 30 inches and 120 inches in height that blocks the
D. Size and closing of excavations. When excavations are made under the
provisions of this section, the excavation shall not be larger and shall
not be left open longer than the necessities of the work demand.
E. Materials from excavation not to interfere with public. In opening any
street or other public way, all materials for paving or ballasting shall be
removed with the least possible injury or loss and, together with the
excavated material from the trenches, shall be placed where the least
practicable inconvenience to the public will be caused and admit free
passage of water along the gutters.
F. Openings to have protection. All openings made in the public streets or
alleys in accordance with permission given pursuant hereto shall be
enclosed with sufficient barriers, approved lights or flashers, which
shall be maintained upon the same at night, and all necessary
precautions shall be taken to prevent accidents.
G. Materials to be replaced. In opening a trench on any street or lot, the
sidewalk materials, sand, gravel and earth, or whatever material is
removed or penetrated, shall be replaced in a manner satisfactory to
the City Engineer and any remainder removed at once, leaving the
street or sidewalk in perfect repair, and shall be so maintained for a
period of one year thereafter. In addition, all gas, water and electric
lines or conduits must be protected from injury or settling in a manner
satisfactory to the City Engineer. In refilling the excavation, all earth,
stone and screenings shall be thoroughly and properly tamped and the
surface of the street, sidewalk or alley left in as good condition as the
same was in before the excavation was made.
H. Paved streets. When any excavation is made in a permanently paved
road or street or in any road or street which at any time is to be
permanently paved, all clay or hardpan must be removed and the
excavation entirely backfilled with sand or gravel or other required
material thoroughly wet and consolidated or tamped in six-inch layers.
The excavation requirements set forth in § SPS 332.38, Wis. Adm. Code,
and 29 CFR 1926.651, as may be amended from time to time, are
hereby incorporated by reference and shall govern such
construction.246
I. No excavation when ground frozen. No excavation in the streets, alleys
or other public ways shall be permitted when the ground is frozen,
except as approved by the City Engineer.
246. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 395-2 MONONA CODE § 395-3
1:434
view of motorists, pedestrians or bicyclists using any City street. "Vision
triangle," as used herein, means that area defined by the formula found in
Exhibit A.247
§ 395-4. Construction of sidewalks and streets. [Amended
2-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2-10-612]
A. The intention of the Common Council is to ensure the streets and
sidewalks of the City are maintained on a regular and ongoing schedule
as necessary to ensure public safety and welfare. As such, whenever
possible, consistent with prudent budgetary considerations, the cost for
the initial construction of sidewalks in residential areas should be paid
by the City. Whenever budgetary considerations require a portion of the
initial construction of sidewalks to be paid by abutting property owners,
the property owner share should be as minimal as possible and
apportioned in a fair and equitable manner. [Added 4-4-2016 by Ord.
No. 2-16-675]
B. City Engineer to establish. New and reconstructed sidewalks shall be of
concrete and constructed in substantial accordance with the
specifications prescribed by the City Engineer.
C. Driveway approaches. Driveway approaches must be established for
each lot in advance of the sidewalk construction and shall be clearly
marked on the plans.
D. Grade for sidewalks; locations. Whenever the Council shall order
construction of a sidewalk, the City Engineer shall immediately survey
and stake out the location and grade of the same if a grade has been
established; and where no grade has been established as ascertained by
the records, the Engineer shall prepare and report a grade for the
approval of the Council, and when the same shall be established shall
stake out the sidewalk as ordered by the Council. No sidewalk shall be
laid under this section until a grade therefor has been established by
the Council. No person shall construct any sidewalk except in
accordance with such approved location and established grade, except
with the permission of the Council.
E. Construction and repair of sidewalks. The provisions of § 66.0907, Wis.
Stats., relating to the construction and repair of City sidewalks so far as
applicable to the City, are adopted by reference.248
F. Assessment and repair – streets.
(1) Policy principles.
(a) The following principles underlie this portion of the article:
247. Editor's Note: Exhibit A, Sight Distance Requirements at Side Roads and Ramps, is
attached to this chapter.
248. Editor's Note: Original subsection (e), Assessment and repair – sidewalks, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2-16-275.
§ 395-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-4
1:435
[1] The first time a street is improved to a "standard" street,
the City and the owner will share in the cost as outlined
herein.
[2] The defining characteristics of an improved street is a
concrete curb and gutter. Once concrete curb and gutter
have been installed, subsequent reconstruction of the
standard street will be paid for entirely by the City.
[3] Any requests for the construction of nonstandard street
shall be subject to review and recommendation by the
Public Works Committee to the Common Council. The total
cost of a nonstandard street is to be paid by the abutting
property owners, unless otherwise determined by the
Common Council.
(b) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
COLLECTOR STREET — As set forth in the State of Wisconsin
Department of Transportation Certified Mileage List.
CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER — Includes any design
recommended by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation
(WISDOT or by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
MUNICIPAL ARTERIALS — As set forth in the State of
Wisconsin Department of Transportation Certified Mileage
List.
NONSTANDARD STREET — A street without curb and gutter.
STANDARD STREET — A standard local street is an improved
street with a twenty-eight-foot-wide bituminous concrete
surface with concrete curb and gutter. The total width back to
back of curb shall be 33 feet. The Public Works Committee may
approve a greater or lesser width on a case-by-case basis.
(2) Improvement of streets. All local residential streets shall be
improved as funds permit and as authorized in any calendar year by
the Council by constructing a standard street as defined in
Subsection F(1).
(3) Municipal arterials and collector streets shall be improved as funds
permit, according to standards and specifications approved by the
Common Council.
(4) Reconstruction as a nonstandard street. The Public Works
Committee may approve the reconstruction of a local street with a
nonstandard design if the Committee finds that such design is not
contrary to public health, safety and welfare.
§ 395-4 MONONA CODE § 395-4
1:436
G. Specifications as to materials used in construction. The depth, width,
type, gradation strength requirements, etc., of all materials shall be as
recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the Public Works
Committee.
H. Costs. In streets reconstructed, the City shall assume 40% of the cost of
improvement, and the abutting property owner shall assume the sixtypercent
balance of such cost, according to the following formula: The
cost for the initial construction of a "standard street" shall be
apportioned 40% to the City and 60% to abutting property owners. The
cost for subsequent reconstruction of a standard street shall be paid by
the City. The cost for reconstruction of a nonstandard street shall be
paid by the abutting property owners, unless the Council determines to
apportion the cost otherwise. Costs shall be assessed according to the
following formula:
(1) The cost per assessable front foot of property involved is the total
cost as outlined in Subsection H(7) below of the improvement
divided by the total assessable footage.
(2) On corner lots, the front footage (i.e., the width of narrow side)
shall be assessed in full; the side footage (i.e., the depth or length
of the lot) shall be assessed at 50% of the length of the "long side at
the street."
(3) A lot fronting on two streets shall be assessed in the following
manner:
(a) If such is not divisible into another (or more) buildable lot(s),
the front frontage shall be assessed in full and the rear
frontage shall be assessed at 50% of its rear frontage.
(b) If such lot is divisible into another or more buildable lots, both
front and rear frontages shall be assessed in full.
(4) Nondivisible lots fronting on a dead-end street or lots on culs-desac,
with less than 60 feet of frontage, shall be given a benefit
assessment of 60 feet.
(5) An interior "pie-shaped" lot shall be assessed at 50% of its frontage,
but in no case shall the assessment be for less than 60 feet. A "pieshaped"
lot is defined as a lot having only three sides. An "interior
lot" is defined as any lot not being on a corner of two streets.
(6) Any time a lot is assessed for special assessments, there shall be a
minimum assessment based on 60 feet of frontage, regardless of
any other provision of this Code.
(7) In streets reconstructed in the City, the abutting property owner
shall assume 60% of the cost of street improvements based on a
standard section shown on the diagram marked "Profile of Typical
Residential Street"249 (the twenty-eight-foot local street width or its
§ 395-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-4
1:437
§ 395-5. Driveways; openings and location of filling station islands.
twenty-eight-foot equivalent in other streets). The costs shall be
computed on the basis of the average actual unit quantity bid
prices for street projects let by the City in the year of construction.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, no person shall pay
an assessment which, when added to any state or federal funding
for such project, causes the revenues to exceed the cost of the
project. If possible, the unit quantities for the specific project being
assessed shall be used. The costs include, but are not limited
to, up to 20% added on for City engineering, contingency and
administrative costs. The City shall assume all remaining project
costs beyond the abutting property owners' sixty-percent share of
the typical street cross section.
A. Width of driveway. No lot shall have more than 1/2 of any frontage on
any street in driveway openings, except that the Public Works
Committee may, upon showing of hardship, grant exceptions to permit
driveway openings covering more than 1/2 of the street frontage.
B. Concrete aprons. No concrete driveway apron shall extend beyond the
lot line until the abutting street has been improved with curbs and
utilities.
C. Radius of driveway approach. The radius of driveway approaches to
filling stations, public garages and public parking areas from the curb
shall be five feet.
D. Distance of driveway from sidewalk. The edge of the driveway nearest
the corner at the outside edge of the sidewalk from the street line
extended shall be not less than 10 feet in the case of filling stations,
public garages and public parking areas.
E. Engineer may determine width. The City Engineer may determine the
width of any "unbroken" driveway which is more than 30 feet wide at
the outer edge of the sidewalk for which application for consent is
made; the purpose of this subsection is to give the City Engineer
discretionary power to limit the width of such driveways in excess of 30
feet at the outer edge of the sidewalk in proper cases where the safety
of the general public will be preserved. The word "unbroken" as used in
this subsection means unbroken by safety island 10 feet in length along
the street line. The sidewalk crossed by such driveway shall not have
more than one-fourth-inch-per-foot pitch toward the gutter.
F. Pump islands. No part of any pump island shall be closer than 10 feet to
a street line, and such islands shall be so placed that no part of any
vehicle will encroach or stand in the street while such vehicle is being
served.
249. Editor's Note: Said diagram is attached to this chapter.
§ 395-4 MONONA CODE § 395-6
1:438
§ 395-6. Deposit of rubbish and throwing of glass on streets
prohibited.
No person shall deposit any brine, salt, grass, leaves, dirt, gravel, snow,
ice or other rubbish in any street, alley or public place in the City, and no
person shall deposit or permit to be deposited in or upon any street, alley,
driveway or public place or in or upon any road or pleasure drive which
is under the police jurisdiction of the City any articles liable to injure any
person or the wheels or tires of vehicles.
§ 395-7. Obstruction of streets.
§ 395-8. Snow and ice removed from sidewalks and crosswalk
ramps/openings. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689;
4-1-2019 by Ord. No. 3-19-715]
A. No person shall unnecessarily obstruct or cause to be obstructed any
street, alley, crosswalk or sidewalk so as to interfere with public traffic.
B. Any person or utility and any officer or employee of the City who shall
block or obstruct the traveled portion of any street or improved alley
shall immediately notify the Fire Chief and/or the Police Chief in writing
of such fact, stating where all such obstructions are placed or
excavations made and the probable length of time the same shall so
remain, and on the removal of such obstacle and the opening of such
portion of the street or alley for travel, such person causing the obstacle
shall immediately notify the Fire Chief and/or Police Chief in writing
that such obstacle has been removed and that the street or alley is open
for travel.
A. The owner, occupants or person in charge of each lot or part of lot shall
remove all snow and ice which may have fallen or accumulated on the
sidewalk and crosswalk ramps/openings abutting such lot and shall, if
necessary, spread sand, salt, ashes or other material on the sidewalk
and crosswalk ramps/openings to keep them clear and prevent them
from being or becoming slippery. The person responsible for
maintaining the sidewalk and crosswalk ramps/openings as outlined
above shall clear the sidewalk and crosswalk ramps/openings of
accumulated snow and ice as soon as possible, but in no event later
than 24 hours after such snow and ice cease to accumulate. Sidewalks
and crosswalk ramps/openings shall be cleared to the full width of the
sidewalk and crosswalk ramp/opening. Any person violating this section
shall, in addition to being subject to citation and forfeiture, be primarily
liable for any damage resulting from the failure to properly maintain
the sidewalk and crosswalk ramps/openings in safe condition.
B. The Department of Public Works shall cause all sidewalks and
crosswalk ramps/openings which shall not have been cleared of snow
and ice as above described to be cleared upon default of the person
whose duty it shall be to clear the same. The Department of Public
Works shall keep an accurate account of the expenses so incurred in
§ 395-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-8
1:439
§ 395-9. Downspouts and eaves of buildings not to drain on
sidewalks.
No downspouts from any building shall terminate on or upon, or in such
position that the contents of such spout be cast upon or flow back or over
any public sidewalk in the City. When the eaves of any building extend
over or are so constructed that water may fall therefrom or run back upon
any public sidewalk, such eaves shall be so protected by proper spouts or
otherwise that no water shall fall or drain therefrom or run back upon or
over any public sidewalk. The owner or owners of any building and the
officers of any association or corporation owning any building on which any
spouts or the eaves thereof shall be maintained contrary to this section shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of the Code.
§ 395-10. Damaging streets.
No person shall injure or tear up any pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, or
any sodded or graveled shoulder, on any public street.
§ 395-11. Numbering and naming of streets.
front of each lot or parcel of landing accordance with the Public Works
Special Services Fee Schedule. The expenses shall be billed to the
owner of record for each lot or parcel of land, and payment shall be
due within 30 days of the date of the invoice. If the charges are not
paid within said period of time, they shall be entered in the tax roll by
the Clerk as a special tax against the appropriate lot or parcel of land,
and the same shall be collected in all respects like other taxes upon
real estate. Prosecution under Subsection A of this section shall not bar
the City from proceeding under Subsection B of this section, nor shall
proceeding under Subsection B bar prosecution under Subsection A.
C. No person shall deposit snow or ice on another person's property
without his/her consent.
D. Any person found to have violated Subsection A above shall be subject
to forfeitures as prescribed by the Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule
as adopted by the Common Council.
A. Street numbers.
(1) All lots and parts of lots and parcels of unplatted land in the City
shall be numbered in accordance with the map on file in the office
of the City Clerk designated "A Street Numbering Map," dated May
21, 1951. All lots and parts of lots hereafter platted or otherwise
subdivided shall be numbered to conform as nearly as possible to
the general scheme of numbering as outlined on such map.
(2) Each owner or occupant of any building fronting upon any street
shall, within 20 days after the completion of such building, attach
securely or apply to the first or ground story of such building, so
§ 395-8 MONONA CODE § 395-11
1:440
that same can be plainly seen from the street, the proper number of
such building, as inscribed upon such map, in figures not less than
2 1/2 inches high for single- and two-family residential structures
and not less than six inches high for multifamily and commercial/
industrial structures, and such owner or occupant shall at all times
keep such number so attached or applied. In addition, the owner of
said property may also paint or have painted the address number
on the curb in front of the premises. The numbers shall be painted
by stencil in reflective paint.
(3) If the owner or occupant of any building required by this section to
be numbered shall neglect for 20 days to attach and maintain the
proper numbers on such buildings, the Building Inspector shall
serve on him or her a notice requiring such owner or occupant to
properly number the same, and if he or she neglects to do so for 10
days after the service of such notice, he or she shall be subject to a
penalty as provided in § 1-4 of the Code.
B. Street names. The different streets in the City shall bear the names
given on the map referred to in Subsection A(1) above.
§ 395-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-11
1:441

ARTICLE II
Street Use Permits
[Adopted as Title 7, Ch. 6, of the 1994 Code]
§ 395-12. Purpose.
The streets in possession of the City are primarily for the use of the public
in the ordinary way. However, under proper circumstances, the City may
grant a permit for street use, subject to reasonable municipal regulation
and control. Therefore, this article is enacted to regulate and control the
use of streets pursuant to a street use permit to the end that the health,
safety and general welfare of the public and the good order of the City can
be protected and maintained.
§ 395-13. Application.
A written application for a street use permit by persons or groups desiring
the same shall be made on a form provided by the City Clerk and shall
be filed with the City Clerk. The application shall set forth the following
information regarding the proposed street use:
§ 395-14. Representative.
The person or representative of the group making application for a street
use permit may be required to meet with the City Administrator, when
the Administrator gives consideration to the granting of said street use
permit, to provide any additional information which is reasonably necessary
to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be granted.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant or
applicants.
B. If the proposed street use is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorizing responsible
heads of such organization.
C. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons who
will be responsible for conducting the proposed use of the street.
D. The date and duration of time for which the requested use of the street
is proposed to occur.
E. An accurate description of that portion of the street proposed to be
used.
F. The approximate number of persons for whom use of the proposed
street area is requested.
G. The proposed use, described in detail, for which the street use permit is
requested.
§ 395-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-15
1:443
§ 395-15. Review by administrative officials.
Before any application for a street use permit is considered by the City
Administrator, the application shall be reviewed by the Director of Public
Works, Fire Chief and Chief of Police for their recommendations as to the
effect that the temporary closing of the street will have on the public safety
and traffic movement in the area during the time the street may be closed.
§ 395-16. Mandatory denial.
An application for a street use permit shall be denied if:
§ 395-17. Permit fee.250
Each application for a street use permit shall be accompanied by a fee as
prescribed in the City's Fee Schedule.
§ 395-18. Consent to issuance of permit.
In addition to the fee required by the previous section, each application for
a street use permit, except for parades or races sponsored by civic, youth
or scout organizations which have been in existence for at least six months,
shall be accompanied by a petition designating the proposed area of the
street to be used and time for said proposed use, said petition to be signed
by not less than 75% of the residents and/or business owners over 18 years
of age residing along that portion of the street designated for the proposed
use within 90 days of the event. Said petition shall be verified and shall be
submitted in substantially the following form:
A. The proposed street use is primarily for private or commercial gain.
B. The proposed street use would violate any federal or state law or any
ordinance of the City.
C. The proposed street use will substantially hinder the movement of
police, fire or emergency vehicles, constituting a risk to persons or
property.
D. The application for a street use permit does not contain the information
required above.
E. The application requests a period for the use of the street in excess of
six hours.
F. The proposed use could equally be held in a public park or other
location. In addition to the requirement that the application for a street
use permit shall be denied, as hereinabove set forth, the City
Administrator may deny a permit for any other reason or reasons if it
concludes that the health, safety and general welfare of the public
cannot adequately be protected and maintained if the permit is granted.
250. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 395-15 MONONA CODE § 395-18
1:444
PETITION FOR STREET USE PERMIT
We, the undersigned residents of the __________ hundred block of __________
Street in the City of Monona, hereby consent to the ____________________
recreational or business use of this street between the hours of __________
and __________ on __________, the _____ day of __________, 20 _____, for
the purpose of ____________________ and do hereby consent to the City of
Monona to grant a Street Use Permit for use of the said portion of said
street for said purpose and do hereby agree to abide by such conditions
of such use as the City of Monona shall attach to the granting of the
requested Street Use Permit. We further understand that the permit will
not be granted for longer than six hours on the date hereinabove specified,
and agree to remove from the street prior to the end of said period all
equipment, vehicles and other personal property placed or driven thereon
during the event for which a permit is granted.
We designate __________ as the responsible person or persons who shall
apply for an application for a Street Use Permit.
§ 395-19. Insurance.
The applicant for a street use permit may be required to indemnify, defend
and hold the City and its employees and agents harmless against all claims,
liability, loss, damage or expense incurred by the City on account of any
injury to or death of any person or any damage to property caused by or
resulting from the activities for which the permit is granted. As evidence of
the applicant's ability to perform the conditions of the permit, the applicant
may be required to furnish a certificate of comprehensive general liability
insurance with the City of Monona. The applicant may be required to furnish
a performance bond prior to being granted the permit.
§ 395-20. Termination of street use permit.
A street use permit for an event in progress may be terminated by the
Police Department if the health, safety and welfare of the public appear to
be endangered by activities generated as a result of the event or the event
is in violation of any of the conditions of the permits or ordinances of the
City of Monona. The Chief of Police has the authority to revoke a permit or
terminate an event in progress if the event organizers fail to comply with
any of the regulations in the street use policy or conditions stated in the
permit.
§ 395-21. Violations and penalties.251
Any person who violates any provision of this article is subject to a penalty
as provided in § 1-4 of the Code.
251. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 395-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-21
1:445
Chapter 404
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 7.
Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers — See
Ch. 328.
Weights and measures — See Ch. 457.
Garage sales — See § 480-12.
§ 404-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in sales within
the City of Monona without being registered and receiving a transient
merchant's license for that purpose as provided herein. All licenses granted
under this chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance through
December 31 of the current year. Licenses may be renewed annually and
expire on December 31 of each year.
§ 404-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Includes any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation,
or one purporting to be such.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The City Chief of Police or his/her duly appointed
officer.
CLERK — The City Clerk or his/her duly appointed agent.
FOOD — A raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption, or chewing gum.
MERCHANDISE — Includes personal property of any kind and shall include
merchandise, goods or materials provided incidental to services offered or
sold. The sale of merchandise includes donations required by the seller for
the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A transient merchant who serves
or sells food intended for human consumption from a movable vehicle,
pushcart, trailer, boat or temporary structure, which periodically or
continuously changes location.
PERMANENT MERCHANT — One who, for at least one year prior to the
consideration of the application of this chapter to said merchant: a) has
continuously operated an established place of business in Dane County; or
b) has continuously resided in Dane County and now does business from his/
her residence.
§ 395-21 MONONA CODE § 404-2
1:446
SERVICE BASE — An operating base location to which a mobile food
establishment or transportation vehicle returns regularly for such things as
vehicle and equipment cleaning, discharging liquid or solid wastes, refilling
water tanks and ice bins, and boarding food.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — One who engages in the sale of merchandise
at any place in the City of Monona temporarily, and who does not intend
to become and does not become a permanent merchant of the City. For
purposes of this definition, "sale of merchandise" includes a sale in which
the personal services rendered upon or in connection with the merchandise
constitutes the greatest part of value for the price received. "Transient
merchant" shall also include any one engaged in the sale of food, ice cream,
candy, beef or other merchandise out of a vehicle.
§ 404-3. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from all the provisions of this chapter:
A. Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods
to regular customers on established routes;
B. Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods;
C. Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown;
D. Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders at the
home of the buyer for merchandise regularly offered for sale by such
merchant within this county and who delivers such merchandise in his/
her regular course of business;
E. Any person who has an established place of business where the
merchandise being sold is offered for sale on a regular basis and in
which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested, a
home visit by said person;
F. Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has
had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer;
G. Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the
sale or offering for sale of merchandise;
H. Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court
and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law;
I. Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for or on behalf of said organization, provided
that there is submitted to the Clerk proof that such charitable
organization is registered under § 202.12, Wis. Stats. Any charitable
organization engaging in the sale of merchandise and not registered
under § 202.12, Wis. Stats., or which is exempt from the statute's
requirements, shall be required to comply with this chapter;
§ 404-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-3
1:447
§ 404-4. Application.
J. Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom
a complaint has been made to the Chief of Police or Clerk that such
person is a transient merchant, provided that there is submitted to the
Chief of Police or Clerk proof that such person has leased for at least
one year or purchased the premises from which he/she has conducted
business in the City for at least one year prior to the date the complaint
was made;
K. Any individual licensed by an examining board as defined in § 15.01(7),
Wis. Stats.;
L. This chapter does not apply to transient merchants while doing
business at special events authorized by the Common Council;
M. Any group or individual selling merchandise for the primary purpose of
raising funds for a public or private school engaged in the education of
children from kindergarten through high school or any extracurricular
group affiliated with such a school;
N. Any family member holding an estate sale of the personal property of a
deceased member of his/her family;
O. Any individual holding a garage sale as provided by § 480-12;
P. Any individual engaged in proselytizing, canvassing or pamphleteering
regarding political or religious views and not selling any merchandise
or soliciting any funds or services.
A. Information. Applicants for a license must complete and return to the
Clerk an application form furnished by the Clerk, which shall require
the following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary
address, if any.
(2) Copy of a current driver license or other form of identification that
includes a photograph of the applicant.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the transient merchant represents
or is employed by or whose merchandise is being sold.
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will
be conducted, if any.
(5) Documentation showing that the applicant has permission to be at
that location.
(6) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
merchandise, and any services offered.
(7) Proposed methods of delivery of merchandise, if applicable.
§ 404-3 MONONA CODE § 404-4
1:448
(8) Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by
applicant in the conduct of his/her business.
(9) Most recent cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where
applicant conducted his/her business.
(10) Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving this City.
(11) Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime
or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchant
business within the last five years, and the nature of the offense
and the place of conviction.
(12) Mobile food establishments shall provide the following additional
information:
(a) A description of all food to be offered for sale;
(b) The location(s) where business will be conducted;
(c) The dates and times business will be conducted.
(d) The address of the service base from which the operation will
be supported.
B. Documentation. Applicants shall include with the applications a true
and complete copy of the following:
(1) A state-issued driver's license or other proof of identity containing
a photograph of the applicant.
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of
weights and measures for each device utilized which is regulated
by Chapter 457, Weights and Measures.
(3) A current valid Wisconsin Seller's Permit.
(4) A current auto insurance declaration page for coverage in force for
the entire license period.
(5) Applications for mobile food establishments shall also include the
following:
(a) A current mobile food establishment permit issued by the
Wisconsin Department of Health Services or its designated
agent;
(b) A current service base permit issued by the Wisconsin
Department of Health Services or its designated agent;
(c) Written consent from the owners of all private property upon
which it intends to operate;
§ 404-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-4
1:449
§ 404-5. Investigation.
§ 404-6. Appeal.
Any person refused or denied a license may appeal the denial through the
appeal procedure provided by Chapter 7, Administrative Review.
§ 404-7. Regulation of operations.
(d) Proof of liability insurance in an amount no less than $300,000
per incident.
C. Fee. At the time the application is filed, a fee shall be paid to the Clerk
to cover the cost of processing said application. Each and every
member of a group must file a separate application form. The fee for a
transient merchant's license is nonrefundable and shall be in the
amount listed in the City's Fee Schedule.
A. Upon receipt of each application, the Chief of Police or his/her duly
appointed officer may immediately make and complete an investigation
of the statements made in such application.
B. The Clerk shall refuse to license the applicant if it is determined,
pursuant to the investigation above, that: the application contains any
material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints of
material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities
in the most recent cities, villages and towns, not exceeding three, in
which the applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was
convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within
the last five years, the nature of which is directly related to the
applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or the applicant failed to
comply with any applicable provisions of this chapter.
A. Prohibited practices.
(1) A transient merchant shall be prohibited from: calling at any
dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. except by appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place
where a sign is displayed bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No
Solicitors" or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of
any dwelling place or remaining on any premises after being asked
to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority
over such premises.
(2) A transient merchant shall not misrepresent or make false,
deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality,
quantity or characteristics of any merchandise offered for sale, the
purpose of his/her visit, his/her identity or the identity of the
organization he/she represents. A charitable organization transient
merchant shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of
the merchandise being offered will actually be used for the
§ 404-4 MONONA CODE § 404-7
1:450
charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Said
portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the
merchandise.
(3) No transient merchant shall impede the free use of sidewalks and
streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from
vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
(4) No transient merchant shall make any loud noises or use any
sound-amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced
is capable of being plainly heard outside a one-hundred-foot radius
of the source.
(5) No transient merchant shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in
or around the area in which he/she is conducting business.
B. Disclosure requirements for transient merchants other than mobile
food establishments.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to
a prospective customer, a transient merchant shall expressly
disclose his/her name, the name of the company or organization he/
she is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of merchandise or
services he/she offers to sell.
(2) If any sale of merchandise is made by a transient merchant, or any
offer for the later delivery of merchandise is taken by the seller, the
buyer shall have the right to cancel said transaction in accordance
with § 423.202, Wis. Stats., and any other provision under the law;
the seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed
notice of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of
§ 423.203, Wis. Stats.
(3) If the transient merchant takes a sales order for the later delivery
of merchandise, he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide
the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the
agreement; the amount paid in advance whether full, partial or no
advance payment is made; the name, address and telephone
number of the seller; the delivery or performance date; and
whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms
thereof.
C. Any transient merchant engaged in the sale of fireworks, as defined in
§ 238-1, shall fully comply with the provisions of Chapter 238,
Fireworks, as well as this chapter.
D. Mobile food establishments. In addition to the provisions of Subsection
A, all mobile food establishments operating within the City shall:
(1) Comply with all applicable requirements of Ch. DHS 196, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(2) Operate only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
§ 404-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-7
1:451
(3) Place no seating for consumer consumption of products sold within
the public right-of-way.
(4) Provide a minimum four-foot clearance on sidewalks and rights-ofway
for pedestrian access and traffic.
(5) When operating in the public right-of-way, serving and dispensing
of food products shall be directed toward the sidewalk or terrace
area immediately adjacent.
(6) Maintain clear access and visibility of crosswalks and street
corners.
(7) Not connect to any public source of electricity, water or sewer.
(8) Not use any public property such as light poles or other utility
poles, flower planters, trees or other amenities to attach any ropes,
posters, signs, electrical cords or other objects used in its
operations.
(9) Keep the area clean and free from litter, garbage, refuse and debris
at all times.252
(10) Maintain at least one leakproof container for the deposit of waste,
garbage, litter and refuse. When leaving vending area, the mobile
vendor and his/her employee(s) shall be responsible for the
removal of all litter resulting from its operations.
(11) Locations of operation. Mobile food establishments issued a license
under this section shall only operate at the following locations:
(a) Private property. On private property for no more than 120
days per calendar year at the same property, provided the
operations do not impair traffic flow or obstruct vision for
intersecting streets, driveways, sidewalks or other traffic
areas. All operations on private property shall be first approved
by the City Planner as consistent with Chapter 480, Zoning.
(b) Public street. On any public street which has a speed limit no
greater than 25 mph, provided it is parked in a legal parking
space greater than 200 feet from the property line of any
restaurant and removed by 10:00 p.m. each day.
(c) Other public property. On any public property other than a
public street only as specifically approved in writing by the
City Clerk and stated on the issued license.
252. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 404-7 MONONA CODE § 404-8
1:452
§ 404-8. Records.
The Chief of Police shall report to the Clerk all convictions for violation of
this chapter, and the Clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the
applicant.
§ 404-9. Revocation of license.
§ 404-10. Violations and penalties.254
Any person adjudged in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable as set forth in § 1-4 of the Code for each violation per day plus
costs of prosecution. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 411
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative review — See Ch. 7.
Nuisances — See Ch. 312.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 321.
Zoning — See Ch. 480.
A. License may be revoked by the License Review Committee after notice
and hearing, if the applicant made any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement in the application, made any fraudulent, false,
deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of
engaging in transient sales, violated any provision of this chapter or
was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is
directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in selling.
B. Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally or pursuant to
Ch. 68, Wis. Stats.; such notice shall contain the time and place of
hearing and a statement of the acts upon which the hearing will be
based.253
253. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
254. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 404-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 404-10
1:453

ARTICLE I
Public Tree Maintenance
[Adopted as Title 6, Ch. 2, of the 1994 Code]
§ 411-1. Trimming.
§ 411-2. Trees and shrubbery obstructing view at intersection or
view of traffic signs.
A. Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any terrace, public area or upon
any private premises adjacent to any public right-of-way or public areas
shall be kept trimmed so that the lowest branches projecting over the
public street or alley provide a clearance of not less than 14 feet. The
Director of Public Works may waive the provisions of this section for
newly planted trees if he/she determines that they do not interfere with
public travel, obstruct the light of any streetlight or endanger public
safety.
B. The necessity of the pruning may be determined by the Director of
Public Works.
C. Clearance from sidewalk to lower branches shall not be less than 10
feet. All trees standing upon private property in the City, the branches
of which extend over the line of the street, shall be trimmed so that no
branch shall grow or hang over the line of the sidewalk lower than 10
feet above the level of the sidewalk. No tree shall be permitted to grow
in such a manner as to obstruct the proper diffusion of light from any
public lamp.
D. Trimming or pruning of more than 2/3 of the crown of a terrace tree
shall be considered to be a major alteration and shall require a permit
from the Director of Public Works.255
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no person shall
maintain, plant or permit to remain on any private or public premises
situated at the intersection of two or more streets or alleys in the City
any hedge, tree, shrub or other growth which may obstruct the view of
the operator of any motor vehicle or pedestrian approaching such
intersection.
B. It is unlawful for any person to plant, cause to grow, allow to grow or
maintain any trees, bushes, shrubbery or vegetation of any kind which
is an obstruction to the clear and complete vision of any traffic sign or
driveway approach to a street in the City. It shall be the duty of every
owner of such tree, bush, shrubbery or vegetation to remove such
obstruction.
255. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 411-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-2
1:455
§ 411-3. Tree costs chargeable to lands.257
C. Any shrub, tree or other plant which obstructs the view at an
intersection or the view of a traffic sign shall be deemed to be
dangerous to public travel, and the Director of Public Works may order,
by written notice, the owner or occupant of any private place or
premises on which there stands a tree or shrub which unreasonably
interferes with or encroaches upon the street or sidewalk to take such
steps as are necessary to remove such interference. If such owner or
occupant fails, within 10 days of receipt of notice, to take such
necessary steps, the Director of Public Works shall order City
employees to remove the interference. The cost of removing the
interference shall be imposed and collected as a special charge upon
the property upon which or in front of which such tree or shrub
stands.256
D. Any person who is an owner or occupant or firm or corporation failing
to obey the written notice of the Director of Public Works as specified in
Subsection C above shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
forfeiture as established in § 1-4 of the Code of the City of Monona.
A. The entire cost of planting, removal, spraying, trimming or treatment of
trees, shrubs and plants in front of or upon any lot or parcel of land
abutting on any public area or terrace may be chargeable to and
assessed upon such lot or parcel of land.
B. Account to be kept. The Director of Public Works shall keep a strict
account of the cost of planting, removal, trimming or treating of any
tree, shrub or plant in front of or on each lot or parcel of land abutting
any public area or terrace and, prior to the 10th day of November in
each year, shall make a report to the City Clerk of all work done for
which charges are to made, stating and certifying the description of
land, lot, parts of lots or parcels of land abutting on any public way in
which any such work shall have been done and the amount chargeable
to each piece of property; the City Clerk at the time of making the
annual report to the Common Council of the lots or parcels of land
subject to special charges shall include therein the lots or parcels of
land so reported during the preceding year.
C. Amounts chargeable. The amounts so reported to the Council shall be
imposed on said lots or parcels of land, respectively, to which they are
chargeable and shall constitute a special charge thereon and shall be
collected by the City. The Director of Public Works shall advance out of
the proper fund sufficient money for doing said work, and the said
special charge shall be credited to said fund of the City and shall not be
diverted or used for any other purpose.
256. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
257. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 411-2 MONONA CODE § 411-3
1:456
ARTICLE II
Public Tree Program
[Adopted as Title 12, Ch. 2, of the 1994 Code]
§ 411-4. Statement of policy and applicability.258
It is the policy of the City of Monona to regulate and establish policy, under
the administration of the City Forester, for the control of planting, removal,
maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in or upon all public areas
and terrace areas of the City to eliminate and guard against dangerous
conditions which may result in injury to persons using the streets, alleys,
sidewalks or other public areas; to promote and enhance the beauty and
general welfare of the City; to prohibit the undesirable and unsafe planting,
removal, treatment and maintenance of trees and shrubs located in public
areas; and to guard all trees and shrubs both public and private within the
City against the spread of disease, insects or pests. The Common Council
hereby declares its intention to control and prevent the spread of disease
and the insect pests and vectors which carry such diseases.
§ 411-5. Definitions.
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this article, they shall
be construed to have the following meanings:
BOULEVARD OR TERRACE AREAS — The land between the normal location
of the street curbing and the sidewalk. Where there is no curb and gutter,
the area four feet from the curbline shall be deemed to be a boulevard for
the purpose of this article. "Boulevard" shall have the same meaning as
"terrace." Where there are no sidewalks, the area four feet from the curb
shall be deemed "boulevard or terrace areas" under this article.
EVERGREEN TREE — Any woody plant normally having one stem or trunk
and bearing foliage in the form of needles and crowns which extend from
ground level throughout its entire height.
MAJOR ALTERATION — Trimming a tree beyond necessary trimming to
comply with this article.
PERSON — Person, firm, association or corporation.
PUBLIC AREAS — Includes all public parks, as defined in § 321-1, public
rights-of-way and other lands owned, controlled or leased by the City, except
the terrace areas.259
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any tree or shrub or part thereof which, by reason
of its condition, interferes with the use of any public area; is infected with
a plant disease; is infested with injurious insects or pests; is injurious to
258. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
259. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 411-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-5
1:457
public improvements; or endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of
persons or property.
PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS — All trees and shrubs located or to be
planted in or upon public areas.
SHRUBS — Any woody vegetation or a woody plant having multiple stems
and bearing foliage from the ground up.
TREE — Any woody plant, normally having one stem or trunk, bearing its
foliage or crown well above ground level to heights of 16 feet or more.
§ 411-6. City Forester.260
A. Appointment. The City Forester shall be appointed by the Common
Council upon the recommendation of the Public Works Committee.
B. Powers and duties. The City Forester, subject to the direction of the
Public Works Committee, shall have the following general powers and
duties:
(1) To direct, manage, supervise and control the City's urban forestry
program, including the planting, removal, trimming, maintenance
and protection of all trees and shrubs in or upon all terrace and
public areas of the City.
(2) To enforce such rules, regulations, permit and penalty procedures
as deemed necessary and may do so by the issuance of
administrative orders and/or municipal citations to effectuate the
intent of this article.
(3) To inspect any trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, plants, logs or
branches existing or growing upon any property within the City and
to conduct surveys to determine if any destructive or
communicable disease or pest exists which may be detrimental to
or endanger the good health and well-being of trees or other plant
life in public areas. To inspect all premises and places within the
City to determine whether any public nuisance exists thereon. The
City Forester or his or her authorized representative may enter
upon private premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of
examining any tree or shrub located upon or over such premises
and carrying out any of the provisions of this article. If a request to
inspect such trees or shrubs is denied by the person responsible for
the property, an inspection warrant may be obtained pursuant to
§ 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
(4) To restrict or regulate tree maintenance activities within the City
limits to reduce the spread of infectious diseases and insects.
260. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 411-5 MONONA CODE § 411-6
1:458
§ 411-7. Interference with City Forester prohibited.
No person shall interfere with the City Forester or his/her authorized
representative while he/she is engaged in carrying out any work or
activities authorized by this article.
§ 411-8. Public nuisances, declaration and abatement.261
(5) To provide information to the public concerning the urban forestry
program and tree and shrub care.
(6) To implement and direct a City Urban Forestry Management Plan.
A. The City Forester shall have the right to declare as a public nuisance
any tree or shrub or part thereof, including firewood, existing anywhere
in the City, which is:
(1) Interfering with the use of any public area;
(2) Infected with a disease;
(3) Infested with insects; or
(4) Endangering the life, health or safety of other trees/shrubs,
persons or property.
B. The City Forester shall maintain and make available to the public a list
of nuisance trees and shrubs as established by the Public Works
Committee.
C. Abatement of public nuisances.
(1) Public areas. All trees, shrubs or parts thereof on public property
shall be subject to treatment and/or removal when it is determined
by the City Forester or his/her designee that the trees or shrubs
constitute an immediate or future health or safety hazard or when
they have become unsightly, infested, diseased or dead. The City
Forester or his/her designee shall have the discretion to determine
the most appropriate course of action to prevent or treat such
conditions.
(2) Private premises. No person shall permit any nuisance tree or
shrub as determined under this article to remain on any premises
owned or controlled by such person within the City. Upon
determination by the City Forester that any nuisance tree or shrub
exists on any private premises, he/she shall order the owner or
tenant having charge of such premises to treat, remove or
otherwise control such tree or shrub in such manner as will abate
the nuisance. If the owner or tenant having charge of such
261. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 411-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-8
1:459
§ 411-9. Planting of trees and shrubs.
premises fails to abate the nuisance the City Forester shall do so
pursuant to the abatement procedure under § 312-7 of the Code.
A. Responsibility. The City Forester shall recommend to the Public Works
Committee a program for tree planting, care and protection of trees
and shrubs on public areas and terraces within the City and to the Park
and Recreation Board for public parks.262
B. Tree sizes. The Public Works Committee, upon the recommendation of
the City Forester, shall maintain lists of tree species desirable for
planting in boulevards according to their normal mature height:263
(1) Large trees: over 40 feet;
(2) Medium trees: 25 feet to 40 feet; and
(3) Small trees: 15 feet to 25 feet.
C. Planting size.
(1) All large or medium trees, when planted, shall be at least eight feet
high and have a minimum trunk diameter of 1 1/2 inches at a point
six inches above the ground.
(2) All small trees, when planted, shall be least five feet high and have
five or more branches.
D. Location.
(1) There shall be a distance of 40 to 50 feet between terrace area
trees, depending upon the size of tree and other factors. Terrace
trees shall be planted equal distance between the sidewalk or
proposed sidewalk and back of the curb or proposed back of curb.
In terrace areas less than three feet wide, planting will not be
permitted. Terrace area trees shall be a minimum of 35 feet from an
intersection.264
(2) Small-sized trees shall be planted at least five feet from driveways
and large- or medium-sized trees shall be planted at least 15 feet
from driveways. Trees shall also be planted at least 10 feet from
curb box/water shutoffs.
(3) Evergreen trees or shrubs shall not be planted in a terrace area.
262. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
263. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
264. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 411-8 MONONA CODE § 411-9
1:460
§ 411-10. Removal of trees and stumps.
(4) It shall be unlawful to plant or maintain shrubbery, ground cover or
other plants not considered to be a deciduous leaf tree within
terrace areas whose growth is in excess of eight inches in height
above the top of the nearest curb.
(5) Tree grates shall be provided for terrace trees surrounded by
concrete by the adjacent property owner and shall be level with
adjacent concrete.
E. Minimum opening to be maintained. Unless otherwise provided for in a
written permit from the City Forester, there must be at least nine
square feet of open ground about the base of each tree three inches in
diameter one foot above the ground, and for each two inches of
increase in such diameter, there must be an increase of at least one foot
of open ground around each such tree.265
F. Certain species restricted. No person shall plant within the City of
Monona any female tree of the species Populas deltoidea, commonly
called the "cottonwood," or any tree commonly called the "seed-bearing
box elder" or "Acer negundo," which may now or hereafter become
infested with box elder bugs, and such trees are hereby declared a
nuisance. Any person having any such trees on his/her premises shall
cause the same to be removed.
G. Unlawfully planted trees. Trees, plants or shrubs planted within any
terrace or planting easement without the authorization and approval of
the City Forester may be removed. The City Forester shall notify the
abutting owner in writing, listing the unlawfully planted trees, plants or
shrubs, ordering their removal and establishing a reasonable time
within which such removal shall be accomplished. In the event that
removal is not accomplished within the time specified, the City may
remove such trees, plants or shrubs and charge the costs thereof to the
owner.266
A. 267Removal standards. In cutting down trees located in public and
terrace areas, the tree must be removed with the root stump grubbed
out or ground out to a depth of at least nine inches below grade
measured in a straight line with the normal grade of sidewalk to top of
curb. All wood and debris must be removed from the street prior to the
end of each working day, and all holes shall be filled to normal grade
level with topsoil as soon as practicable. The abutting property owner
265. Editor's Note: Original subsection (f), Permitted species, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
266. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
267. Editor's Note: Original subsection (a), Dangerous, obstructive and infected trees, which
immediately preceded this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 411-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-10
1:461
§ 411-11. Prohibited acts.
shall have a right of first refusal to keep the wood, provided such wood
is not diseased.
B. Private removal. No person, firm, organization or corporation shall
plant, injure, trim, remove or destroy any tree or shrub located in or
upon any public place until a permit shall have been issued by the City
Forester. Such permit shall be issued only when the removal, trimming
or cutting of the tree or shrub is necessary, as determined by the City
Forester, because of disease, damage, hazardous condition, and/or
location, or its location is such that substantial detriment is done to the
property upon which the tree or shrub stands or property abutting the
same. Such permit shall expressly state the premises upon which the
tree stands and the location of the tree thereon.
A. Damage to public trees. No person shall, without the consent of the
owner in the case of a private tree or shrub, or without written permits
from the City Forester in the case of a terrace-area tree, public tree or
shrub, perform or cause to be performed by others any of the following
acts:
(1) Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire, sign, unprotected electrical
installation or other device or material to, around or through a tree
or shrub.
(2) Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub or
permit any fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub.
(3) Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil or other injurious
substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or about any tree or
shrub or place cement or other solid substance around the base of
the same.
(4) Remove any guard, stake or other device or material intended for
the protection of a public tree or shrub or close or obstruct any
open space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to
permit access of air, water and fertilizer.
(5) Attach any sign, poster, notice or other object on any tree, or fasten
any guy wire, cable, rope, nails, screws or other device to any tree,
except that the City may tie temporary "no parking" signs to trees
when necessary in conjunction with street improvement work, tree
maintenance work or parades.
(6) Cause or encourage any fire or burning near or around any tree.
(7) Except with a written permit from the City Forester, to place or
maintain upon the ground any stone, brick, cement or other
impervious substance in such manner as may obstruct the free
access of air or water to the roots of any tree, shrub or plant in or
upon any public way or public place.
§ 411-10 MONONA CODE § 411-11
1:462
§ 411-12. Appeal from determinations or orders.269
Any person who receives a determination or order under this article from
the City Forester and objects to all or any part thereof shall have the right
to appeal such determination or order, subject to the provisions of Chapter
7, Administrative Review, of the Code of the City of Monona.270
§ 411-13. Adoption of state statutes.
Sections 27.09 and 86.03, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference.
B. Excavations. All trees on any parkway or other publicly owned property
near any excavation or construction of any building structure or street
work shall be sufficiently guarded and protected by those responsible
for such work as to prevent any injury to said trees. No person shall
excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches, or install pavement within a
radius of 10 feet from any public tree without a permit from the City
Forester.268
268. Editor's Note: Original subsections (c), Interference with Forester, and (d), Refusal to
abate nuisance, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
269. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
270. Editor's Note: Original section 12-2-10, Inspection of trees, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 411-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-13
1:463

ARTICLE III
Private Tree Maintenance
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
§ 411-14. Oak pruning regulated.
No person shall prune, cut or otherwise injure any oak tree on public or
private property between April 1 and October 1 of any year; provided,
however, that the City Forester may authorize the issuance of permits
to allow such pruning as may be necessary to protect the public safety
and shall specify any conditions thereon deemed necessary to prevent the
spread of oak wilt disease.
§ 411-15. Private trees.
Property owners having trees or shrubs growing on their property outside
of the public right-of-way shall maintain such trees and shrubs such that
they do not obstruct streetlights, traffic signs or signals, street name signs
or the free use of public ways and do not interfere with overhead or
underground utility facilities.
§ 411-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-15
1:465
Chapter 420
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junked vehicles and appliances — See Ch.
342, Art. I.
§ 420-1. Abandoned vehicles; definitions.
A. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited. No person shall leave unattended
any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home on any public
street or highway or private or public property in the City of Monona for
such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to
reasonably appear to have been abandoned. Whenever any such vehicle
has been left unattended on any street or highway in the City of Monona
or upon private or public property without the permission of the
property owner or other person charged with the lawful jurisdiction
thereof for more than 72 hours, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned
and constitutes a public nuisance.
B. Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall
be applicable:
STREET — Any public highway or alley and shall mean the entire width
between the boundary lines of any public way where any part thereof is
open to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
UNATTENDED — Unmoved from its location with no obvious sign of
continuous human use.
VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home,
whether or not such vehicle is registered under Wisconsin law.
C. Presumptions. For purposes of this section, the following irrebuttable
presumptions shall apply:
(1) A vehicle shall be presumed unattended if it is found in the same
position 72 hours after issuance of a traffic ticket or citation and if
such traffic ticket or citation remains placed upon the windshield
during said 72 hours.
(2) Any vehicle left unattended for more than 72 hours on any public
street or public ground or left unattended for more than 72 hours
on private property without the consent of the property owner is
deemed abandoned and constitutes a nuisance, provided that the
vehicle shall not be deemed abandoned under this subsection if left
unattended on private property outside of public view and is
enclosed within a building, or if designated as not abandoned by
the Chief of Police.
§ 411-15 MONONA CODE § 420-1
1:466
§ 420-2. Removal and impoundment of vehicles.
Any vehicle in violation of this chapter shall be removed and impounded
until lawfully claimed or disposed of under the provisions of § 420-3.
§ 420-3. Removal, storage, notice or reclaimer of abandoned
vehicles.
D. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed
building or a vehicle stored on a premises licensed for storage of junk or
junked vehicles and fully in compliance with City zoning regulations or
to a vehicle parked in a paid parking lot or space where the required fee
has been paid.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to the removal,
storage, notice, reclaimer or disposal of abandoned vehicles as defined
in § 420-1.
B. Removal.
(1) Any police officer who discovers any motor vehicle, trailer,
semitrailer or mobile home on any public street or highway or
private or public property in the City of Monona which has been
abandoned shall cause the vehicle to be removed to a suitable place
of impoundment.
(2) Upon removal of the vehicle, the police officer shall notify the Chief
of Police or his or her designee of the abandonment and of the
location of the impounded vehicle.
C. Storage and reclaimer. Any abandoned vehicle which is determined by
the Chief of Police or his or her designee to be abandoned shall be
retained in storage for a period of 14 days after certified mail notice, as
hereinafter provided, has been sent to the Wisconsin titled owner and/
or secured party of record with the Wisconsin Motor Vehicle Division,
except that, if the Chief of Police or his or her designee determines an
abandoned vehicle to have a value of less than $100 or that the cost of
towing and storage charges for impoundment will exceed the value of
the vehicle, it may be junked or sold by direct sale to a licensed salvage
dealer after having been retained in storage for a period of seven days
and after certified mail notice, as hereinafter provided, has been sent to
the Wisconsin titled owner or secured party of record with the
Wisconsin Motor Vehicle Division, provided that it is first determined
that the vehicle is not reported stolen or wanted for evidence or other
reason. All substantially complete vehicles in excess of 19 model years
of age shall be deemed as having value in excess of $100. Any such
vehicle which may be lawfully reclaimed may be released upon the
payment of all accrued charges, including towing, storage and notice
charges, and upon presentation of the vehicle title or other satisfactory
evidence to the Chief of Police or his or her designee to prove an
ownership or secured party interest in said vehicle.
§ 420-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-3
1:467
§ 420-4. Disposal of abandoned vehicles.
Any abandoned vehicle impounded by the City, which has not been
reclaimed or junked or sold by direct sale to a licensed salvage dealer
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, may be sold by public auction
sale or public sale calling for the receipt of sealed bids. A Class I notice,
including the description of the vehicles, the name(s) and address(es) of the
Wisconsin titled owner and secured party of record, if known, and the time
of sale shall be published before the sale.
§ 420-5. Report of sale or disposal.
Within five days after the direct sale or disposal of a vehicle as provided
for herein, the Chief of Police or his or her designee shall advise the State
of Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Division of Motor Vehicles, of
such sale or disposal on a form supplied by said Division. A copy of the
form shall be given to the purchaser of the vehicle, enabling the purchaser
to obtain a regular certificate of title for the vehicle. The purchaser shall
have 10 days to remove the vehicle from the storage area but shall pay
a reasonable storage fee established by the City for each day the vehicle
remains in storage after the second business day subsequent to the sale
date. Ten days after the sale, the purchaser shall forfeit all interest in the
vehicle and the vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be sold
again. Any listing of vehicles to be sold by the City shall be made available
D. Notice to owner or secured party. Certified mail notice, as referred to
herein, shall notify the Wisconsin titled owner of the abandoned vehicle,
if any, and/or the secured party of record with the Wisconsin Motor
Vehicle Division, if any, of the following:
(1) That the vehicle has been deemed abandoned and impounded by
the City of Monona;
(2) The "determined value" of the abandoned vehicle;
(3) If the cost of towing and storage costs will exceed the determined
value of the vehicle;
(4) That if the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or other reason the
vehicle may be reclaimed upon the payment of all accrued charges,
including towing, storage and notice charges, within 14 days of the
date of notice, unless the vehicle has been determined to have a
value less than $100 or that the cost of towing and storage charges
for impoundment will exceed the value of the vehicle, in which case
the vehicle may be reclaimed within seven days upon the payment
of the aforesaid charges; and
(5) That the owner or aforesaid secured party may, upon request, be
granted a hearing relating to the determinations made with respect
to said vehicle within the period that such vehicles may be
reclaimed.
§ 420-3 MONONA CODE § 420-5
1:468
to any interested person or organization which makes a written request for
such list to the Police Department. The Police Department may charge a
reasonable fee for the list.
§ 420-6. Owner responsible for impoundment and disposal costs.
§ 420-7. Conflict with other Code provisions.
In the event of any conflict between this section and any other provisions of
this Code, this chapter shall control.
Chapter 427
VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN, OFF-ROAD AND SLOW-SPEED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Snowmobiles — See Ch. 374. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 434.
§ 427-1. State all-terrain vehicle laws adopted.
The provisions describing and defining regulations with respect to allterrain
vehicles in the following-enumerated subsections of § 23.33, Wis.
Stats., and any future amendments or revisions, are hereby adopted by
reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any acts
required to be performed by the following statutory subsections or which
are prohibited by such statutory subsections are required to be performed
by this section or are prohibited by this section:
A. The owner of any abandoned vehicle, except a stolen vehicle, is
responsible for the abandonment and all costs of impounding and
disposing of the vehicle. Costs not covered from the sale of the vehicle
may be recovered in a civil action by the City against the owner.
B. Payment of removal and impoundment costs is not required when the
vehicle has been impounded for purposes of law enforcement
investigation.
A. Section 23.33(2), Registration.
B. Section 23.33(3), Rules of operation [including subsections (a) through
(i)].
C. Section 23.33(4), Operation on or near highway [including subsections
(a) through (e)].
D. Section 23.33(5)(a)(c), Age restrictions.
E. Section 23.33(6), Equipment requirements [including subsections (a)
through (e)].
§ 420-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-1
1:469
§ 427-2. Unauthorized operation of motor vehicles on public or
private property.
F. Section 23.33(7), Accidents [including subsections (a) and (b)].
G. Section 23.33(1), Definitions [including subsections (a) through (n)].
A. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the terms below shall be
defined as follows:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is self-propelled and shall
include but not be limited to automobiles, trucks, jeeps, vans,
motorcycles, motorbikes, go-karts, motorized three-wheeled vehicles,
all-terrain vehicles, mopeds, snowmobiles, dune buggies and tractors.
"Motor vehicle" shall not mean any airplane, railroad train, boat,
wheelchair or bicycle. A vehicle which would otherwise be defined as a
motor vehicle under this section shall not be so defined while:
OFF-ROAD — Any location which:
OPERATION — The physical manipulation or activation of any of the
controls of a motor vehicle necessary to put it in motion.
UNAUTHORIZED — Without the express prior consent of the owner,
lessee, manager or other person who is authorized to give consent by
the owner or lessee of land. Authorization shall not be implied from a
failure to post private or public land.
It is being operated solely for the purpose of construction or
maintenance of an improvement to land or solely for access to
construction or maintenance sites, provided such operation is by
persons having legitimate business on such lands or sites;
(1)
It is being operated by or at the direction of public employees or
utility company employees as part of their employment duties.
(2)
It is being operated by the holder of an easement or right of access
on or over the land on which operation is occurring or the holder's
employees or agents.
(3)
(1) Is not a paved or maintained public street or alley; or
Is not used or maintained by the owner or lessee of land as a
driveway, parking lot or other way for motor vehicles; or
(2)
Is a private trail for use only by the owner or his/her permittees for
recreational or other vehicular use. Off-road shall not include any
creek bed, riverbed or lake; provided, however, that this subsection
shall not apply to snowmobiles or other vehicles being operated on
the ice covering such creek bed, riverbed or lake.
(3)
B. Unauthorized off-road operation prohibited.
(1) The unauthorized off-road operation of a motor vehicle is
prohibited.
§ 427-1 MONONA CODE § 427-2
1:470
§ 427-3. Slow-speed vehicles. [Amended 7-7-2008 by Ord. No.
6-08-581271]
§ 427-4. Violations and penalties.272
Violations of this chapter as punishable as set forth in § 1-4, the general
penalty provision of the Code.
(2) Except for authorized maintenance vehicles and snowmobiles or
all-terrain vehicles operating in areas authorized by the Common
Council, it shall be unlawful to operate any minibike, go-kart, allterrain
vehicle or any other motor-driven craft or vehicle
principally manufactured for off-highway use on the City streets,
alleys, parks, sidewalks, bikeways, parking lots or on any public
highway use on the City streets, alleys, parks, sidewalks, bikeways,
parking lots or on any public lands or private lands or parking lots
held open to the public. The operator shall at all times have the
written consent of the owner before operation of such craft or
vehicle on private lands.
A. "Slow-speed vehicle" means a self-propelled motor vehicle that has
successfully completed the low-speed vehicle America test program
conducted by the United States Department of Energy and that
conforms to the definition and requirements for low-speed vehicles as
adopted in the federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed
vehicles under 49 CFR 571.3(b) and 571.500. "Slow-speed vehicle" does
not include a golf cart.
B. A person may operate a slow-speed vehicle on any City street that has a
speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less, subject to the following
restrictions:
(1) The person operating the slow-speed vehicle must hold a valid
Wisconsin operator's license or a valid operator's license from
another state.
(2) The slow-speed vehicle must be duly registered with and titled by
the State of Wisconsin in accordance with applicable state statutes
and regulations.
271. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
272. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 427-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-4
1:471
Chapter 434
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citations — See Ch. 29.
Bicycles and play vehicles — See Ch. 168.
Fires and fire lanes — See Ch. 232.
Snowmobiles — See Ch. 374.
All-terrain, off-road and slow-speed
vehicles — See Ch. 427.
§ 427-4 MONONA CODE § 427-4
1:472
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 434-1. State traffic laws adopted. [Amended 8-17-2009 by Ord. No.
08-09-597]
A. Statutes adopted. Pursuant to the provisions of § 349.06, Wis. Stats.,
except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the statutory
provisions in Chapters 110 and 340 through 349 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles
and traffic, for which the penalty for violation thereof is a forfeiture, are
hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any
regulation incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited
by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of
the statutory regulations in Chapters 110, 340 through 349
incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this chapter in
order to secure to the extent legally practicable uniform statewide
regulation of vehicle traffic on the highways, streets and alleys of the
State of Wisconsin. Any person who shall, within the City of Monona,
Wisconsin, violate any provisions of any statute incorporated herein by
reference shall be deemed guilty of an offense under this section.273
B. Other state laws adopted. There are also hereby adopted by reference
the following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, but the prosecution of
such offenses under this chapter shall be as provided in Chapters 340
through 349 of the Wisconsin Statutes and the penalty for violation
thereof shall be limited to a forfeiture as hereinafter provided in this
chapter:274
(1) Section 941.01, Negligent operation of vehicle off highway.
(2) Section 941.30, Recklessly endangering safety.
(3) Section 943.11, Entry into locked vehicle.
(4) Section 943.23, Operating motor vehicles without owner's
consent.275
C. General references. General references in this chapter to Wisconsin
statutory sections or chapters describing or defining procedures or
authority for enactment or enforcement of local traffic regulations shall
be deemed to refer to the most recent enactments of the Wisconsin
Legislature describing or defining such procedures or authorities.
273. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
274. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
275. Editor's Note: Original subsection (c), Statutes specifically incorporated by reference,
which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 434-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-1
1:473
§ 434-2. State Administrative Code provisions adopted.
D. Operators to be licensed. Section 343.05 of the Wisconsin Statutes is
hereby adopted by reference, except for the provisions of subsection (5)
of said statute which impose a criminal penalty. The penalty for
violation of this section shall be the monetary forfeitures set forth in
§ 343.05(5), Wis. Stats., for the respective offenses listed.
E. Operating while suspended, revoked, ordered out of state or
disqualified. Section 343.44 of the Wisconsin Statutes is hereby
adopted by reference, except for the provisions of subsection (2) of said
statute which impose a criminal penalty. The penalty for violation of this
section shall be the monetary forfeitures set forth in § 343.05(2), Wis.
Stats., for the respective offenses listed.
A. Administrative regulations adopted. The following administrative rules
and regulations adopted by the Secretary of the Wisconsin Department
of Transportation and published in the Wisconsin Administrative Code,
exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be
imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this
chapter as if fully set forth herein.276
Ch. Trans 305, Standards for Motor Vehicle Equipment
Ch. Trans 326, Motor Carrier Safety Requirements for Transportation
of Hazardous Materials
Ch. Trans 150, Leasing of Vehicles by Private Carriers
Ch. Trans 304, Slow-Moving Vehicle Emblem
B. Noncompliance prohibited. No person shall operate or allow to be
operated on any highway, street or alley within the City a vehicle that is
not in conformity with the requirements of Subsection A or the
provisions of § 110.075 and Ch. 347, Wis. Stats., incorporated by
reference in § 434-1 of this chapter.
C. Safety checks.
(1) Operators to submit to inspection. When directed to do so by any
law enforcement officer, the operator of any motor vehicle shall
stop and submit such vehicle to an inspection and such tests as are
necessary to determine whether the vehicle meets the
requirements of this section or that the vehicle's equipment is in
proper adjustment or repair. No person, when operating a motor
vehicle, shall fail to stop and submit such vehicle to inspection
when directed to do so by any law enforcement officer as herein
provided.
(2) Authority of officer. Any law enforcement officer of the City is
hereby empowered whenever he or she shall have reason to believe
276. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 434-1 MONONA CODE § 434-2
1:474
§ 434-3. Official traffic signs and control devices; prohibited signs,
signals and markers.
that any provision of this section is being violated to order the
operator of the vehicle to stop and to submit such vehicle to an
inspection with respect to brakes, lights, turn signals, steering,
horns and warning devices, glass, mirrors, exhaust systems,
windshield wipers, tires and other items of equipment.
(3) Vehicle to be removed from highway. Whenever, after inspection as
provided by this section, a law enforcement officer determines that
a vehicle is unsafe for operation, he or she may order it removed
from the highway and not operated, except for purposes of removal
and repair, until the vehicle has been repaired as directed in a
repair order. Repair orders may be in the form prescribed by the
Secretary of the Department of Transportation under § 110.075(5),
Wis. Stats., and shall require the vehicle owner or operator to
cause the repairs to be made and return evidence of compliance
with the repair order to the Department of the issuing officer within
the time specified in the order.
D. Penalty. Penalty for violation of any provision of this section, including
the provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code incorporated
herein by reference, shall be as provided in § 434-22, together with the
costs of prosecution and applicable penalty assessment.
A. Duty of Director of Public Works to erect and install uniform traffic
control devices. Whenever traffic regulations created by this chapter,
including a State of Wisconsin traffic regulation adopted by reference in
§ 434-3, require the erection of traffic control devices for enforcement,
the Director of Public Works, with the cooperation of the Police
Department, shall procure, erect and maintain uniform traffic control
devices conforming to the Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual
promulgated by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, giving
notice of such traffic regulation to the users of the streets and highways
on which such regulations apply. Whenever state law grants discretion
to local authorities in erecting or placement of a uniform traffic control
device, devices shall be erected in such locations and in such a manner
as, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works, will carry out the
purposes of this chapter and give adequate warning to users of the
streets and highways of the City of Monona.
B. Code numbers to be affixed to official traffic control devices. The
Director of Public Works shall cause to be placed on each official traffic
control sign a guide board, mile post, signal or marker erected under
Subsection A a code number assigned by the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation and shall also place or direct the placing of code
numbers on all existing official traffic control devices as required by the
laws of the State of Wisconsin.
§ 434-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-3
1:475
§ 434-4. School bus warning lights.
C. Prohibited signs and markers in highways. No person other than an
officer authorized by this chapter to erect and maintain official traffic
control devices or his or her designee shall place within the limits of any
street or highway maintained by the City any sign, signal, marker, mark
or monument unless permission is first obtained from the Director of
Public Works or, where applicable, the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation. Any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument placed or
maintained in violation of this subsection shall be subject to removal as
provided in Subsection D.
D. Removal of unofficial signs, markers, signals and traffic control devices.
The Director of Public Works may remove any sign, signal, marking or
other device which is placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this
chapter or state law. Any charge imposed against premises for removal
of a prohibited or illegal sign, signal, marking or device shall be
reported by the Director of Public Works to the Common Council for
review and certification at its next regular meeting following the
imposition of the charge. Any charge not paid on or before the next
succeeding November 15 shall be placed upon the tax roll for collection
as for other special municipal taxes.
A. When used:
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 346.48(2)(b)2, Wis. Stats.,
adopted by reference in § 434-1 to the contrary and except as
provided in Subsection B below, school bus operators shall use
flashing red warning lights in residential and business districts
when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or
unloaded at locations at which there are no crosswalks or traffic
signals so that pupils must cross the street or highway before being
loaded or after being unloaded.
(2) The operator of a school bus equipped with flashing red warning
lights shall actuate such lights at least 100 feet before stopping to
load or unload pupils or other authorized passengers and shall not
extinguish such lights until loading or unloading is completed and
persons who must cross the street or highway are safely across.
(3) The operator of a school bus shall use the flashing red warning
lights when loading or unloading passengers in a residential or
business district, with the exception of streets or highways with
four or more lanes.
(4) The operator of a motor vehicle which approaches from the front or
rear of any school bus which has stopped on a street or highway
when the bus is displaying flashing red warning lights shall stop the
vehicle not less than 20 feet from the bus and shall remain stopped
until the bus resumes motion or the operator extinguishes the
flashing red warning lights. The operator of a school bus which
§ 434-3 MONONA CODE § 434-4
1:476
approaches the front or rear of another school bus that has stopped
and is displaying red warning lights shall stop not less than 20
feet from the other bus, display its red warning lights and remain
stopped with red warning lights actuated until the other bus
resumes motion or the other operator extinguishes the flashing red
warning lights.
B. Pursuant to § 349.21(2), Wis. Stats., the use of flashing red warning
lights by school bus operators is prohibited when pupils or other
authorized passengers are loaded or unloaded directly from or onto the
school grounds or that portion of a right-of-way between the roadway
and the school grounds designated by "school" warning signs as
provided in § 118.08(1), Wis. Stats.277
277. Editor's Note: Original § 10-1-5, Official traffic map, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 434-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-4
1:477

ARTICLE II
Street Traffic Regulations
§ 434-5. No-heavy-traffic routes.
All vehicles having a gross weight in excess of 6,000 pounds are considered
"heavy traffic" vehicles. The following streets or portions of streets are
declared "No-Heavy-Traffic Routes":
§ 434-6. Speed limits.
A. Bridge Road.
B. Frost Woods Road.
C. Owen Road.
A. State speed limits adopted. The provisions of §§ 346.57, 346.58 and
346.59, Wis. Stats., relating to the maximum and minimum speed of
vehicles, are hereby adopted as part of this section as if fully set forth
herein, except as specified by Subsection C below pursuant to § 349.11
(3)(c), Wis. Stats.
B. Posted limits. No person shall drive a vehicle in excess of any speed
limit established by law and indicated by official signs.
C. Speed limits modified. The Common Council hereby determines that the
statutory speed limits on the following streets or portions thereof are
unreasonable, unsafe or imprudent and modifies such speed limits
under authority granted by state law as follows. The speed limits are as
hereafter set forth upon the following streets between the limits
designated:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location/Limits
Broadway 40 Entire length
Femrite Drive,
eastbound
25 At Seventh Day Adventist School
(900 Femrite Drive)
Monona Drive 20 At Monona Grove High School
(4400 Monona Drive) and Nichols
Elementary School (5301 Monona
Drive), during regular school
days
Monona Drive 30 From the North City limits
(beginning at 3735 Monona
Drive) to its intersection with U.S.
Highways 12 and 18
§ 434-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-6
1:479

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 434-7. Stopping or parking prohibited in certain specified places.
A. Parking prohibited at all times. Except temporarily for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading or in receiving or
discharging passengers or property, and while the vehicle is attended
by a licensed operator so that it may be moved promptly in case of an
emergency or to avoid obstruction of traffic, no person shall at any time
park or leave standing any vehicle:
(1) Within an intersection.
(2) On, or within 15 feet of, a crosswalk.278
(3) On a sidewalk or terrace area, except when parking in such place is
clearly indicated by official traffic signs or markers. "Terrace or
sidewalk area" means that area between the sidewalk and the
nearest curbline running parallel or generally parallel thereto or, in
the absence of a sidewalk, 10 feet beyond the curbline.
(4) Alongside or opposite any highway excavation or obstruction when
such stopping or standing would obstruct traffic or when
pedestrian traffic would be required to travel in the roadway.
(5) On the roadway side of any parked vehicle unless double parking is
clearly indicated by official traffic signs or markers.
(6) Within a fire lane consisting of either the driveway between the
front doors of a fire station and the public street or in such places
properly designated and marked as fire lanes as ordered by the
Fire Chief.
(7) Upon any portion of a highway where and at the time when
stopping or standing is prohibited by official traffic signs indicating
the prohibition of any stopping or standing.
(8) In any place or manner so as to obstruct, block or impede traffic.
(9) Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, unless a greater distance is
indicated by an official traffic sign.
(10) Upon any portion of a highway where and at the time when parking
is prohibited, limited or restricted by official traffic signs.
(11) Upon any bridge.
(12) Upon any street or highway within the City limits, any vehicle
which faces a direction different from the direction of normal traffic
278. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 434-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-7
1:481
flow for the lane of traffic in which said vehicle is stopped or
standing.
(13) In a loading zoning.
(14)Within four feet of the entrance to an alley, private road or
driveway.279
(15) In any municipal park when said park is closed to the public.
B. Parking in driveways or on private property. No person shall park or
leave standing any motor vehicle in any private driveway without the
permission of the owner or lessee of the property on which such
driveway is located, whether or not such driveway or private property is
posted to limit or restrict parking.280
C. Vehicles not to block private drive, alley or fire lane. No vehicle shall, at
any time, be parked so as to unreasonably restrict the normal access to
any private drive, alley or fire lane. Said access shall be deemed to be
unreasonably restricted if any vehicle is parked within four feet of
either side of said access. Upon discovery by a police officer or upon
complaint by the owner of any such blocked drive, alley or fire lane, the
Chief of Police may order said vehicle towed from such position at the
risk and expense of the owner of said vehicle.
D. Prohibitions involving parking vehicle for repair; display for sale.
(1) No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any street, alley, public
right-of-way or municipal parking lot in the City of Monona for the
purpose of repairing said vehicle or to display such vehicle for sale.
(2) No person other than an owner and/or operator of a business
located on business-zoned property engaged in the regular
business of selling vehicles may display a vehicle for sale upon
private premises unless the following conditions are met:
(a) Consent to display the vehicle has been given by the owner or
lessee of the premises; and
(b) No person shall park any vehicle for the purpose of advertising
such vehicle for sale on private property in the City of Monona
except in areas zoned single-family, two-family and multifamily
(SF, TF and MF).
(3) No person may display a vehicle for sale upon private premises
unless the following conditions are met:
(a) Consent to display the vehicle has been given by the owner or
lessee of the premises; and
279. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
280. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 434-7 MONONA CODE § 434-7
1:482
§ 434-8. Leaving keys in vehicle prohibited; parking vehicles with
motor running.
§ 434-9. Unattended motorized machinery.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit any
construction, compaction, earth-grading or farm machinery which is selfpropelled
and moves upon the surface of the earth and which is owned
or controlled by him or her to stand for any period of time unattended
without locking the ignition system or otherwise rendering said machinery
inoperable so as to prevent any person unauthorized by the owner or
individual in control thereof from starting said machinery.
§ 434-10. Parking prohibited during certain periods.
Parking in excess of 24 hours prohibited. No person shall park any motor
vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home on any City street or City
parking lot for 24 or more consecutive hours.
§ 434-11. Parking-prohibited zones.
(b) The owner of the vehicle is on the premises or resides there;
and
(c) The vehicle displayed for sale is parked entirely on the
premises; and
(d) The premises contains only two vehicles displayed for sale; and
(e) The advertisement or sign for sale of the vehicle is not larger
than two square feet.
(f) These restrictions shall not apply to any person or business
that engages in the regular business of selling vehicles in
compliance with the Code for the City of Monona.
A. Leaving keys in vehicle. No person shall permit any motor vehicle to
stand or remain unattended on any street, alley or other public area,
except an attended parking area, unless either the starting lever,
throttle, steering apparatus, gear shift or ignition of the vehicle is
locked and the key for such lock is removed from the vehicle. Whenever
any police officer shall find any vehicle standing with the key in the
ignition in violation of this section, such officer is authorized to remove
such key from the vehicle and deliver the key to the Police Department
for safe custody.
B. Parking vehicles with motor running. No person shall park or leave
standing any motor vehicle with the motor or refrigerator unit running
for more than 30 minutes within 300 feet of any residence within the
City of Monona between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 434-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-11
1:483
§ 434-12. Parking of large or heavy vehicles restricted.
A. Parking for advertising on Monona Drive prohibited. No vehicle shall be
parked primarily for advertising purposes in those areas on Monona
Drive in which signs are prohibited. Accordingly no person shall park a
vehicle in the Retail Business or Commercial/Industrial District on
Monona Drive in the area from 10 feet from the building line to the
front property line for the primary purpose of advertising, and no
person shall park a vehicle in such area which has affixed thereto or
mounted or constructed thereon any sign carrying advertising material.
Vehicles having lettered thereon identifying material or trade slogans
customarily found on commercial vehicles may be parked in such area
during normal business hours but no person shall park such vehicle in
such area when the business located on the premises is closed.
B. Parking in fire lanes prohibited. No person except the operator of an
emergency vehicle shall park in a fire lane. A fire lane, for the purpose
of this subsection, is defined as an area designated by the Fire Chief
pursuant to the City's Fire Prevention Code and indicated by signs or
pavement markings.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LARGE VEHICLE — Any automobile, truck, trailer, truck power unit,
bus, recreational vehicle and/or combinations of vehicles weighing in
excess of 12,000 pounds or over 16 feet in length (including
accessories, racks or other physical extensions) or having a height of
more than eight feet from the roadway.
MOTOR BUS — A motor vehicle designed primarily for the
transportation of persons rather than property and having a passenger
capacity of 16 or more persons, including the operator. Passengercarrying
capacity shall be determined by dividing by 20 the total
seating space measured in inches [also see § 340.01(31), Wis. Stats.).
SCHOOL BUS — A motor vehicle which carries 10 or more passengers
in addition to the operator or a motor vehicle painted in accordance
with § 347.44(1), Wis. Stats., for the purpose of transporting
passengers as defined in § 340.01(56), Wis. Stats.
B. Restriction as to hours.
(1) 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. No person shall park or leave standing any
large vehicle upon any street between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
(2) 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. No person shall park or leave standing any
large vehicle upon any street between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. for more than two hours, unless otherwise lawfully
parked and engaged in continuous loading and unloading. The City
Council may designate specific truck parking zones.
§ 434-11 MONONA CODE § 434-12
1:484
§ 434-13. Parking during and after snowstorm; restrictions.
[Amended 8-4-2008 by Ord. No. 8-03-578; 2-20-2017 by Ord. No.
2-17-685]
C. Bus parking.
(1) The operator of a school bus or motor bus may park in areas zoned
single-family, two-family or multifamily district pursuant to the
Monona Municipal Code only for the amount of time reasonably
necessary for the continuous loading or unloading of the school bus
or motorbus.
(2) This restriction shall not apply to buses parked in areas designated
on school property.
D. Removal. Any vehicle unlawfully parked under Subsection B or C may
be removed from the street by order of a law enforcement officer,
pursuant to § 434-16, and the expense of so moving and storing such
vehicle shall be paid by the operator or owner of said vehicle as a
forfeiture in addition to the penalties prescribed.
A. Placing snow in streets. It is unlawful for any person to:
(1) Plow or otherwise remove accumulated snow from a private
parking lot and deposit same on a City street or right-of-way.
(2) Plow or otherwise place snow from a private driveway and deposit
same on a City street in such a manner as to decrease the drivable
width of any such street.
(3) Plow or otherwise place snow from a private driveway and deposit
same in such a manner as to block or decrease the usable width of
any other private driveway or to block a fire hydrant.
B. Interference with snow removal. It is unlawful for any person to
obstruct, harass, prevent or otherwise interfere with any employee of
the City engaged in snow removal service or to obstruct, cause damage
to or otherwise interfere with any City-owned, -leased or -contracted
vehicle used in conjunction with snow removal services.
C. Mayor may declare a snow emergency. Whenever the Mayor or the
Mayor's designee, after consultation with the Chief of Police and/or
Director of Public Works, determines that an emergency exists because
of existing or threatened snow or ice conditions which necessitate
prompt removal of accumulations of ice and snow from such streets and
highways, the Mayor or the Mayor's designee may, by appropriate
public media, declare a snow emergency, during which the following
emergency snow parking regulations shall be in force in the City.
D. Snow emergency parking. No person shall park, leave standing, or
cause to park or leave standing, any vehicle on any street or public
§ 434-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-13
1:485
§ 434-14. Unlawful removal of parking citations.
No person other than the owner or operator thereof shall remove a City
notice of parking violation or other parking citation from a motor vehicle.
§ 434-15. Operation of motor vehicles in public parking lots.
§ 434-16. Removal of illegally parked vehicles. [Amended 8-4-2008
by Ord. No. 8-03-578]
parking lot during a declared snow emergency until the City has
declared the snow emergency to be ended.
(1) Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this subsection,
residents may park vehicles in the following City of Monona
parking lots: Ahuska, Lottes, Winnequah, Frost Woods Beach,
Firemen's, Maywood and Schluter Parks parking lots for no more
than 48 consecutive hours while snow is being cleared from City
streets.
E. Signs and posting. The Director of Public Works shall place appropriate
signs at or reasonably near the City limits on all state and county trunk
highways and connecting highways, informing motorists that snow
emergency and snow removal parking regulations may be in effect in
the City.
A. Unlicensed operators prohibited. No person who does not hold a valid
operator's license shall operate a vehicle in any public parking lot or in
any private parking lot held out for the use of parking for the general
public.
B. Traffic regulations applicable. All provisions of § 434-1 of this chapter
and of the Wisconsin Statutes and laws incorporated herein by
reference shall be applicable on any public parking lot and on any
private parking lot or road held out for use for the general public for
parking or vehicular traffic.
A. Hazard to public safety. Any vehicle parked, stopped or standing upon a
highway or public parking lot or ramp in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is declared to be a hazard to traffic and public
safety.
B. Removal by operator. Such vehicle shall be removed by the operator in
charge, upon request of any law enforcement officer, to a position
where parking is permitted or to a private or public parking or storage
premises.
C. Removal by police officer. Any law enforcement officer, after issuing a
notice of parking violation for illegal parking, stopping or standing of an
unattended vehicle in violation of this chapter, is authorized to remove
such vehicle to a position where parking is permitted.
§ 434-13 MONONA CODE § 434-16
1:486
§ 434-17. Temporary parking and use restrictions. [Added
9-16-2013 by Ord. No. 9-13-650]
D. Removal by private service. Any law enforcement officer may order a
motor carrier holding a permit to perform vehicle towing services, a
licensed motor vehicle salvage dealer or a licensed motor vehicle dealer
who performs vehicle towing services to remove and store such vehicle
in any public storage garage or rental parking grounds or any facility of
the person providing the towing services.
E. Towing and storage charges. In addition to other penalties provided in
this chapter, the owner or operator of a vehicle so removed shall pay the
actual cost of moving, towing and storage. If the vehicle is towed or
stored by a private motor carrier, motor vehicle salvage dealer or
licensed motor vehicle dealer, actual charges regularly paid for such
services shall be paid. If the vehicle is stored in a public storage garage
or rental facility, customary charges for such storage shall be paid.
Upon payment, a receipt shall be issued to the owner of the vehicle for
the towing or storage charge.
A. The Chief of Police or Director of Public Works, or respective designee,
may prohibit or restrict parking, standing, pedestrian use, or use by any
bicycle or other play vehicle on any portion of a public street, public
sidewalk or City-owned property when either of them determines it to
be necessary for the public safety, health or welfare. The authority
granted herein includes the authority to temporarily close such areas
for any and all use.
B. The authority granted in this section shall be limited to no greater than
10 days. Any longer period or extension of any previous declaration
must be approved by the Mayor and must not exceed 180 days.
C. Whenever any street, sidewalk or City-owned property is closed or its
use restricted as provided herein, the official making such declaration
shall:
(1) Ensure appropriate signage and/or barriers are erected to ensure
the public is notified of the restrictions;
(2) The Chief of Police and Director of Public Works shall be promptly
notified of such declaration and the period of time the restrictions
shall remain in effect. The Chief of Police and Director of Public
Works, or respective designees, shall consult each other whenever
reasonably practicable prior to making any such declaration.
(3) If the declaration involves the closure of any public street, the
official making such declaration shall take all reasonably
appropriate action to ensure alternative access to private property
is provided or, if not reasonably possible, the period of time access
is not provided is minimized.
§ 434-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-17
1:487
D. Any person violating a declaration under this section shall be subject to
the penalty provided in § 434-22.
E. Any vehicle parking or standing in violation of a declaration under this
section may be removed from the street or City owned property by
order of any law enforcement officer pursuant to § 434-16, and the
expense of so moving and storing such vehicle shall be paid by the
operator or owner of said vehicle as a forfeiture in addition to the
penalty prescribed in Subsection D above.
§ 434-17 MONONA CODE § 434-17
1:488
ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 434-18. Disturbance of peace with motor vehicle.
A. Unnecessary noise prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a motor vehicle in such a manner which shall make or cause to
be made any loud, disturbing or unnecessary sounds or noises such as
may tend to annoy or disturb another in or about any public or private
area in the City of Monona. No person shall use compression brakes or
operate a motor vehicle using brakes which are in any way activated or
operated by the compression of the engine of any such motor vehicle or
any unit or part thereof, unless such brakes are necessarily used in an
emergency situation. The prohibition contained in this section shall not
apply to fire, police, EMS and/or other emergency vehicles.281
B. Unnecessary smoke prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a motor vehicle in such a manner which shall make or cause to
be made any smoke, gases or odors which are disagreeable, foul or
otherwise offensive, which may tend to annoy or disturb another in or
about any public or private area in the City.
C. Unnecessary acceleration and display of power prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle, including motorcycles,
all-terrain vehicles and bicycles, in such a manner as to cause, by
excessive and unnecessary acceleration, the tires of such vehicle or
cycle to spin or emit loud noises or to unnecessarily throw stones or
gravel; nor shall such driver cause to be made by excessive and
unnecessary acceleration any loud noise as would disturb the peace.
D. Avoidance of traffic control device prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to leave the
roadway and travel across private property to avoid an official traffic
control device, sign or signal.
E. Operation in restricted area prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to leave the
roadway and park, stop, or travel upon or across any public or private
property, parking lot, driveway or business service area for any purpose
except the official conduct of business located on said property without
the consent of the owner or lessee of the property. This section shall
specifically include, but not be limited to:
(1) Public park property;
(2) Cemetery properties;
(3) School District property;
281. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 434-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-18
1:489
§ 434-19. Motor vehicles on pedestrianways.
No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle on any pedestrianway
within the City of Monona except maintenance vehicles.
§ 434-20. School crossing guards.
Pursuant to § 349.215, Wis. Stats., those adult persons appointed by the
Police Department or Monona Grove School District to act as school
crossing guards shall have the authority to stop vehicular traffic and to keep
it stopped as long as necessary at their respective school crossings for the
purpose of permitting schoolchildren to cross the street.
§ 434-21. Driving over curbing or safety islands prohibited.
(4) Medical facilities;
(5) Funeral homes;
(6) Service stations;
(7) Grocery stores;
(8) Restaurants;
(9) Financial institutions; and
(10) Other similar-type businesses with service driveways or drive-up or
drive-through facilities.
F. Stopping and parking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
stop or park a motor vehicle in any manner on any public or private
property or parking lot contrary to a regulatory sign posted thereon
which may permit parking by certain persons and limits, restricts or
prohibits parking as to other persons without the consent of the owner
or lessee of the property. Any vehicle parked in violation of this section
may be removed or towed by the property owner at the vehicle owner's
expense.
A. Driving over curbing prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any motor
vehicle to be driven or backed over any curbing in the City of Monona.
B. Driving over safety zones or islands prohibited. Whenever safety zones
or safety islands are marked in accordance with the Wisconsin Uniform
Traffic Control Device Manual, no operator of a vehicle shall at any time
drive through or over a safety zone or safety island.
§ 434-18 MONONA CODE § 434-21
1:490
ARTICLE V
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 434-22. Violations and penalties.
A. Forfeiture penalty. The penalty for violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be a forfeiture as hereafter provided, together with court
costs and fees prescribed by § 814.63(1) and (2) or 814.65(1), Wis.
Stats., the penalty assessment for moving traffic regulations and the
driver improvement surcharge imposed by §§ 757.05 and 346.655, Wis.
Stats., where applicable. Payment of the judgment and applicable court
costs, fees, assessments and surcharges may be suspended by the
sentencing court for not more than 60 days. Any person 18 years of age
or older who shall fail to pay the amount of the forfeiture, court costs,
any penalty assessment or driver surcharge or other penalty imposed
for violation of any provision of this chapter may, upon order of the
court entering judgment therefor and having jurisdiction of the case, be
imprisoned until such forfeiture, costs and assessment are paid, but not
exceeding 90 days.282
B. Other sanctions.
(1) By court. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the
sentencing court to exercise additional authorities granted by the
Wisconsin Statutes to suspend or revoke the operating privileges of
the defendant, order the defendant to submit to assessment and
rehabilitation programs or to attend traffic safety school in addition
to payment of a monetary penalty or in lieu of imprisonment.
(2) By municipality. No person who has been convicted of a violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be issued a license or permit by
the City, except a dog license, until the forfeiture imposed for such
violation and any penalty assessment, court costs and fees or
surcharge is paid.
C. Forfeitures for violation of uniform moving traffic regulations.
(1) Uniform offenses. Forfeitures for violations of any moving traffic
regulation set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference
in § 434-1 shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be
imposed for violations of the comparable Wisconsin Statute,
including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses.
(2) Miscellaneous. The forfeiture for violation of any provision of
§ 434-1B of this chapter shall be as set forth in the City's Fee,
Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule.283
282. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
283. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 434-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-22
1:491
§ 434-23. Enforcement.
D. Forfeitures for parking violations.284
(1) Forfeitures for uniform statewide parking, stopping and standing
offenses. Minimum and maximum forfeiture for violation of
nonmoving traffic regulations adopted by reference in § 434-1, as
described in Chs. 341 to 349, Wis. Stats., shall be as found in the
current edition of the Revised Uniform State Traffic Deposit
Schedule.
(2) Penalty for violations of § 434-16B or C. Any person violating
§ 434-16B or C shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
forfeiture as set forth in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit
Schedule, together with costs of prosecution and penalty
assessment, and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned
until such forfeiture has been paid, but not to exceed 90 days.
Vehicles parked in violation of § 434-16B or C may be ticketed and
towed in accordance with § 434-16D and E.
(3) Penalty for other parking violations. The forfeiture for violation of
parking regulations in §§ 434-7 through 434-16 shall be as set forth
in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule. Violations of the
state's handicapped parking violations shall be subject to a
minimum forfeiture as set forth in the City's Fee, Forfeiture and
Deposit Schedule.
E. Other violations. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter for which a penalty is not otherwise established by this section
shall be subject to a forfeiture as set forth in the City's Fee, Forfeiture
and Deposit Schedule.285
A. Enforcement procedures.
(1) How enforced. This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with
§§ 66.0114, 345.20 to 345.53 and Ch. 800, Wis. Stats., and other
applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes and this section.
(2) Applicable court procedures. Except where otherwise specifically
provided by the laws of the State of Wisconsin or this Code, the
traffic regulations in this Code shall be enforced in the Municipal
Court in accordance with the provisions of § 345.20(2)(b) and Ch.
800, Wis. Stats.
B. Citations.
(1) Uniform citation and complaint. The Wisconsin Uniform Traffic
Citation and Complaint described and defined in the Wisconsin
284. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
285. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 434-22 MONONA CODE § 434-23
1:492
Statutes shall be used for enforcement of all provisions of this
chapter except those provisions which describe or define
nonmoving traffic violations and violations of §§ 346.71 through
346.73, Wis. Stats. Violations of §§ 346.71 through 346.73, Wis.
Stats., shall be reported to the District Attorney, and the Wisconsin
Uniform Traffic Citation shall not be used in such cases except
upon written request of the District Attorney.
(2) Parking citations. The City Attorney and Chief of Police shall
recommend to the Common Council a citation for use in enforcing
the nonmoving traffic offenses in this chapter. Such citation shall
be used for enforcement of nonmoving traffic regulations created
or adopted by this chapter, including violations of nonmoving traffic
regulations defined and described in the Wisconsin Statutes,
adopted by reference in § 434-1, and all provisions regarding
nonmoving traffic violations in this chapter. The citation for
nonmoving traffic violations shall contain a notice that the person
cited may discharge the forfeiture for violation of a nonmoving
traffic regulation and penalty thereof by complying with Subsection
C(2) of this section. Nonmoving traffic citations may be issued by
law enforcement officers or by civilian employees of the Police
Department.
C. Deposits and stipulations.
(1) Uniform traffic offenses.
(a) Who may make. Persons arrested or cited for violation of
moving traffic offenses created by this chapter shall be
permitted to make deposits and stipulations of no contest or be
released by the arresting officer in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. Stipulations of
guilt or no contest may be made by persons arrested for
violations of this chapter in accordance with § 66.0114(1)(b),
Wis. Stats., whenever the provisions of § 345.27, Wis. Stats.,
are inapplicable to such violations. Stipulations shall conform
to the form contained in the uniform traffic citation and
complaint under § 345.11, Wis. Stats.
(b) Delivery or mailing of deposit and stipulation. Any person
stipulating guilt or no contest under the preceding subsection
must make the deposit required under § 345.26, Wis. Stats., or,
if the deposit is not established under such statute, shall
deposit a forfeited penalty as provided in the schedule
established by the Municipal Judge and approved by the
Common Council. Deposits may be brought or mailed to the
Police Department within five days of the issuance of the
citation in lieu of court appearance.
(2) Nonmoving traffic regulations.286
§ 434-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-23
1:493
(a) Direct payment of penalty permitted. Persons cited (summons
not issued) for violation of nonmoving traffic offenses
described and defined in this chapter may discharge the
penalty thereof and avoid court prosecution by mailing or
forwarding within five days of the issuance of the citation to
the Police Department the minimum forfeiture specified for the
violation. When payment is made as provided in this
paragraph, no court costs shall be charged.
(b) Court prosecution. If the alleged violator does not deliver or
mail a deposit as provided in Subsection C(2)(a) within 15 days
of the date of the citation, the Chief of Police shall forward a
copy of the citation to the City Attorney for prosecution.
(c) Registration suspension. If the alleged violator does not pay
the forfeiture or appear in court in response to the citation for
a nonmoving traffic violation on the date specified in the
citation or, if no date is specified on the citation, within 28 days
after the citation is issued, the City may ask the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation to suspend the registration of
the vehicle involved or refuse registration of any vehicle owned
by the person pursuant to the provisions of § 345.28(4), Wis.
Stats., and Subsection C(3) below.
(d) Bond. Any official authorized to accept deposits under
§ 345.26, Wis. Stats., or this section, shall qualify by taking the
oath prescribed by § 19.01, Wis. Stats.
(3) Notice of demerit points and receipt. Every officer accepting a
forfeited penalty or money deposit under this section shall receipt
therefor in triplicate as provided in § 345.26(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
Every officer accepting a stipulation under the provisions of this
section shall comply with the provisions of §§ 343.28, 345.26(1)(a)
and 345.27(2), Wis. Stats., and shall require the alleged violator to
sign a statement of notice in substantially the form contained on
the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under
§ 345.11, Wis. Stats.
(4) Registration suspension program.
(a) The City shall participate in the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation Traffic Violation and Registration Program as
set forth in § 345.28, Wis. Stats., and Ch. Trans 128, Wis. Adm.
Code, and all amendments or changes thereto.
(b) The Chief of Police is hereby designated as a delegated
authority for purposes of §§ 85.13 and 345.28, Wis. Stats., and
Ch. Trans 128, Wis. Adm. Code. The Chief of Police is
authorized to perform, on behalf of the City, all functions
286. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 434-23 MONONA CODE § 434-23
1:494
required of a local authority under said statutes and Code,
including, but not limited to:
[1] Preparing and completing all forms and notices, notifying
the Wisconsin Department of Transportation of unpaid
citations for nonmoving traffic violations;
[2] Specifying whether the registration of vehicles involved in
unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations should be
suspended and/or whether registration should be refused
for any vehicle owned by persons with unpaid citations for
nonmoving traffic violations;
[3] Determining the method by which the City will pay the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation for
administration of the program; establishing the effective
date for participation; and
[4] Taking such other action as is necessary to institute and
continue participation in the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation Traffic Violation and Registration Program.
(c) The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to assign a member of
the Police Department to perform such acts as are necessary to
effectuate this subsection.
(d) In addition to all applicable fines and court costs, the cost of
using the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic
Violation and Registration Program shall be assessed as
permitted by § 345.28(4)(d), Wis. Stats. The Municipal Judge or
Police Department may refuse to notify the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation of payment on a citation until all
applicable fines and costs, including costs assessed under the
preceding sentence, are paid.
(e) This subsection shall not be interpreted as requiring that all
unpaid citations for nonmoving traffic violations be processed
through the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic
Violation and Registration Program. The City's participation in
such program shall be in addition to any and all other means
legally available to enforce such citations.
§ 434-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-23
1:495
Chapter 443
WATER AND SEWER UTILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 175.
Sewer use — See Ch. 360.
Stormwater Utility — See Ch. 388.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 473.
§ 443-1. Authority of Public Works Committee.
The Public Works Committee shall have general management and control
of the Water Utility and Sewer Utility and may employ such personnel as
shall be necessary for the efficient operation of such utilities, subject to the
approval of the Common Council.
§ 443-2. Rules and regulation of Water Utility.
The provisions of Ch. PSC 185, Wis. Adm. Code, as may be amended from
time to time, are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as if
set forth in full. A violation of any such rules shall constitute a violation of
this section.
§ 443-3. Contracts.
The ordinances, rules and regulations passed by the Common Council shall
be considered a part of the contract with every person supplied with water
and sewer service through the Utility, and every person shall be considered
to express his or her assent to be bound thereby.
§ 443-4. Access to premises.
Utility employees shall have free access at all reasonable hours to any
premises supplied with water and sewer for the purpose of inspecting,
repairing and examining the service appliances.
§ 443-5. Establishment of service.
A. Application for water service shall be made in writing on a form
furnished by the Water Utility. The application will contain the legal
description of the property served, name of the owner, the exact use to
be made of the service, and the size of the supply pipe and meter
desired.
B. Service will be furnished only if:
(1) Premises has a frontage on a public street, property right-of-way in
which a cast-iron or other long-life water main has been laid, or
§ 434-23 MONONA CODE § 443-5
1:496
§ 443-6. Water and sewer lateral connections.
All connections with service laterals of the Utilities shall be made as
prescribed in the Plumbing Code, found in Chapter 175, Building
Construction, of the Code of the City of Monona. All the requirements of
the Plumbing Code must be met before the owner or occupant of any lot
or parcel of any real estate shall make such connection. Application for
connection hereunder shall be made to the appropriate Utility.
§ 443-7. Opening of fire hydrants.
Only persons authorized by the Water Utility or the Chief of the Fire
Department shall be permitted to open any fire hydrant for any purpose,
and no one except such person shall be permitted to take the hydrant
wrenches or suffer the same to be taken from any fire engine house except
for Fire Department use.
§ 443-8. Obstruction to fire hydrant.
where property owner has agreed to and complied with the
provisions of the Utility's filed main extension rule;
(2) Property owner has installed or agrees to install a service pipe from
the right-of-way line or water main to the point of use and laid not
less than six feet below the surface of an established or proposed
grade, and according to the Utility's specification, and
(3) Premises have adequate piping beyond metering point.
C. The owner of a multiunit dwelling has the option of being served by
individual metered water service to each unit. The owner, by selecting
this option, is required to provide interior plumbing and meter settings
to enable individual metered service to each unit and individual
disconnection without affecting service to other units. Each meter and
meter connection will be a separate Water Utility customer for the
purpose of the filed rules and regulation.
D. No division of the water service of any lot or parcel of land shall be
made for the extension and independent metering of the supply to an
adjoining lot or parcel of land. No division of a water supply service
shall be made at the curb for separate supplies therefrom for two or
more separate premises having frontage on any street or public service
strip, whether owned by the same or different parties.
E. The Utility is hereby empowered to withhold approval of any
application wherein full information of the purpose of such supply is not
clearly indicated and set forth by the applicant property owner.
A. Statement of legislative intent. Fire hydrants are placed and
maintained at various points within City streets to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of the residents and businesses in
the City who own property in the vicinity of such hydrants. Obstruction
§ 443-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-8
1:497
§ 443-9. Tampering with equipment.
No person, without the written authority of the Director of Public Works,
shall operate any valve connected with the street or supply main; break or
tamper with any seal of the water meter in service; open any fire hydrant
connected with the distribution system, whether the hydrant is the property
of the City or has been placed by an owner for his or her own protection,
except for purposes of extinguishing fire only; or wantonly injure or impair
such equipment.
§ 443-10. Claims not allowed against City.
Except as may otherwise be specifically allowed by ordinance or resolution
by the Common Council, no claims shall be allowed against the City on
account of the interruption of the water supply caused by the breaking
of pipes or machinery or by the stoppage for repairs or by stoppage or
recession of flow or on account of fire or other emergency, nor shall any
claims be allowed for any consequential or indirect damages, including
but not limited to loss of profits, caused by the breaking of any pipe or
machinery.
§ 443-11. Payment for laterals and mains.
of such fire hydrants is hereby declared to create a situation which
is imminently dangerous to the persons and property of all residents
within the area of such fire hydrants and the same provides a
substantial hindrance in the efficient and effective control of fire. By
the City's right to regulate the use of street right-of-way by abutting
property owners, the following regulations are enacted.
B. Structures and plantings prohibited. Notwithstanding any apparent
authority under any other provisions of this Code, no person shall erect,
construct or install any structure or device of any nature whatsoever,
nor shall any such structure or device be maintained within six feet of
any fire hydrant. No person shall plant any tree, shrub or other planting
nor maintain any of the same in such a manner that such planting, when
mature, shall encroach within six feet of any fire hydrant.
C. Notice to remove. The Director of Public Works, the Fire Chief or their
designees shall notify any property owner of a violation of this section
and shall direct the removal of such obstruction within a reasonable
period of time, not to exceed 14 days. If the same is not removed within
the time period set forth in such notice, such obstruction is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance maintained upon public property, and
the same shall be summarily abated by the City, which shall cause
removal of such obstruction.
D. Exception. This section shall not apply to any structure which may be
placed upon the City right-of-way by a public utility under any easement
or franchise, and the provisions of such easement or franchise shall
specifically govern the placement of those structures.
§ 443-8 MONONA CODE § 443-11
1:498
§ 443-12. Water and sewer rates.
Water and sewer user rates shall be as adopted by resolution of the
Common Council.
§ 443-13. Collection of water and sewer charges.
A. The cost of installation of water and sewer service laterals shall be
borne by the property owner.
B. New plats. Chapter 473, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the City of
Monona is applicable for new plats.
C. New streets in previously platted areas. New streets in previously
platted areas shall be paid for in accordance with the procedures of
Chapter 473, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the City of Monona.
D. Developed streets. The full cost of installation of sanitary sewer and
water main in developed streets shall be assessed against the abutting
property under § 66.0703, Wis. Stats.
A. Statement and collection. Four times each year, the City Clerk shall
mail to the owners or occupant of all lots or parcels of real estate in the
City to which water and sewer service has been furnished by the City
during the preceding three months a bill stating the amount due for the
same. If such amount is not paid by the date specified on the bill, a late
payment charge of 1 1/2% per month shall be added, and the Treasurer
shall proceed to collect the dues with the late payment charge. The
Treasurer has the authority for collecting outstanding water and sewer
charges as a special charge. Said charges shall be a lien on the real
estate to which the water and sewer service was furnished, and all sums
that have accrued during the preceding year and are delinquent as of
October 15 shall be reported by the Treasurer to the Clerk, who shall
insert the same in the tax roll as delinquent utility charges against the
property. All proceedings in relation to the collection, return and sale of
property for delinquent City taxes shall apply to said charges.
B. Notice. On or about October 1 of each year, the Treasurer shall give
notice in writing to the owner or occupant of all lots or parcels of real
estate to which water and sewer service has been furnished prior to
September 1 and payment for which is owing and in arrears at the time
of giving such notice. The notice shall state the amount of such arrears,
including the penalty herein specified; that unless the same is paid by
October 15 thereafter, a penalty of 10% of the amount of such arrears
will be added thereto; and that unless such arrears, with any such
penalty, shall be paid by October 31 thereafter, the same will be levied
as a delinquent utility charge against the lot or parcel of real estate to
which service was furnished and for which payment is delinquent as
above specified.
§ 443-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-14
1:499
§ 443-14. Revenues from Utilities.
The income from the Utilities shall be used to meet operation, maintenance,
depreciation, interest, sinking fund requirements, if any, additions and
improvements and other necessary disbursements or indebtedness.
§ 443-15. Leak adjustment.
No adjustment shall be made to the sewer billing for leaks in a customer's
appliance or plumbing if the water wasted was discharged into the sewer
system. When the water that was wasted was not discharged into the sewer
system, then the quantity of such water can be deducted in computing the
charge for sewer service. Adjustments for water leaks shall be made as
provided in § PSC 185.35, Wis. Adm. Code, as amended from time to time,
and the written rules of the Water Utility.
§ 443-16. Water emergency.
Whenever conditions exist which affect the availability of water so as to
endanger the health, safety and welfare of the persons and property within
the City, the City Administrator, after consulting with the Director of Public
Works, may declare a water emergency and the application of emergency
water regulations, which regulations shall remain in force and effect until
lifted by the City Administrator. For the purposes of this chapter, a water
emergency shall exist whenever, in the judgment of the City Administrator,
the Water Utility is unable to provide or expected to be unable to provide
sufficient water to meet the normal usage needs of the municipality and its
citizens due to drought, mechanical failure, or other like kind of conditions.
§ 443-17. Outdoor water use restriction.
The City Administrator, after consulting with the Director of Public Works,
may impose voluntary or mandatory outdoor water usage restrictions on all
water users in the City in order to avoid undue stress upon the resources
and reserve capacity of the Water Utility. The restrictions may apply to
all properties or to alternate sides of the street, as is deemed necessary.
Alternate side restrictions would apply to odd-numbered sides of the street
on odd-numbered calendar days and even-numbered sides of the street on
even-numbered calendar days, respectively. Restrictions may be for all day
or for specified times each day.
§ 443-18. Maintenance of water services.
The property owner shall install at his or her cost the initial water service
from the street main to the house. After installation, the City shall maintain
water service from the water main to the valve, including the valve and
the connection thereto. The property owner shall be responsible for all
other maintenance expenses. All water services must be maintained free of
defective conditions, by and at the expense of the owner or occupant of the
property. If maintenance activities require that driveways, landscaping, etc.,
§ 443-14 MONONA CODE § 443-18
1:500
be disturbed or removed, the property owner shall be responsible for such
costs.
§ 443-19. Introduction of fluorides into water system. [Amended
8-15-2011 by Ord. No. 8-11-627]
The Water Utility shall introduce fluoride into the water being distributed in
the water supply system of the City at a target feed rate of 0.7 milligrams
per liter (mg/l).
§ 443-20. Cross-connections to City water supply prohibited.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a program for
protecting the City of Monona public water supply system from
contamination due to the backflow of contaminants through the water
service connection into the public water system.
B. Authority. The cross-connection inspection program is established
under the authority of and with the intent to comply with the
requirements of § NR 810.15, Wis. Adm. Code, Cross-connections and
Interconnections Code.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BACKFLOW — The undesirable flow of water or mixtures of water
and other liquids, gases or other substances under positive or reduced
pressure into the City of Monona Water Utility (hereinafter "Utility")
public water supply system from any source.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER — A device or means designed to prevent
backflow caused by backpressure or backsiphonage; most commonly
categorized as air gap, reduced-pressure-principle backflow preventer,
double-check-valve assembly, pressure vacuum breaker, atmospheric
vacuum breaker, hose-connection vacuum breaker, hose-connection
backflow preventer, backflow preventer with intermediate atmospheric
vent, barometric loop or other approved device.
BACKPRESSURE — An elevation of pressure in the downstream piping
system (pump, elevation of piping, or steam and/or air pressure) above
the Utility supply pressure, which would cause or tend to cause a
reversal of the normal direction of flow.
BACKSIPHONAGE — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances into the distribution pipes of the Utility's potable water
supply system from any source, caused by the sudden reduction of
pressure in the Utility's potable water supply system.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any physical connection or arrangement
between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable
water from the Utility and the other containing water from a private
source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases or
chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system to another;
§ 443-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-20
1:501
the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the
two systems.
D. Cross-connection prohibited. No person shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any crossconnection.
No interconnection shall be established whereby potable
water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply, other than
the public water supply of the Utility, may enter the supply or
distribution system of the Utility, unless such private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such
supply have been approved by the Utility and the State of Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
E. Surveys. The Utility may cause inspection to be made of all properties
serviced by the Utility where cross-connection with the public water
system is deemed possible or suspected. Residential properties
serviced by the Utility shall be surveyed a minimum of once every 10
years or on a schedule matching meter replacement. Surveys shall be
conducted for every industrial, commercial and public authority service
a minimum of once every two years. Commercial properties of similar
or less risk than residential properties may follow the same schedule as
residential properties. The Utility may, but is not required to, perform
the cross-connection inspection of the owner's property. If in the
opinion of the Utility the Utility is not able to perform the inspection,
the property owner must, at his/her own expense, have the plumbing
inspected for cross-connections by a State of Wisconsin certified crossconnection
inspector/surveyor or by a State of Wisconsin licensed
plumber. The frequency of required inspections and reinspections,
based on potential health hazards involved, may be shortened by the
Utility. The Utility may charge fees as approved by the State of
Wisconsin Public Service Commission for on-premises follow-up visits
by Utility personnel for reinspection due to customer noncompliance
and for after-hours' inspections or reinspections.
F. Right of entry. Upon presentation of credentials, representatives of the
Utility shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to
examine any property served by a connection to the public water
system of the Utility for cross-connection. If entry is refused, such
representatives may obtain a special inspection warrant under
§ 66.0119, Wis. Stats. Upon request, the owner, lessee or occupant of
any property so served shall furnish the inspection agency any
pertinent information regarding the piping system on such property.
G. Authority to discontinue service. The Utility is authorized to discontinue
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of
this section exists and to take such other precautionary measures
deemed necessary to eliminate any damage of contamination of the
public water system. Water service shall be discontinued if the means of
backflow prevention required by the Utility is not installed, tested,
maintained and repaired in compliance with this section and Ch. NR
810, Wis. Adm. Code, or if it is found that the means of backflow
§ 443-20 MONONA CODE § 443-20
1:502
prevention required by this section has been removed or bypassed.
Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and
opportunity hearing in accordance with Chapter 7, Administrative
Review, except as provided under emergency discontinuance of service.
H. Reconnection of service. Water service to any property discontinued
under the provisions of this section shall not be restored until the crossconnection
has been eliminated or a backflow prevention device
approved by the Utility has been installed in compliance with the
provisions of this section. The Utility may charge fees as approved by
the State of Wisconsin Public Service Commission for the reconnection
of the water service.
I. Emergency discontinuance of service. If it is determined by the Utility
that a cross-connection or an emergency endangers public health,
safety or welfare and requires immediate action, service may be
immediately discontinued. The owner, lessee or occupant shall have an
opportunity for hearing under Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., within 10 days of
such emergency discontinuance. Such hearing shall be before the
Monona Common Council and shall conform to all existing due process
requirements.
J. Owner responsibility. The property owner shall be responsible for the
elimination of or protection from all cross-connections on his/her
premises. The owner shall, at his/her expense, have installed,
maintained and tested any and all backflow preventers on his/her
premises in compliance with Chs. NR 810 and SPS 382, Wis. Adm.
Code. The property owner shall have corrected any malfunction of any
backflow preventer on his/her premises. The property owner shall
inform the Utility of any proposed or modified cross-connections and
also any existing cross-connections that are not protected by an
approved backflow prevention device. The property owner shall not
install a bypass around any backflow preventer unless there is a
backflow preventer of the same type on the bypass. Property owners
who cannot shut down operation for testing of the backflow prevention
device must supply additional devices necessary to allow testing to take
place. In the event the property owner installs plumbing upstream of
the backflow preventer, such plumbing must have its own approved
backflow preventer. The property owner is required to follow the
protection practices described in the American Water Works
Association publication AWWA M14, titled "Recommended Practice for
Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control," unless the Utility
requires or authorizes other means of protecting the public water
system. These requirements or authorizations will be at the discretion
of the Utility.
K. Additional protection. In the case of premises having internal crossconnections
that cannot be permanently corrected or controlled or
intricate plumbing and piping arrangements, or where entry to all
portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection
purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or
§ 443-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-20
1:503
§ 443-21. Private water wells.
not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be
protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved
backflow preventer in the service line. In the case of any premises
where there is any material danger to health that is handled in such
a manner that, in the opinion of the Utility, could create an actual or
potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system
shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved
reduced-pressure-principle backflow preventer. Examples of premises
where these conditions may exist include sewage treatment plants,
hospitals, mortuaries, plating plants and car wash establishments. In
the case of any premises where, in the opinion of the Utility, an undue
health threat is posed because of the presence of toxic substances,
the Utility may require an approved air gap at the service connection
to protect the public water system. This requirement will be at the
discretion of the Utility.
L. Wisconsin Administrative Code. Chapter SPS 382 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code is hereby adopted, except any penalty provisions
therein which exceed the legal authority of the City to impose. Chapter
NR 810 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code is hereby adopted.
M. Plumbing code. This section does not supersede the State of Wisconsin
Plumbing Code, Chs. SPS 381 to 387, Wis. Adm. Code, nor any other
provisions of this Code, but instead should be supplementary to them.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to prevent contamination of
groundwater and to protect public health, safety and welfare by
assuring that unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells, wells which may
serve as conduits for contamination, or wells which may be illegally
cross-connected to the municipal water system are properly
abandoned, and that existing private wells meet state requirements for
construction and water quality. Improperly abandoned wells represent
potential direct pathways for groundwater contamination to enter the
municipal drinking water supply.
B. Applicability. This section applies to all wells located on premises
served by the City municipal water system.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
NONCOMPLYING — A well or pump installation which does not comply
with the provisions of Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code, in effect at the
time the well was constructed, a contamination source was installed,
the pump was installed, or work was done on either the well or pump
installation.
PUMP INSTALLATION — The pump and related equipment used for
withdrawing water from a well, including the discharge piping, the
§ 443-20 MONONA CODE § 443-21
1:504
underground connections, pit-less adapters, pressure tanks, pits,
sampling faucets and well seals or caps.
UNSAFE — A well or pump installation which produces water which
is bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with substances in
excess of the standards of Ch. NR 809 or NR 140, Wis. Adm. Code,
or for which a health advisory has been issued by the Department of
Natural Resources.
UNUSED — A well or pump installation which is not in use or does not
have a functional pumping system.
WELL — An excavation or opening into the ground made by digging,
boring, drilling, driving or other methods for the purpose of obtaining
groundwater for consumption or other use.
WELL ABANDONMENT — The filling and sealing of a well according to
the provisions of Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
D. Abandonment required. Except as provided in Subsection E below, all
wells located on premises served by the municipal water system shall
be abandoned in accordance with the terms of this chapter and Ch. NR
812, Wis. Adm. Code.
E. Well operation permit. The City Water Utility may grant a permit to a
private well owner to operate a well for a period of five years that will
allow retention and operation of wells which are determined to be safe
and in compliance with Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code, with the limitation
that the well shall be functional and the owner shall demonstrate a need
for use. The City Water Utility or its agent may conduct inspections or
have water quality tests conducted at the applicant's expense to obtain
or verify information necessary for consideration of a permit
application or renewal. Permit applications and renewals shall be made
on forms provided by the City. The following conditions must be met for
issuance or renewal of a well operation permit:
(1) The well and pump system must be evaluated by a licensed well
driller or pump installer and certified to comply with § NR 812.42,
Wis. Adm. Code, prior to issuance of the initial permit and no less
than every 10 years afterwards; and
(2) The well construction and pump installation have a history of
producing bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by at least two
samples taken a minimum of two weeks apart. No exception to this
condition may be made for unsafe wells, unless the Department of
Natural Resources approves in writing the continued use of the
well; and
(3) There are no cross-connections between the well and pump
installation and the municipal water system; and
§ 443-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-21
1:505
§ 443-22. Violations and penalties.288
Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which a separate
penalty has not been imposed shall be punished as set forth in § 1-4, the
general penalty of this Code. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Chapter 450
WATERWAYS
§ 450-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLEANING WORK — Any effort that will result in the removal of the
deposits on the bed and banks of a navigable waterway that occurred
throughout the years, including mechanical dredging, hydraulic dredging,
hand work cleaning, or work of a similar character.
(4) The proposed use of the well and pump installation can be justified
as being necessary in addition to water provided by the municipal
water system.
F. Abandonment procedures. All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of
this section or rule shall be abandoned according to the procedures and
methods set forth in Ch. NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code. All debris, pump,
piping, unsealed liners and any other obstructions which may interfere
with sealing operations shall be removed prior to abandonment.
(1) The owner of the well or the owner's agent shall notify the Director
of Public Works at least 48 hours prior to commencement of any
well abandonment activities. The abandonment of the well shall be
observed by the City Water Utility.
(2) An abandonment report form supplied by the Department of
Natural Resources shall be submitted by the well owner to the
Water Utility and the Department of Natural Resources within 10
days of the completion of the well abandonment.
G. Application and permit fee. Permit applications and renewals shall be
made on forms provided by the Water Utility. A permit fee in the amount
set forth in the City's Schedule of Fee, Forfeiture and Deposit shall
accompany the application.287
287. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
288. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 443-21 MONONA CODE § 450-1
1:506
NAVIGABILITY — A waterway is navigable if it has bed and banks and it is
possible to float a canoe or other small craft in it at some time of the year.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore where
the water is present often enough so that the lake or stream bed begins to
look different from the upland. Specifically, the ordinary high-water mark
is the point on the bank or shore up to which the water, by its presence
or wave action or flow, leaves a distinct mark on the shore or bank. The
mark may be indicated by erosion, destruction of/or change in vegetation,
or other easily recognizable characteristics.
SHORELINE — A line that connects all the ordinary high-water marks on
the banks or shore where the water is present.
WATERWAY — Any navigable water body.
§ 450-2. Assessment and cleaning process.
A. Application. A written application may be made by any interested party
to the City Engineer requesting consideration for the cleaning of a
waterway and/or stabilizing of a shoreline. No application shall be
processed unless accompanied by a fee as prescribed by the City's Fee
Schedule. The fee shall be credited against any assessment for
waterway maintenance but shall be otherwise nonrefundable.289
B. Application review by City Engineer. Upon receiving the written
application, the City Engineer (hereafter "Engineer") shall conduct a
preliminary review of the proposed work, which shall include:
(1) Rough cost estimate.
(2) Recommendation on whether project design planning shall be
performed by the City Engineer or an outside engineering firm.
(3) Evaluation of project's environmental impact.
(4) Consultation with the Department of Natural Resources to
ascertain permit procedure/timetable.
(5) Contact with affected/surrounding property owners to determine
availability of construction easements.
(6) Such other factors as deemed appropriate by the City Engineer.
(7) Written recommendation to the Public Works Committee regarding
the advisability of the project.
C. Hearing before Public Works Committee. Upon receipt of the
Engineer's report the Public Works Committee shall hold a hearing on
the application for the cleaning of a waterway and/or stabilizing of a
shoreline. Notice shall be given to the public and affected property
289. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-2
1:507
owners. The Public Works Committee shall determine the procedures
to be utilized at any such hearing.
D. Decision of Public Works Committee. The Public Works Committee may
recommend approval or rejection of the project and shall in writing
inform the public and affected property owners of its decision.
E. Report to/consideration by Common Council. Any project receiving a
positive recommendation shall be recommended by the Public Works
Committee for inclusion in the Capital Improvement Budget for the
subsequent year's City Budget. The Common Council shall have final
approval of all projects.
F. Design/planning.
(1) Any project approved by the Common Council shall be designated
and constructed in substantial compliance with the specifications
prescribed by the Engineer or designee and approved by the Public
Works Committee. The final design plans shall include a
recommendation as to the average distance to be utilized in
assessment calculations.
(2) If during the design/planning process problems exist which, in the
opinion of the Engineer, change the scope or nature of the project
and/or make the project unfeasible, which shall include but not be
limited to increased costs, inability to secure necessary easements,
unwillingness of property owners to remove temporary structures,
or any other substantial concern, the Engineer shall make a report
to the Public Works Committee, which shall then recommend to the
Council whether to proceed with the proposed project.
G. Assessment and cleaning process: lakefront. [Amended 5-2-2011 by
Ord. No. 4-11-623]
(1) Following review and approval of the project's final design plan, the
cost of the proposed cleaning work shall be specially assessed
pursuant to the following schedule:
(a) Seventy percent to abutting property owners and 30% to City:
for any cleaning work within fifty-foot average distance from
the shoreline; for any cleaning work of a total width of fifty-foot
average or less.
(b) Sixty percent to abutting property owners and 40% ti City: for
any cleaning work which extends from the shoreline more than
fifty- and less than one-hundred-foot average distance; for any
cleaning work of a total width of 50 feet and less than 100 feet
on average.
(c) Fifty percent to abutting property owners and 50% to City: for
any cleaning work that extends from the shoreline 100 feet or
§ 450-2 MONONA CODE § 450-2
1:508
Chapter 457
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Transient merchants — See Ch. 404.
greater distance; for any cleaning work of a total width of 100
feet or more on average.
(d) The average distance shall be the mean of the length of a set of
parallel lines extended from the shoreline to the point of the
dredging limits evenly spaced at 10 feet. Only one assessment
schedule per project shall apply.
(2) The assessment methodology shall utilize the meander line for
calculation of frontage method. This assessment schedule shall not
apply to shoreline stabilization. The City shall pay no costs for
shoreline stabilization except pursuant to Subsection G(3) below.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, the City may elect to follow a different
special assessment schedule when, in the judgment of the Common
Council, after review by the Public Works Committee, it would be
inappropriate and unfair to apply the schedule set forth above.
H. Assessment and cleaning work policy: lagoons, rivers and channels.
[Added 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 4-11-623]
(1) Following review and approval of the project's final design plan, the
cost of the proposed cleaning work shall be specially assessed
pursuant to the following schedule: Seventy percent to abutting
property owners and 30% to City.
(2) The assessment methodology shall utilize the shoreline for
calculation of frontage method. This assessment schedule shall not
apply to shoreline stabilization. The City shall pay no costs for
shoreline stabilization except pursuant to Subsection H(3) below.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, the City may elect to follow a different
special assessment schedule when, in the judgment of the Common
Council, after review by the Public Works Committee, it would be
inappropriate and unfair to apply the schedule set forth above.
(4) City cost-sharing for cleaning work associated with the Belle Isle
channels shall occur no more often than once every 25 years.
(5) City cost-sharing for cleaning work associated with the Cove Circle
channel and Schluter Beach channel shall occur no more often than
once every 15 years.
§ 450-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-2
1:509
§ 457-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter requires
otherwise, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
SELL, SALE and SOLD — Includes barter or exchange and any offering or
exposing for sale or possession with intent to sell.
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES — Weights and measures of every kind,
instruments and devices for weighing and measuring, and any appliances
and accessories used with any or all such instruments and devices, except
meters for the measurement of electricity, gas (natural or manufactured) or
water when the same are operated in a public utility system.
§ 457-2. License required.290
No person, firm or corporation shall operate weights and measures,
weighing or measuring devices, and systems and accessories relating
thereto, which are used commercially within the City of Monona in
determining the weight, measure or count of commodities or things sold or
purchased or offered or exposed for sale on the basis of weight, measure or
count, unless licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. A license
shall be valid for one year and shall expire on June 30. A new license for six
months of the license year or less shall be 50% of the annual license fee; all
others shall be for the full amount. No license fee shall be refunded once a
license or permit has been issued. A late filing fee of 15% of the license fee
or a minimum of $3, whichever is greater, shall be required to be paid prior
to the granting of the license for each of the following:
§ 457-3. Application.
Application for a weighing or measuring device license shall be made
in writing on a form provided for such purpose by the City Clerk. The
application shall state the specific descriptions and identifications of each
weighing and measuring device to be licensed, the location of the devices,
the applicant's full name and post office address and whether the person
is an individual, firm or corporation and, if a partnership, the names of
partners together with their addresses, and the signatures of the applicants.
No device shall be added to any premises and put into use during the license
year unless application is made for such device and the fee paid.
§ 457-4. Issuance of license.
A. Each renewal application received by the City Clerk after June 30.
B. Each application for which deficiencies in the application process are
corrected after June 30.
290. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-2 MONONA CODE § 457-4
1:510
§ 457-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Issuance. The City Clerk shall annually issue a license to the applicant
based on the total number of weighing and measuring devices operated
by the applicant and reviewed by the Wisconsin Department of
Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection, if the requirements of this
chapter have been complied with, and upon payment to the City
Treasurer the fee required according to the City's Schedule of Fee,
Forfeiture and Deposit for each device.291
B. Display of license. Persons licensed under the provisions of this chapter
shall immediately post their license upon some part of the premises on
which the business is conducted which is conspicuous to its patrons,
and said license shall remain posted for the period the license is in
force.
C. Suspension of license. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this
chapter, whenever the City Clerk or a Monona police officer finds that
business on any licensed premises is conducted or managed in such a
manner that there is any violation of any ordinances or regulations of
the City of Monona, the laws of the State of Wisconsin, or regulations of
the National Bureau of Standards relating to weights and measures, he/
she may issue a written notice to the license holder, operator or
employee in charge of the licensed premises, citing such condition and
specifying the corrective action to be taken. If deemed necessary, such
order shall state that the license is immediately suspended and all
weighing and measuring operations are to be discontinued. Any person
to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately but may
appeal such order in accordance with Chapter 7, Administrative
Review, of the Code of the City of Monona. Failure to allow an
authorized inspector immediate access to the premises to determine
whether such grounds exist shall be grounds for suspension.292
D. Transfer of license. No license may be transferred unless otherwise
provided for by the ordinances of the City. No license shall be issued to
or used by any person acting as agent for or in the employ of another.
A. Any person adjudged to have violated any provision of this chapter shall
forfeit an amount in accordance with § 98.26, Wis. Stats. Each violation
shall constitute a separate offense.293
B. In addition to all other remedies and actions provided under this
chapter, the City Attorney may seek a temporary or permanent
injunction restraining any person from violating any provision of this
chapter.
291. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
292. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
293. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 457-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-5
1:511
Part III: Land Use Legislation
Chapter 466
FLOODPLAIN AND SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Erosion and stormwater control — See Ch.
216.
Waterways — See Ch. 450.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
473.
Zoning — See Ch. 480.
§ 457-5 MONONA CODE § 457-5
1:512
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization, Finding of Fact, Statement of Purpose,
Title and General Provisions
§ 466-1. Statutory authorization.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in § 62.23, Wis. Stats.,
and the requirements in § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 466-2. Finding of fact.
Uncontrolled development and use of the shoreland-wetlands, floodplains
and rivers or streams of Monona would impair the public health, safety,
convenience, general welfare and tax base.
§ 466-3. Statement of purpose.
This chapter is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
A. Protect life, health and property;
B. Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood-control projects;
C. Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers;
D. Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
F. Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
G. Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers;
H. Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and
result in conflicts between property owners;
I. Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the
floodplain;
J. Maintain the stormwater and floodwater storage capacity of wetlands;
K. Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which filter
or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that
would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
L. Protect fish spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life and wildlife by
preserving wetlands and other fish and aquatic habitat;
M. Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area;
N. Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting shorelandwetland
excavation, filling and other earthmoving activities.
§ 466-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-4
1:513
§ 466-4. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland
Zoning Ordinance for Monona, Wisconsin."
§ 466-5. General provisions.
A. Areas to be regulated. This chapter regulates all areas that would be
covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other maps approved by the Department
of Natural Resources. Base flood elevations are derived from the flood
profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30
and AH Zones on the FIRM. Other regulatory zones are displayed as A
and AO Zones. Regional flood elevations (RFE) may be derived from
other studies. If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most
restrictive information shall apply.
B. Official maps and revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain districts
are designated as AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) listed below. Any change to the base flood
elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries of the floodplain or
floodway in the FIS or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be
reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA through the letter of
map change process (see Article X, Amendments) before it is effective.
No changes to RFEs on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until
approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on file in the office
of the Zoning Administrator. If more than one map or revision is
referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply. Any maps
referenced in this section must be approved by the DNR and be more
restrictive than those based on the FIS at the site of the proposed
development.
The maps designated below are hereby adopted and made part of this
chapter. They are on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator of the
City of Monona:
(1) United States Geological Survey Madison East Quadrangle Map
dated 1983.
(2) Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Maps stamped "FINAL" on January
28, 1986.
(3) Floodplain zoning maps entitled "The Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) Dane County, Wisconsin, and Incorporated Areas," panels
55025C0428G, 55025C0436G, 55025C0437G and 55025C0441G,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
dated January 2, 2009; panel 55025C0429H, dated September 17,
2014, with corresponding profiles that are based on the Dane
County Flood Insurance Study, volumes 55025CV001D,
55025CV002D, 55025CV003D and 55025CV004D, dated June 16,
§ 466-4 MONONA CODE § 466-5
1:514
2016, prepared in connection therewith. [Amended 5-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 5-16-678]
(4) City of Madison, Village of Maple Bluff Flood Storage District,
Panel 19 of 21, dated September 17, 2014. Prepared by the WDNR.
Approved by the WDNR.
(5) City of Fitchburg, City of Monona Flood Storage District, Panel 20
of 21, dated September 17, 2014. Prepared by the WDNR.
Approved by the WDNR.
(6) Comprehensive zoning base maps titled "City of Monona Zoning
Map" and dated November 17, 1980, or latest version.
(7) Flood Insurance Rate Map 55025C0437G and corresponding Flood
Insurance Study data for West Unnamed Tributary to Lake
Waubesa, as revised by FEMA Letter of Map Revision Case Number
16-05-3951P with effective date of December 30, 2016.294
C. Establishment of floodplain zoning districts. The regional floodplain
areas are divided into four districts, as follows:
(1) The floodway district (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to
carry the regional floodwaters and are contained within AE Zones
as shown on the FIRM.
(2) The flood-fringe district (FF) is that portion of the floodplain
between the regional flood limits and the floodway.
(3) The general floodplain district (GFP) is those areas that have been
or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood.
(4) The flood storage district (FSD) is that area of the floodplain where
storage of floodwaters is calculated to reduce the regional flood
discharge.
D. Locating floodplain boundaries.
(1) Discrepancies between boundaries on the Official Floodplain
Zoning Map and actual field conditions shall be resolved using the
criteria in Subsection D(1)(a) or (b) below. If a significant difference
exists, the map shall be amended according to Article X. The
Zoning Administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile
elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map
amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for documenting actual predevelopment field
conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was
determined and for initiating any map amendments required under
this section. Disputes between the Zoning Administrator and an
294. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 466-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-5
1:515
applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according
to § 466-38C and the criteria in Subsection D(1)(a) and (b) below.
(a) If flood profiles exist, the location of the district boundary line
shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator using both
the map scale and the profile elevations. The regional or base
flood elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies. A
map amendment is required where there is a significant
discrepancy between the map and actual field conditions. The
Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to immediately
grant or deny a land use permit on the basis of a district
boundary derived from the elevations shown on the water
surface profile of the regional flood, whether or not a map
amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for initiating any map amendments required under
this section within a reasonable period of time.
(b) Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary
shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator using the map
scale. Where there is a significant difference between the
district boundary line shown on the map and actual field
conditions, the map shall be amended. Where a map
amendment has been approved by both the Common Council
and the Department, the Zoning Administrator shall have the
authority to grant or deny a land use permit.
(2) Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood
elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must approve any map amendment
or revision pursuant to Article X, Amendments, § 466-44G.
E. Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of
this chapter shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain
unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood
elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the
map is amended pursuant to Article X, Amendments.
F. Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this
chapter shall be in compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable local, state and federal regulations. (However, see Article
VIII of this chapter for the standards applicable to nonconforming
uses.) It is the responsibility of the applicant to secure all other
necessary permits from appropriate federal, state and local agencies,
including those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
G. Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to
comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State
agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways
§ 466-5 MONONA CODE § 466-5
1:516
and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt
when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
H. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(1) This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any zoning ordinance
previously enacted under § 62.23 or 87.30, Wis. Stats., which relate
to floodplains and shoreland-wetlands. A more restrictive
ordinance than this chapter shall continue in full force and effect to
the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise. The more
restrictive of either the shoreland-wetland district or floodplain
district regulations shall apply when a property is located in both
zoning districts.
(2) This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail.
I. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor
of the Common Council and are not a limitation on or repeal of any
other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this
chapter required by Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, is unclear, the
provision shall be interpreted consistent with the requirements of Ch.
NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, and in light of the standards in effect on the
date of the adoption of this chapter or in effect on the date of the most
recent text amendment to this chapter.
J. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards in
this chapter are based on engineering experience and research. Larger
floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by man-made or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply or guarantee that
nonfloodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from
flooding and flood damages. Nor does this chapter create liability on the
part of or a cause of action against the City or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this
chapter.
K. Annexed areas. The Dane County floodplain zoning provisions in effect
on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by
the City for all annexed areas until the City adopts and enforces an
ordinance which meets the requirements of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm.
Code ,and 44 CFR 59-72, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
These annexed lands are described on the City's Official Zoning Map.
County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for
the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of
the Zoning Administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the
regional flood elevation and the floodway location.
§ 466-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-5
1:517

ARTICLE II
General Standards Applicable to All Floodplain Districts
§ 466-6. Review of permit applications; determination of flood
safety.
The Zoning Administrator shall review all permit applications to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If
a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall be designed and anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant
materials; be constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that
utility and mechanical equipment is designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the equipment during
conditions of flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with
the above standards. All proposed plats and certified survey maps required
by Chapter 480, Zoning, of this Code shall include regional flood elevation
and floodway data. Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards, and all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages.
§ 466-7. Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses.
§ 466-8. Watercourse alterations.
No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain
shall be issued until the Zoning Administrator has notified in writing all
adjacent municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional offices and
required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits.
The standards of § 466-7 must be met and the flood-carrying capacity of
any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. As soon as is
practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse
alteration or relocation, and pursuant to Article X, Amendments, the Zoning
Administrator shall apply for a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA.
A. No floodplain development shall:
(1) Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development,
causing any increase in the regional flood height; or
(2) Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain
storage area lost.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the
proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the
regional flood height, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other
adopted map, unless the provisions of Article X, Amendments, are met.
§ 466-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-8
1:519
Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR
through the LOMC process.
§ 466-9. Development requiring state permit.
Development which requires a permit from the Department under Chs.
30 and 31, Wis. Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts,
dams and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are
obtained and amendments to this chapter are made according to Article X,
Amendments.
§ 466-10. Public or private campgrounds.
Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and
shall meet the following provisions:
A. The campground is approved by the Department of Health Services.
B. A land use permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning
Administrator.
C. The character of the river system and the campground elevation are
such that a seventy-two-hour warning of an impending flood can be
given to all campground occupants.
D. There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that
offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in
the campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement
between the campground owner, the municipal emergency government
coordinator and the Police Chief which specifies the flood elevation at
which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible for monitoring
flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used and the
procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel
responsible for conducting the evacuation.
E. This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which
time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated – by the officials
identified in Subsection D – to remain in compliance with all applicable
regulations, including those of the State Department of Health
Services.
F. Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready for
highway use are allowed.
G. The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground for more
than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be
removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours.
H. All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be
issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written
copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization
§ 466-8 MONONA CODE § 466-10
1:520
shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period not to exceed 180
days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section.
I. The Zoning Administrator shall monitor the limited authorizations
issued by the campground operator to assure compliance with the
terms of this section.
J. All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive
days must meet the applicable requirements in either Article III, Article
IV or Article V for the floodplain district in which the structure is
located.
K. The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances
warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a
flood warning is issued.
L. All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection,
electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells,
shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the floodprotection
elevation.
§ 466-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-10
1:521

ARTICLE III
Floodway District (FW)
§ 466-11. Applicability.
This article applies to all floodway areas on the Floodplain Zoning Maps and
those identified pursuant to § 466-21.
§ 466-12. Permitted uses.
The following open space uses are allowed in the floodway district and the
floodway areas of the general floodplain district, if they are not prohibited
by any other ordinance; they meet the standards in §§ 466-13 and 466-14;
and all permits or certificates have been issued according to § 466-35:
§ 466-13. Standards for developments in floodway.
A. Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
B. Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas,
parking areas and airport landing strips.
C. Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting,
trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas, and hiking and
horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of § 466-13D.
D. Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as
historic structures that comply with §§ 466-13 and 466-14.
E. Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with
§ 466-13D.
F. Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves,
dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of
transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Chs. 30 and 31, Wis.
Stats.
G. Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with § 466-13C.
A. General.
(1) Any development in the floodway shall comply with Article II and
have a low flood damage potential.
(2) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects
of the proposal according to § 466-6:
(a) A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular
to the watercourse, showing if the proposed development will
obstruct flow; or
§ 466-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-13
1:523
(b) An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional
flood height.
(3) The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if the
project will cause any increase in the flood elevations upstream or
downstream, based on the data submitted for Subsection A(2)
above.
B. Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or
functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by
permit if the structures comply with the following criteria:
(1) Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood
damage potential, and is constructed to minimize flood damage.
(2) Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a
total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher
than one foot above grade. The openings shall be equipped with
screens, louvers or other coverings or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(3) Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement.
(4) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed
to or above the regional flood elevation.
(5) It must not obstruct flow of floodwaters or cause any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
C. Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and bridges
may be allowed by permit, if:
(1) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the floodprotection
elevation; and
(2) Construction meets the development standards of § 466-7.
D. Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be
allowed by permit, if:
(1) The requirements of § 466-7 are met;
(2) No material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is
issued by the Department pursuant to Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and a
permit pursuant to § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344 has been issued, if
applicable, and all other requirements have been met;
(3) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
(4) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
§ 466-13 MONONA CODE § 466-14
1:524
§ 466-14. Prohibited uses.
All uses not listed as permitted uses in § 466-12 are prohibited, including
the following uses:
A. Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or
those not associated with permanent open-space uses;
B. Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to
property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic
life;
C. Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the
adjoining districts;
D. Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are
removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational
areas and Department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable
provisions of local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code;
E. Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water,
except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local
ordinances and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
F. Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
G. Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted
under § NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code; and
H. Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service
existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which
complies with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
§ 466-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-14
1:525

ARTICLE IV
Flood-Fringe District (FF)
§ 466-15. Applicability.
This article applies to all flood-fringe areas shown on the Floodplain Zoning
Maps and those identified pursuant to § 466-21.
§ 466-16. Permitted uses.
Any structure, land use or development is allowed in the flood-fringe district
if the standards in § 466-17 are met; the use is not prohibited by this or
any other ordinance or regulation; and all permits or certificates specified
in § 466-35 have been issued.
§ 466-17. Standards for development in flood-fringe.
Section 466-7 shall apply in addition to the following requirements
according to the use requested. Any existing structure in the flood-fringe
must meet the requirements of Article VIII, Nonconforming Uses:
A. Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home, which
is to be newly constructed or moved into the flood-fringe, shall meet or
exceed the following standards. Any existing structure in the floodfringe
must meet the requirements of Article VIII, Nonconforming Uses.
(1) The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the floodprotection
elevation on fill unless the requirements of § 466-17A(2)
can be met. The fill shall be one foot or more above the regional
flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the
structure. The Department may authorize other floodproofing
measures if the elevations of existing streets or sewer lines makes
compliance with the fill standards impractical and the Board of
Appeals grants a variance;
(2) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood
elevation if it is floodproofed to the flood-protection elevation. No
basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood
elevation;
(3) Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a structure to
land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in Subsection
A(4).
(4) In developments where existing street or sewer-line elevations
make compliance with Subsection A(3) impractical, the City may
permit new development and substantial improvements where
roads are below the regional flood elevation, if:
(a) The City has written assurance from police, fire and emergency
services that rescue and relief will be provided to the
§ 466-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-17
1:527
structure(s) by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event;
or
(b) The City has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation plan.
B. Accessory structures or uses. Accessory structures shall be constructed
on fill with the lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation.
C. Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected, altered
or moved into the flood-fringe shall meet the requirements of
§ 466-17A. Subject to the requirements of Subsection F, storage yards,
surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower
elevations. However, no such area in general use by the public shall be
inundated to a depth greater than two feet or subjected to flood
velocities greater than two feet per second upon the occurrence of the
regional flood. Inundation of such yards or parking areas exceeding two
feet may be allowed, provided an adequate warning system exists to
protect life and property.
D. Manufacturing, agricultural and industrial uses. Any manufacturing,
agricultural or industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved
into the flood-fringe shall have the lowest floor elevation to or above the
flood-protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in
§ 466-41. On streams or rivers having prolonged flood durations,
greater protection may be required to minimize interference with
normal plant operations. Subject to the requirements of Subsection E,
storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed
at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life
and property.
E. Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive
or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish or
aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood-protection elevation or
floodproofed in compliance with § 466-41. Adequate measures shall be
taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body during
flooding.
F. Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges
shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans; and
(1) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger
public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed
essential, construction or repair of such facilities shall only be
permitted if they are designed to comply with § 466-41;
(2) Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower
elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the
regional flood elevation.
G. Sewage systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system,
§ 466-17 MONONA CODE § 466-17
1:528
pursuant to § 466-41, to the flood-protection elevation and meet the
provisions of all local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
H. Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system, pursuant to § 466-41, to the floodprotection
elevation and shall meet the provisions of Chs. NR 811 and
NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
I. Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is
prohibited in flood-fringe areas.
J. Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this chapter.
K. Manufactured homes.
(1) Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize
flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation
plan, indicating vehicular access and escape routes, with local
emergency management authorities.
(2) In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement
homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood-protection
elevation; and
(b) Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally
during a flood.
(3) Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new
manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing
parks, all new, replacement and substantially improved
manufactured homes shall meet the residential development
standards for the flood-fringe in § 466-17A.
L. Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are
on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and
ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring
requirements in § 466-17K(2). A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the
site only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.
§ 466-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-17
1:529

ARTICLE V
General Floodplain District (GFD)
§ 466-18. Applicability.
The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains mapped as A, AO
or AH Zone.
§ 466-19. Permitted uses.
Pursuant to § 466-21, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether
the proposed use is located within the floodway or flood-fringe. Those uses
permitted in the floodway (§ 466-12) and flood-fringe (§ 466-16) districts are
allowed within the general floodplain district, according to the standards of
§ 466-20, provided that all permits or certificates required under § 466-35
have been issued.
§ 466-20. Standards for development in general floodplain district.
Article III applies to floodway areas; Article IV applies to flood-fringe areas.
The rest of this chapter applies to either district.
§ 466-21. Determining floodway and flood-fringe limits.
Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain
district, the Zoning Administrator shall:
A. In AO/AH Zones the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the
conditions listed below, whichever is higher:
(1) At or above the flood-protection elevation; or
(2) Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the structure; or
(3) The depth as shown on the FIRM.
B. In AO/AH Zones, provide plans showing adequate drainagepaths to
guide floodwaters around structures.
A. Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a
plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the
general floodplain district limits, stream channel and existing floodplain
developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits
and elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing measures,
and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM.
B. Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the
proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and
to determine floodway boundaries:
(1) A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in § 466-35B(3);
§ 466-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-21
1:531
(2) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground;
pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and
layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location
and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil
types and other pertinent information;
(3) Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage,
water supply and sanitary facilities.
§ 466-21 MONONA CODE § 466-21
1:532
ARTICLE VI
Flood Storage District (FSD)
§ 466-22. District boundaries and purpose of flood storage.
The flood storage district delineates that portion of the floodplain where
storage of floodwaters has been taken into account and is relied upon to
reduce the regional flood discharge. The district protects the flood storage
areas and assures that any development in the storage areas will not
decrease the effective flood storage capacity, which would cause higher
flood elevations.
§ 466-23. Applicability.
The provisions of this article apply to all areas within the flood storage
district (FSD), as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps.
§ 466-24. Permitted uses.
Any use or development which occurs in a flood storage district must meet
the applicable requirements in § 466-17.
§ 466-25. Standards for development in flood storage district.
A. Development in a flood storage district shall not cause an increase in
the height of the regional flood.
B. No development shall be allowed which removes flood storage volume
unless an equal volume of storage as defined by the predevelopment
ground surface and the regional flood elevation shall be provided in the
immediate area of the proposed development to compensate for the
volume of storage which is lost (compensatory storage). Excavation
below the groundwater table is not considered to provide an equal
volume of storage.
C. If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not be
developed unless the entire area zoned as flood storage district – on this
waterway – is rezoned to the flood-fringe district. This must include a
revision to the floodplain study and map done for the waterway to
revert to the higher regional flood discharge calculated without
floodplain storage, as per Article X, Amendments, of this chapter.
D. No area may be removed from the flood storage district unless it can be
shown that the area has been filled to the flood-protection elevation and
is contiguous to other lands lying outside of the floodplain.
§ 466-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-25
1:533

ARTICLE VII
Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District
§ 466-26. District boundaries of shoreland-wetland.
A. The shoreland-wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the City
of Monona which are five acres or more in size and are shown on the
final Wetland Inventory Map that has been adopted and made a part of
this chapter in § 466-5, and which are:
(1) Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable
lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the
municipality shall be presumed to be navigable if they are listed in
the Department publication "Surface Water Resources of Dane
County" or are shown on the United States Geological Survey
quadrangle maps or other Zoning Maps which have been made a
part of this chapter in § 466-5.
(2) Within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers
or streams or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever
distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be
navigable if they are designated as either continuous or
intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey
quadrangle maps or other Zoning Maps which have been
incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter in
§ 466-5. Floodplain Zoning Maps adopted in § 466-5 shall be used
to determine the extent of floodplain areas.
B. Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water mark location
shall initially be made by the Zoning Administrator. When questions
arise, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district
office of the Department for a final determination of navigability or
ordinary high-water mark.
C. When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland
district boundary shown on the Official Zoning Maps and the actual
field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the Zoning
Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the
Department to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as
mapped is in error. If Department staff concur with the Zoning
Administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a
wetland, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to
immediately grant or deny any land use or building permit in
accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning
district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors shown on the
Official Zoning Maps, the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for
initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period.
D. Under § 281.31(2m), Wis. Stats., notwithstanding any other provision of
law or administrative rule, wetland zoning ordinances required under
§ 466-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-26
1:535
§ 466-27. Permitted uses in shoreland-wetland.
The following uses are permitted, subject to the provisions of Chs. 30 and
31, Wis. Stats., and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if
applicable:
§ 62.231, Wis. Stats. and Ch. NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code, do not apply to
lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches, if:
(1) Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river;
(2) Those parts of the drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not
navigable streams before ditching; and
(3) Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
E. The boundaries of the shoreland-wetland district as set forth in this
§ 466-26 above shall not apply to any wetlands on the landward side of a
bulkhead line established by the City under § 30.11, Wis. Stats., prior to
May 7, 1982, under the authority of § 62.231(2m), Wis. Stats.
A. Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning
permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
(1) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and
boating;
(2) The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild
rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not
injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops;
(3) The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and
harvesting of timber;
(4) The pasturing of livestock;
(5) The cultivation of agricultural crops; and
(6) The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
B. Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and which
may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided
below:
(1) The practice of silviculture, included limited temporary water-levelstabilization
measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally
wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the
conduct of silviculture activities if not corrected;
(2) The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland
alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting
cranberries;
§ 466-26 MONONA CODE § 466-27
1:536
(3) The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems, where
permissible under § 30.20, Wis. Stats., to restore preexisting levels
of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to
dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is permissible
under Ch. 30, Wis. Stats., and that dredged spoil is placed on
existing spoil banks where possible;
(4) The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of
livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for
such construction or maintenance;
(5) The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and walkways,
observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including
limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or
maintenance;
(6) The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of
draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district,
provided that such installation or maintenance is done in a manner
designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural
functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in § 466-29A of this
chapter; and
(7) The maintenance, repair, replacement and construction of existing
highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling
necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or
reconstruction.
C. Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit
and which may include wetland alterations only to the extent
specifically provided below:
(1) The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for
the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of
essential utility and emergency services or to provide access to
uses permitted under this section, as provided below:
(a) The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland;
(b) The road is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse
impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in
§ 466-29A;
(c) The road is designed and constructed with the minimum crosssectional
area practical to serve the intended use;
(d) Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate
area of the roadbed only; and
(e) Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction
or maintenance of the road.
§ 466-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-27
1:537
(2) The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings,
provided that:
(a) The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted
in the shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of
waterfowl, minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals;
(b) The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside
the wetland;
(c) The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and
(d) Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide
structural support for the building is allowed.
(3) The establishment and development of public and private parks
and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural
and scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and
wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms,
wildlife preserves and public boat-launching ramps, provided that:
(a) Any private development allowed under this paragraph shall
be used exclusively for the permitted purpose;
(b) Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the
development of public boat-launching ramps, swimming
beaches or the construction of park shelters or similar
structures is allowed;
(c) The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the
uses permitted under this paragraph are allowed only where
such construction and maintenance meets the criteria in
Subsection C(3)(a), above; and
(d) Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and
wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal
farms and wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of
improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland
values.
(4) The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone
transmission lines and water, gas and sewer lines and related
facilities and the construction and maintenance of railroad lines,
provided that:
(a) The transmission and distribution lines and related facilities
and railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located
outside the wetland;
(b) Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such
construction or maintenance is allowed; and
§ 466-27 MONONA CODE § 466-27
1:538
§ 466-28. Prohibited uses in shoreland-wetland.
§ 466-29. Rezoning shoreland-wetland.
(c) Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner
designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the natural
functions of the wetland listed in § 466-29A.
A. Any use not listed in § 466-27 is prohibited, unless the wetland or a
portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this chapter
in accordance with § 466-29 and Article X.
B. The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or
placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary highwater
mark of any navigable waters are prohibited.
A. Rezoning of a shoreland-wetland shall require amendment of the Final
Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Map adopted in § 466-5B pursuant to
procedures established in Article X of this chapter. In order to ensure
that any amendment will be consistent with the shoreland protection
objectives of § 281.31(2m), Wis. Stats., the City shall not rezone a
wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district, or any portion thereof,
where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact
upon any of the following:
(1) Stormwater and floodwater storage capacity;
(2) Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of
groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a
wetland to another area or the flow of groundwater through a
wetland;
(3) Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or
organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable
waters;
(4) Shoreline protection against soil erosion;
(5) Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
(6) Wildlife habitat; or
(7) Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including
scarce wetland types of habitat of endangered species.
B. Upon notification of a proposed amendment as required by Article X, if
the district office of the Department determines that a proposed
rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria
listed in § 466-26, the Department shall so notify the City of its
determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the
proposed amendment.
§ 466-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-29
1:539
C. If the Department notifies the Plan Commission in writing that a
proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any
of the criteria listed in § 466-26, that proposed amendment, if approved
by the City, shall not become effective until more than 30 days have
elapsed since written notice of the Council approval was mailed to the
Department, as required by Article X. If within the thirty-day period the
Department notifies the Common Council that the Department intends
to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the
municipality under § 62.231(6), Wis. Stats., the proposed amendment
shall not become effective until that ordinance adoption procedure is
completed or otherwise terminated. The record of the Common Council
decision on the proposed amendment shall advise the petitioner of the
provisions of this section.
§ 466-29 MONONA CODE § 466-29
1:540
ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Uses
§ 466-30. General.
A. Applicability. If these standards conform with § 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats.,
they shall apply to all modifications or additions to any nonconforming
use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises which was
lawful before the passage of this chapter or any amendment thereto.
B. The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may continue, subject to
the following conditions:
(1) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure
shall be permitted unless they comply with this chapter. The words
"modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any
alteration, addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or
replacement of any such existing use, structure or accessory
structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a modification; this
includes painting, decorating, paneling and other nonstructural
components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of
existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to
public utilities. Any costs associated with the repair of a damaged
structure are not considered maintenance. The construction of a
deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to
the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension,
modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over
a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to
the principal structure.
(2) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted
and any future use of the property, and any structure or building
thereon, shall conform to the applicable requirements of this
chapter;
(3) As requests are received for modifications or additions to
nonconforming uses or nonconforming structures in the floodplain,
the City shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value,
the cost of all modifications or additions which have been
permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value
those modifications represent;
(4) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the
structure would equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized
assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is
permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming
use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
§ 466-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-30
1:541
Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with § 466-17A. The costs of
elevating the lowest floor of a nonconforming building or a building
with a nonconforming use to the flood-protection elevation are
excluded from the fifty-percent provisions of this paragraph;
(5) No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed
50% of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed
unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming
structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be
provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with
§ 466-17A.
(6) If on a per-event basis the total value of the work being done under
Subsection B(4) and (5) equals or exceeds 50% of the present
equalized assessed value, the work shall not be permitted unless
the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming
structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be
provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance with
§ 466-17A.
(7) Except as provided in Subsection B(8), if any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed
or is substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or
rebuilt unless the use and the structure meet the current ordinance
requirements. A structure is considered substantially damaged if
the total cost to restore the structure to its predamaged condition
equals or exceeds 50% of the structure's present equalized
assessed value.
(8) For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or
destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of
any such nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to
restore it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event,
provided that the minimum federal code requirements below are
met and all required permits have been granted prior to the start of
construction.
(a) Residential structures;
[1] Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings,
columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must
meet the requirements of § 466-41B.
[2] Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy,
§ 466-30 MONONA CODE § 466-30
1:542
§ 466-31. Floodway district.
and shall be constructed with methods and materials
resistant to flood damage.
[3] Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other
service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
[4] In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data
available from a federal, state or other source.
[5] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in
§ 466-20A.
[6] In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainagepaths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from the structure.
(b) Nonresidential structures.
[1] Shall meet the requirements of § 466-30B(8)(a)[1] to [6].
[2] Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the regional flood elevation or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall
meet the standards in § 466-41A or B.
[3] In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in
§ 466-20A.
(9) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure; the alteration will comply with § 466-13A; flood-resistant
materials are used; and construction practices and floodproofing
methods that comply with § 466-41 are used. Repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the
development standards of § 466-30B(8)(a) if it is determined that
the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
A. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the floodway
district, unless such modification or addition:
(1) Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance
requirements;
§ 466-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-31
1:543
§ 466-32. Flood-fringe district.
(2) Meets the requirements of § 466-30;
(3) Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood
height;
(4) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed,
pursuant to § 466-41, by means other than the use of fill, to the
flood-protection elevation; and
(5) If any part of the foundation below the flood-protection elevation is
enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
(a) The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect
or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of
floodwaters without human intervention. A minimum of two
openings must be provided with a minimum net area of at least
one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed area.
The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches
above the adjacent grade;
(b) The parts of the foundation located below the flood-protection
elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
(c) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood-protection elevation; and
(d) The use must be limited to parking, building access or limited
storage.
B. No new on-site sewage disposal system or addition to an existing on-site
sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by
a government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be
allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement, repair or
maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in a
floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal
ordinances, § 466-41 and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
C. No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable
water shall be allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement, repair
or maintenance of an existing well in the floodway district shall meet
the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, § 466-41 and
Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
A. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such
modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by the
City and meets the requirements of § 466-17, except where Subsection
B is applicable.
B. Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection A would result in
unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for
§ 466-31 MONONA CODE § 466-32
1:544
§ 466-33. Flood storage district.
No modifications or additions shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure in a flood storage area unless the standards outlined in § 466-24
are met.
human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential,
the Board of Appeals, using the procedures established in § 466-38,
may grant a variance from those provisions of Subsection A for
modifications or additions, using the criteria listed below. Modifications
or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the floodprotection
elevation may be permitted if:
(1) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential
or commercial structures;
(2) Human lives are not endangered;
(3) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed;
(4) Flood depths shall not exceed two feet;
(5) Flood velocities shall not exceed two feet per second; and
(6) The structure shall not be used for storage of materials as
described in § 466-17E.
C. All new private sewage disposal systems or addition to, replacement,
repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet
all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances, § 466-41 and Ch.
SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
D. All new wells or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a
well shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter, § 466-41 and
Ch. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
§ 466-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-33
1:545

ARTICLE IX
Administration
§ 466-34. Administrators enumerated.
The Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals
shall administer this chapter.
§ 466-35. Zoning Administrator.
A. Duties and powers. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to
administer this chapter and shall have the following duties and powers:
(1) Advise applicants of the chapter provisions, assist in preparing
permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood
elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit
applications.
(2) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this chapter and issue certificates of compliance
where appropriate.
(3) Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine
if substantial damage to the structures has occurred.
(4) Keep records of all official actions, such as:
(a) All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
(b) Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations;
(c) Floodproofing certificates.
(d) Water surface profiles, Floodplain Zoning Maps and
ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures, including
changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
(e) All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures.
(f) List of nonconforming structures and uses.
(5) Submit copies of the following items to the Department regional
office:
(a) Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or
text amendments;
(b) Copies of case-by-case analyses and other required
information, including an annual summary of floodplain zoning
actions taken.
§ 466-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-35
1:547
(c) Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all
related correspondence concerning the assessments.
(6) Investigate, prepare reports and report violations of this chapter to
the Plan Commission and City Attorney for prosecution. Copies of
the reports shall also be sent to the Department regional office.
(7) Submit copies of amendments and biennial reports to the FEMA
regional office.
B. Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any new
development, repair, modification or addition to an existing structure,
or change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and
water facilities, may be initiated. Application to the Zoning
Administrator shall include:
(1) General information.
(a) Name and address of the applicant, property owner and
contractor.
(b) Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification.
(2) Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be
submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
(a) Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot noted on a
copy of the Wetland Inventory Map, if applicable;
(b) Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways and boundaries of wetlands;
(c) Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland
alteration;
(d) Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and
vegetative cover;
(e) Location of any structures with distances measured from the
lot lines and street center lines;
(f) Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems;
(g) Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
(h) Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from
the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps;
(i) The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any
fill using National Geodetic and Vertical Datum (NGVD);
(j) Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in
NGVD at the location of the development and to determine
§ 466-35 MONONA CODE § 466-35
1:548
whether or not the requirements of Article III or Article IV are
met; and
(k) Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or
discharge according to § 466-6. This may include any of the
information noted in § 466-13A.
(3) Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All
hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer registered in the
state. The study contractor shall be responsible for the technical
adequacy of the study. All studies shall be reviewed and approved
by the Department.
(a) Zone A floodplains.
[1] Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the
standards in § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code, Hydrologic
Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
[2] Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Elevation, and the following:
[a] Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic
model shall be based on detailed study information for
downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to
determine adequate starting water surface elevation
(WSEL) for the study.
[b] Channel sections must be surveyed.
[c] Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall
be used for the development of cross-section overbank
and floodplain mapping.
[d] A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross
sections is allowed in developed areas with additional
intermediate cross sections required at transitions in
channel bottom slope, including a survey of the
channel at each location.
[e] The most current version of the Hydrologic
Engineering Center's River Analysis System (HECRAS)
shall be used.
[f] A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of
road is required at each structure.
[g] Additional cross sections are required at the
downstream and upstream limits of the proposed
§ 466-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-35
1:549
development and any necessary intermediate
locations based on the length of the reach if greater
than 500 feet.
[h] Standard accepted engineering practices shall be
used when assigning parameters for the base model
such as flow, Manning's N values, expansion and
contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The
base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data,
such as high-water marks, to determine the
reasonableness of the model results. If no historical
data is available, adequate justification shall be
provided for any parameters outside standard
accepted engineering practices.
[i] The model must extend past the upstream limit of the
difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles
in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The
height difference between the proposed flood profile
and the existing study profiles shall be no more than
0.00 feet.
[3] Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be
provided, showing all cross section locations, floodway/
floodplain limits based on best available topographic data,
geographic limits of the proposed development, and
whether the proposed development is located in the
floodway.
[a] If the proposed development is located outside of the
floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on
the regional flood elevation.
[b] If any part of the proposed development is in the
floodway, it must be added to the base model to show
the difference between existing and proposed
conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients
remain the same as in the existing model, unless
adequate justification based on standard accepted
engineering practices is provided.
(b) Zone AE floodplains:
[1] Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the
existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be
based on § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code, Hydrologic
Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
[2] Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Elevation, and the following:
§ 466-35 MONONA CODE § 466-35
1:550
[a] Duplicate effective model. The effective model shall be
reproduced to ensure correct transference of the
model data and to allow integration of the revised data
to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and
downstream of the revised reach. If data from the
effective model is available, models shall be generated
that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations
shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS report to
within 0.1 foot.
[b] Corrected effective model. The corrected effective
model shall not include any man-made physical
changes since the effective model date but shall
import the model into the most current version of
HEC-RAS for Department review.
[c] Existing (preproject conditions) model. The existing
model shall be required to support conclusions about
the actual impacts of the project associated with the
revised (post-project) model or to establish more upto-
date models on which to base the revised (postproject)
model.
[d] Revised (post-project conditions) model. The revised
(post-project conditions) model shall incorporate the
existing model and any proposed changes to the
topography caused by the proposed development. This
model shall reflect proposed conditions.
[e] All changes to the duplicate effective model and
subsequent models must be supported by certified
topographic information, bridge plans, construction
plans and survey notes.
[f] Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to
the stream reach for which the revision is being
requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream
of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the
effective model and result in water surface elevations
and top widths computed by the revised models
matching those in the effective models upstream and
downstream of the revised reach as required. The
effective model shall not be truncated.
[3] Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be
submitted to the Department for review which meet the
following conditions:
[a] Consistency between the revised hydraulic models,
the revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the
revised flood profiles, topographic work map,
§ 466-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-35
1:551
annotated FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary Floodway
Maps (FBFMs), construction plans, bridge plans.
[b] Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour
interval, and a planimetric map showing the
applicable items. If a digital version of the map is
available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM
may be more easily revised.
[c] Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised 1% and
0.2% annual chance floodplains and floodway
boundaries.
[d] If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital
mapping data (GIS or CADD) are used, then all
supporting documentation or metadata must be
included with the data submission along with the
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and
State Plane Coordinate System in accordance with
FEMA mapping specifications.
[e] The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the
effective floodplain boundaries.
[f] All cross sections from the effective model shall be
labeled in accordance with the effective map and a
cross section lookup table shall be included to relate
to the model input numbering scheme.
[g] Both the current and proposed floodways shall be
shown on the map.
[h] The stream center line or profile baseline used to
measure stream distances in the model shall be visible
on the map.
(4) Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter
shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The permit may
be extended for a maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient
cause.
C. Certificate of compliance.
(1) No land shall be occupied or used and no building which is
hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired,
rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of
compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator, except where no
permit is required, subject to the following provisions:
(a) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof and the proposed use conform to the
provisions of this chapter;
§ 466-35 MONONA CODE § 466-35
1:552
§ 466-36. Fees.295
All fees required under this chapter are set forth in the City's Fee Schedule.
§ 466-37. Plan Commission.
§ 466-38. Board of Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals ("Board") shall exercise the following powers
concerning the provisions of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall
not be the Secretary of the Board.
(b) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit;
(c) If all provisions of this chapter are met, the certificate of
compliance shall be issued within 10 days after written
notification that the permitted work is completed;
(d) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a
registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor
that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are in
compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures
also require certification by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the requirements of § 466-41 are met.
(2) The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of
compliance for a building, premises or part thereof according to
rules and regulations established by the City.
D. Other permits. The applicant must secure all necessary permits from
federal, state and local agencies, including, but not limited to, those
required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under § 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1344.
A. The Plan Commission shall:
(1) Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning Administrator; and
(2) Review and advise the Common Council on all proposed
amendments to this chapter, maps and text.
B. The Plan Commission shall not:
(1) Grant variances to the terms of this chapter in place of action by
the Zoning Board of Appeals; or
(2) Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the
Common Council.
295. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 466-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-38
1:553
A. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall:
(1) Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
(2) Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the
district boundaries shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
(3) Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the
standards established by this chapter.
(4) Conditional use. Hear and decide applications for any conditional
use permits required by this chapter.
B. Appeals to the Board.
(1) Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by
any officer or department of the City affected by any decision of the
Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal
shall be taken within 30 days, unless otherwise provided by the
rules of the Board, by filing with the official whose decision is in
question and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the
reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in question
shall transmit to the Board all records regarding the matter
appealed.
(2) Notice and hearing for appeals including variances.
(a) Notice. The Board shall:
[1] Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
[2] Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes,
specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing;
[3] Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest
and the Department regional office at least 10 days in
advance of the hearing.
(b) Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The
Board shall:
[1] Resolve boundary disputes according to § 466-38C.
[2] Decide variance applications according to § 466-38D.
[3] Decide appeals of permit denials according to § 466-40.
(c) Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
[1] Be made within a reasonable time;
§ 466-38 MONONA CODE § 466-38
1:554
[2] Be sent to the Department regional office within 10 days of
the decision;
[3] Be a written determination signed by the Chairperson or
Secretary of the Board;
[4] State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board's
decision;
[5] Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole
or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction, or
grant or deny the variance application;
[6] Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a
variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the
Board proceedings.
C. Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the Board
in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries:
(1) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or
detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall
prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may
be examined.
(2) The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical
evidence to the Board.
(3) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform the
Plan Commission or the person contesting the boundary location to
petition the Common Council for a map amendment according to
Article X, Amendments.
D. Variance.
(1) The Board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards
of this chapter if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
(a) Literal enforcement of the provisions this chapter will cause
unnecessary hardship;
(b) The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and
unique property conditions not common to adjacent lots or
premises. In such case, the relevant provisions of this chapter
or the map must be amended;
(c) The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
(d) The variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter in
§ 466-3.
§ 466-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-38
1:555
§ 466-39. Conditional use permits.
(2) In addition to the criteria in Subsection D(1), to qualify for a
variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be
met:
(a) The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional flood
elevation;
(b) Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than onehalf
acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed
below the RFE;
(c) Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall
not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall
not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts, and shall not be
contrary to the purpose of this chapter.
(3) A variance shall not:
(a) Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district.
(b) Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or
loss.
(c) Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
(d) Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the
area.
(e) Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or
map(s) required in Article X, Amendments, § 466-44.
(f) Allow any alteration of a historic structure, including its use,
which would preclude its continued designation as a historic
structure.
(4) When a floodplain variance is granted, the Board shall notify the
applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life and property
and flood insurance premiums could increase up to $25 per $100 of
coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the variance record.
A. Application. Any use listed as a conditional use in this chapter shall be
permitted only after an application has been submitted to the Zoning
Administrator and a conditional use permit has been granted by the
Board of Appeals, following the procedures in § 466-38. To secure
information upon which to base its determination, the Board of Appeals
may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information
required for a building/zoning permit, other pertinent information
which is necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent with
the purpose of this chapter.
§ 466-38 MONONA CODE § 466-39
1:556
§ 466-40. Review of appeals of permit denials.
§ 466-41. Floodproofing.
B. Conditions. Upon consideration of the permit application and the
standards applicable to the permitted uses in this chapter, the Board of
Appeals shall attach such conditions to a conditional use permit, in
addition to those required elsewhere in this chapter, as are necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter as listed in § 466-3. Such conditions
may include specifications for, without limitation because of specific
enumeration, type of shore cover; erosion-protection measures;
increased side yard setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water
supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation;
operational control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks,
parking areas and signs; and type of construction.
A. The Board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may include:
(1) Permit application data listed in § 466-35B.
(2) Floodway/flood-fringe determination data in § 466-21.
(3) Data listed in § 466-13A(2)(b) where the applicant has not
submitted this information to the Zoning Administrator.
(4) Other data submitted with the application or submitted to the
Board with the appeal.
B. For appeals of all denied permits the Board shall:
(1) Follow the procedures of § 466-38;
(2) Consider Plan Commission recommendations; and
(3) Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
C. For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation, the Board
shall:
(1) Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data showing
an increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after
amending the flood profile and map and all appropriate legal
arrangements are made with all adversely affected property
owners as per the requirements of Article X, Amendments; and
(2) Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly
demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase, provided
no other reasons for denial exist.
A. No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure
designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the
applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure
§ 466-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-41
1:557
§ 466-42. Public information.
or development to the flood-protection elevation and submits a FEMA
floodproofing certificate.
B. For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or
variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either:
(1) Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
(2) Meets or exceeds the following standards:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
(1) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces and other regional flood factors;
(2) Protect structures to the flood-protection elevation;
(3) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement;
(4) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters; and
(5) Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters.
D. Floodproofing measures could include:
(1) Reinforcing walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse caused by
water pressure or floating debris.
(2) Adding mass or weight to prevent flotation.
(3) Placing essential utilities above the flood-protection elevation.
(4) Installing surface or subsurface drainage systems to relieve
foundation wall and basement floor pressures.
(5) Constructing water supply wells and waste treatment systems to
prevent the entry of floodwaters.
(6) Putting cutoff valves on sewer lines or eliminating gravity-flow
basement drains.
§ 466-41 MONONA CODE § 466-42
1:558
A. Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the
regional flood.
B. All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and
widely distributed.
C. All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any
real property is in.
§ 466-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-42
1:559

ARTICLE X
Amendments
§ 466-43. Obstructions or increases.
§ 466-44. General.
The Common Council may change or supplement the floodplain zoning
district boundaries and this chapter in the manner outlined in § 466-45
below. Actions which require an amendment to the ordinance and/or
submittal of a letter of map change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to,
the following:
A. Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are
made to this chapter, the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway
lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with § 466-44.
B. In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall
be permitted unless the applicant receives a conditional letter of map
revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the
Official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines and water surface
profiles, in accordance with § 466-44. Any such alterations must be
reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR.
C. In A Zones, increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be
permitted if the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision
from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the official
Floodplain Maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in
accordance with § 466-44.
A. Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any
increase in the regional flood height;
B. Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations
on the FIRM;
C. Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in
§ 466-5B;
D. Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height
at or above the flood-protection elevation and is contiguous to land
lying outside the floodplain;
E. Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and
floodplain maps;
F. Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by § NR
116.05, Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by
the City;
G. All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines
or to remove an area from the floodway or the flood-fringe that is based
on a base flood elevation from a FIRM require prior approval by FEMA.
§ 466-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-45
1:561
§ 466-45. Procedures.
Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any party according
to the provisions of § 62.23, Wis. Stats. The petitions shall include all data
required by §§ 466-21 and 466-30B. The land use permit shall not be issued
until a letter of map revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed changes.
A. The proposed amendment shall be referred to the Plan Commission for
a public hearing and recommendation to the Common Council. The
amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the
Department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The
amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of § 62.23, Wis.
Stats.
B. No amendments pursuant to this section shall become effective until
reviewed and approved by the Department.
C. All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow,
causing any increase in the regional flood height, shall obtain flooding
easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely
affected property owners and notify local units of government before
the amendment can be approved by the Common Council.
§ 466-45 MONONA CODE § 466-45
1:562
ARTICLE XI
Enforcement
§ 466-46. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be
unlawful and shall be referred to the City Attorney, who shall expeditiously
prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, be subject to
a forfeiture as provided in § 1-4 of the Code, together with the taxable costs
of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate
offense. Every violation of this chapter is a public nuisance, and the creation
may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the
City, the state or any citizen thereof pursuant to § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
§ 466-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-46
1:563

ARTICLE XII
Definitions
§ 466-47. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this chapter shall have
their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their
common usage. Words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular number includes the plural; and the plural number includes the
singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and is not
discretionary.
§ 466-48. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A facility, structure, building or use
which is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure
or building.
AH ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
ALTERATION — An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or
modifications other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other systems within a
structure.
AO ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH or
VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a onepercent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
A ZONES — Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map
which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be
numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be
reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given
area.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and
depicted on a FIRM.
BASEMENT — Any enclosed area of a building having its floor subgrade,
i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the
Department pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and which allows limited filling
§ 466-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-48
1:565
between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water mark,
except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this
chapter.
CAMPGROUND — Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent
overnight use by four or more camping units, or which is advertised or
represented as a camping area.
CAMPING UNIT — Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in
area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping
trailer, motor home, bus, van, pickup truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if
required, and ready for highway use.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification that the construction and
the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a
structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks
to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
CRAWLWAYS or CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area below the first usable
floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to
plumbing and electrical utilities.
DECK — An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has
a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of
any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure,
regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of
buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the
storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the
installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems
or water supply facilities.
DRY LAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the regional
flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land
outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood
elevation, and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in
the floodway.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The probability of a flood occurrence which is
determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood
§ 466-48 MONONA CODE § 466-48
1:566
event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified
number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year.
FLOOD-FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway
which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated
with standing water rather than flowing water.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map designating approximate flood
hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A Zones
and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map
forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood
Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of a community on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be
amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A technical engineering examination,
evaluation and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides
maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides
both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide
floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and
unnumbered A Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps that accompany the
Flood Insurance Study form the basis for both the regulatory and the
insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the
following conditions:
FLOODPLAIN — Land which has been or may be covered by floodwater
during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the flood-fringe and
may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
FLOODPLAIN ISLAND — A natural geologic land formation within the
floodplain that is surrounded but not covered by floodwater during the
regional flood.
A. The overflow or rise of inland waters;
B. The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake
Superior; or
C.
The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
D.
§ 466-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-48
1:567
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — Policy and procedures to ensure wise use
of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education
and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of
land surface elevations along a stream or river.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and
contents of buildings subject to flooding for the purpose of reducing or
eliminating flood damage.
FLOOD-PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation of two feet of freeboard
above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood.
(Also see "freeboard.")
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters
has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood
discharge.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FREEBOARD — A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number
of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any
factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice
jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and
floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas
due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE — Any structure or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
HEARING NOTICE — Publication or posting meeting the requirements
of Ch. 985, Wis. Stats. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at
least one week (seven days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning
ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice, published twice, once each
week consecutively, the last at least a week (seven days) before the hearing.
Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice exceeding these
minimums.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Damage that could result from
flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant
economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is either:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
§ 466-48 MONONA CODE § 466-48
1:568
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward rise in
the regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison of
existing conditions and proposed conditions, which is directly attributable
to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of
mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and
contraction coefficients, and discharge.
LAND USE — Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real
estate. (Also see "development.")
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE — Elevation of the lowest ground surface that
touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation-design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MAINTENANCE — The act or process of restoring to original soundness,
including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the
replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent
fixtures, systems or structures.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does
not include a "mobile recreational vehicle."
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO EXISTING —
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This
includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by
an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior, or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
D.
§ 466-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-48
1:569
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING —
A parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
is completed before the effective date of this chapter. At a minimum, this
would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection; designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by
a licensed, light-duty vehicle; is licensed for highway use if registration is
required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land,
but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model
homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles."
MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE — A hydraulic engineering model that
corrects any errors that occur in the duplicate effective model, adds any
additional cross sections to the duplicate effective model, or incorporates
more detailed topographic information than that used in the current
effective model.
MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE — A copy of the hydraulic analysis used
in the effective FIS and referred to as the "effective model."
MODEL, EFFECTIVE — The hydraulic engineering model that was used to
produce the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
MODEL, EXISTING (PREPROJECT) — A modification of the duplicate
effective model or corrected effective model to reflect any man-made
modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the
effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which the
revision is being requested. If no modification has occurred since the date
of the effective model, then this model would be identical to the corrected
effective model or duplicate effective model.
MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) — A modification of the existing or
preproject conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected
effective model to reflect revised or post-project conditions.
MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL — The City of Monona.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, "new
construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations
adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it
includes any structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
§ 466-48 MONONA CODE § 466-48
1:570
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — An existing lawful structure or
building which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural
requirements of this chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies.
(For example, an existing residential structure in the flood-fringe district
is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is lower than the floodprotection
elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
NONCONFORMING USE — An existing lawful use or accessory use of a
structure or building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence
in the floodway.)
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development which blocks the conveyance
of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future
development will cause an increase in regional flood height.
OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP — That map, adopted and made
part of this chapter, as described in § 466-5B, which has been approved by
the Department and FEMA.
OPEN SPACE USE — Those uses having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristic.
PERSON — An individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality or state agency.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving one structure, with a septic tank and soil absorption field located
on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage
system approved by the Department of Safety and Professional Services,
including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding
tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a
different parcel than the structure.
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and
distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm
sewer.
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Means base floodwaters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain
and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage
existing or proposed buildings.
§ 466-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-48
1:571
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with
a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year and,
if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement
of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground,
streambed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled
buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
SUBDIVISION — Has the meaning given in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the equalized assessed value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure
has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial
improvement regardless of the work preformed. The term does not,
however, include either any project for the improvement of a building
required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations
identified by the Building Official and that are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a historic structure,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — Where special conditions affecting a
particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict
conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or
density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes
of the ordinance.
§ 466-48 MONONA CODE § 466-48
1:572
VARIANCE — An authorization by the Board of Appeals for the construction
or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent
with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the Floodplain Zoning
Ordinance.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without
required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing
certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATERSHED — The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a
reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of
the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
WELL — An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods to obtain groundwater, regardless of its
intended use.
§ 466-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-48
1:573
Chapter 473
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Erosion and stormwater control — See Ch.
216.
Waterways — See Ch. 450.
Floodplain and shoreland-wetland
zoning — See Ch. 466.
Zoning — See Ch. 480.
§ 473-1. Preliminary plat.
§ 473-2. Final plat.
A. Submission and review.
(1) A subdivider wishing to subdivide land as defined in § 236.02(8),
Wis. Stats., shall present the preliminary plat and three copies (one
copy being reduced to 11 inches by 17 inches) and one topographic
map to the Plan Commission.
(2) The Plan Commission shall conduct a preliminary review of the
proposed plat. A copy of the proposed plat shall also be forwarded
to the Public Works Committee for review and recommendation.
The topographic map shall be referred to the City Engineer for
review and comment.
(3) The Public Works Committee shall, within 30 days of receipt of the
proposed plat, return the copy of the plat to the Plan Commission
along with its recommendations and suggestions regarding the
plat.
(4) The Plan Commission shall review the preliminary plat together
with all recommendations and shall approve, conditionally approve
or reject the preliminary plat and shall recommend its action to the
Common Council. The Common Council shall, likewise, approve,
conditionally approve or reject the preliminary plat within 90 days
of its original submission and shall notify the subdivider in writing
of any conditional approval or reasons for rejection.
(5) The ninety-day time period set forth in Subsection A(4) above may
be extended by agreement with the subdivider.
B. Failure to act. If the Plan Commission or the Common Council fail to act
on the preliminary plat within 90 days of its submission or agreed
extension thereof, the preliminary plat shall be considered approved.
A. Within thirty-six months after the Common Council has approved the
preliminary plat, the developer shall present the final plat to the Plan
Commission for approval. Failure to present the final plat within 36
§ 466-48 MONONA CODE § 473-2
1:574
§ 473-3. Public improvements.
months of approval of the preliminary plat shall be sufficient grounds
for the Plan Commission or the Common Council to refuse to approve
the final plat.296
B. Within 60 days after submission of the final plat, the Plan Commission
shall review the final plat and determine whether it meets all conditions
of the approved or conditionally approved preliminary plat and shall
recommend its action to the Common Council. The Council shall, within
60 days of the original submission of the final plat, approve or reject the
final plat. If rejected, the subdivider shall be notified in writing of the
preliminary plat conditions that have not been complied with. The sixtyday
approval period may be extended by agreement with the developer.
C. If the Council fails to act on the final plat within 60 days of its
submission or agreed extension thereof, the plat is approved.
D. The subdivider shall obtain any necessary approval of state agencies or
departments.
(1) The subdivider shall obtain all required signatures to all required
certificates. The City Clerk and City Treasurer shall be the last two
signatures to be affixed to the final plat before submission to the
county.
E. The subdivider shall present the plat for recording within 12 months of
the date of the last approval of the plat and within 36 months of the first
approval, in order to sustain an approved status.297
F. The subdivider shall file two copies of the recorded final plat with the
City Clerk.
A. Security. Except as provided in Subsection B, public improvements in
new subdivisions or lot divisions shall be installed and financed as
follows:
(1) The subdivider shall prepare a design of water, sewer and storm
sewer facilities required and shall establish road grade and
elevations after the final plat has been recorded. The subdivider
shall also prepare cost estimates of water, sewer, storm sewer
facilities and cost estimates of grading and graveling of streets. All
work performed by the subdivider pursuant to this subsection shall
be per applicable City standards and/or additional or other
standards set forth by the City Engineer and shall be subject to
review and approval by the City Engineer.
296. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
297. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 473-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 473-3
1:575
(2) The subdivider shall deposit in full financial surety with the City
Treasurer the costs estimated by the Engineer under Subsection
A(1), unless the Common Council has determined that the
developer may proceed under Subsection B hereof.
B. Public improvements in tax incremental finance districts. If the
Common Council determines that development of a particular project
or parcel in a tax incremental finance district is in the best interest of
the City and such development is unlikely to proceed due to the cost
associated with public improvements, the Common Council may direct
that the public improvements be installed by the City at the City's
expense. In that event, the City shall levy special assessments against
the benefited properties to offset all or part of the cost of the public
improvements. Special assessments levied under this subsection shall
be deemed special assessments for local improvements under
§ 66.0701, Wis. Stats. The provisions of § 66.0703, Wis. Stats., relating
to notice and waiver of hearing, and of § 66.0701, Wis. Stats., relating
to lien and appeals of local special assessments, shall apply to
assessments levied pursuant to this section.
C. Option of developer to install public improvements.
(1) In tax incremental finance districts, the Common Council may allow
developers the option of assuming responsibility for installation of
public improvements described in Subsection A as herein provided.
(2) Prior to the recording of a final plat or approval of the development,
the developer shall furnish the City with financial surety equal to
110% of the estimated constructed costs and a copy of a private
contract for installation of public improvements, both approved by
the City Engineer in accordance with guidelines established under
Subsection C(1). The surety shall guarantee payment of 110% of
the final project cost and hold the owner harmless from all claims,
including any defects in workmanship or material, for a period of
one year after the project improvements are completed and
transferred to the City. If approved by the Common Council, an
irrevocable letter of credit may be substituted in whole or in part
for the financial surety.
(3) Upon certification by the City Engineer that the construction has
been completed and meets all City requirements for public
improvements and by the City Clerk that the developer has filed the
necessary financial surety and satisfied all outstanding claims for
work on the project, the City Engineer shall prepare and
recommend to the Common Council a resolution for purchase of
the improvements by the City on such terms and conditions as the
Council deems in the best interests of the City. Payment in whole or
part for the improvements may be made from the City general fund,
general obligation or revenue borrowings, tax incremental funds,
special assessments against benefited property or any combination
thereof.
§ 473-3 MONONA CODE § 473-3
1:576
§ 473-4. Land divisions.
(4) Special assessments levied under this section shall be deemed
special assessments for local improvements under § 66.0701, Wis.
Stats. The provisions of §§ 66.0701 and 66.0703, Wis. Stats.,
relating to notice and waiver of hearing, and of § 66.0701, Wis.
Stats., relating to lien and appeals of local special assessments,
shall apply to assessments levied pursuant to this section.
(5) The City Engineer shall prepare a standard procedure manual
implementing the provisions of this section. After review and
approval by the Common Council, the Manual of Procedure for
Installation of Improvements in Tax Incremental Financing
Districts shall be kept on file in the office of the City Engineer and
be open to public inspection; compliance with the Manual shall be
deemed a condition of approval of subdivisions or developments
within tax incremental financing districts in the City.
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LAND DIVISION — The division of any parcel of land within the City for
purposes of sale or building development. It shall not include:
(1) Transfers of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order.
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or easements.
The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of
adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and
the parcels resulting are not reduced below the minimum lot sizes
required by this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances.
(3)
Land division creating four or more lots or building sites within a
period of five years.
(4)
B. Certified survey map. A division creating not more than four lots in a
period of five years. Any person desiring to accomplish land division by
certified survey map shall file with the Plan Commission a certified
survey map as defined in § 236.34, Wis. Stats., and eight acceptable
copies thereof together with a written application for approval at least
five days prior to the meeting of the Plan Commission at which action is
desired.
C. Public hearing. The Plan Commission may schedule a public hearing on
the proposed land division before taking action. In such case, the City
Clerk shall give notice of the proposed land division to property owners
within the area in which the land division is proposed as shall be
deemed necessary.
D. Review of division. The proposed land division shall be reviewed by the
Plan Commission and the Public Works Committee for conformity with
§ 473-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 473-4
1:577
§ 473-5. General park and public land dedication requirements.
the provisions of this Code and the Official Map and Master Plan of the
City.
E. Access to streets required. No proposed land division shall be approved
unless the resulting lots front on a dedicated street at least 60 feet in
width.
F. Action on application. The Plan Commission and Council shall, within
90 days of application, approve, approve conditionally, or reject the
proposed land division. The applicant shall be notified in writing of any
conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection.
G. Compliance with statutes. The certified survey map shall comply with
§ 236.34, Wis. Stats., which is adopted by reference as part of this
chapter.
H. Variances. When in the judgment of the Plan Commission or Council, it
would be inappropriate to apply literally any of the provisions of this
chapter because extraordinary hardship would result, the Council may
grant such variance from the provisions hereof so that substantial
justice may be done and the public interests secured.
A. Dedication requirement. In order that adequate open spaces and sites
for public uses may be properly located and reserved and in order that
the cost of providing public areas, such as but not limited to parks,
recreation areas and public schools ay be equitably apportioned on the
basis of additional need created by a certified survey or subdivision
development or residential development where a zoning permit is
required under § 480-52 to add dwelling units to a previously platted lot
or lots, each subdivider or developer shall be required to dedicate land
or pay fees in lieu of land for park or other public uses.
B. General design. In the design of a subdivision, land division, planned
unit development or certified survey, provision shall be made for
suitable sites of adequate area for schools, parks, playgrounds, open
spaces, drainageways and other public purposes. Such sites are to be
shown on the preliminary plat and final plat and shall comply with the
City Master Plan or components of said Plan. Consideration shall be
given to the preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands of trees,
marshes, lakes, ponds, streams, watercourses, watersheds, ravines and
woodlands, prairie and wetlands, and plant and animal communities.
C. Site reservations required.
(1) Where the area proposed to be divided contains a park, playground
or other public area which is shown upon the Master Plan of the
City, at the Common Council's determination such area shall either
be dedicated to the proper public agency or it shall be reserved for
acquisition thereby within a three-year period by purchase or other
§ 473-4 MONONA CODE § 473-5
1:578
means. If the land is not acquired during this period, it shall be
released to the subdivider.
(2) Whenever any river, stream or important surface drainagecourse is
located in the area being divided, the subdivider of land shall
provide an easement along each side of the river, stream or
drainagecourse for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating,
improving or protecting the river, stream or drainagecourse for
drainage or recreational use.
D. Land dedication.
(1) Dedication of sites. Where feasible and compatible with the
comprehensive or master plan of the City, the subdivider shall
provide and dedicate to the public adequate land to provide for
park, recreation, school and open space needs of the land
development within the City of Monona. The location of such land
to be dedicated shall be determined by the Common Council.
Where the dedication is not compatible with the comprehensive or
master plan or for other reasons is not feasible as recommended by
the Plan Commission and as approved by the Common Council, the
subdivider shall, in lieu thereof, pay to the City a fee as established
by this chapter, or a combination thereof.
(2) Dedication of parks, playgrounds, recreation and open spaces. The
developer shall dedicate sufficient land area to provide adequate
park, playground, recreation and open space to meet the needs to
be created by and to be provided for the land division, subdivision
or comprehensive development. The minimum dedication shall be
2,000 square feet per proposed dwelling unit.
(3) Unknown number of dwelling units. Where the plat, certified
survey or condominium does not specify the number of dwelling
units to be constructed, the land dedication shall be based upon the
maximum number of units permitted by Chapter 480, Zoning, and
this chapter.
(4) Minimum size of park and playground dedications.
(a) In general, land reserved for recreation purposes shall have an
area of at least two acres. Where the amount of land to be
dedicated is less than two acres, the Common Council may
require that the recreation area be located at a suitable place
on the edge of the proposed land division, subdivision or
certified survey so that additional land may be added at such
time that the adjacent land is subdivided. In no case shall an
area of less than one acre be reserved for recreational
purposes if it will be impractical or impossible to secure
additional lands in order to increase its area.
(b) Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a character
and location suitable for use as a playground, play field or for
§ 473-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 473-5
1:579
other recreation purposes and shall be relatively level and dry.
A recreation site shall have a total frontage on one or more
streets of at least 200 feet, and no other dimension of the site
shall be less than 200 feet.
(5) Fees in lieu of land.
(a) Where in the sole discretion of the Common Council there is no
land suitable for parks within the proposed land division or the
dedication of land would not be compatible with the City's
comprehensive development or park plan, the minimum size
under Subsection D(4) above cannot be met, or City officials
determine that a cash contribution would better serve the
public interest, the Common Council shall require the
subdivider to contribute a park and recreation development
fee in lieu of land. The fees collected shall be held in a
nonlapsing fund to be used for purchase, development,
improvement and maintenance of parks, playgrounds, open
spaces and other recreational sites and facilities. A fee shall be
paid as set by the Common Council in the City's Fee Schedule
prior to issuance of a building permit.298
(b) The Common Council may in its sole discretion permit the
subdivider to satisfy the requirements of this chapter by
combining a land dedication with a fee payment. If a land
dedication of 25% of the required dedication is made, the
subdivider shall also contribute an amount equal to 75% of the
required per-unit fee in lieu of land. If a land dedication of 50%
of the required dedication is made, the subdivider shall also
contribute an amount equal to 50% of the required per-unit fee
in lieu of land. If a land dedication of 75% of the required
dedication is made, the subdivider shall also contribute an
amount equal to 25% of the required per-unit fee in lieu of
land.
(c) The City shall place any fee collected pursuant to the
provisions of this section in a separate account to be used at
the discretion of the Common Council in any community park,
for developing adequate parks, playgrounds, recreation and
open spaces.
(6) Extraterritorial areas. Where the land division, subdivision or
comprehensive development is situated within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City and the town operates and maintains a park
system, the parkland area dedicated to the town or fees paid to the
town in lieu of such dedication shall be credited against any
dedication required by or fee imposed pursuant to this section.
298. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 473-5 MONONA CODE § 473-5
1:580
(7) Limitations. A subdivider shall not be required to dedicate more
than 1/3 of the total area of the plat to meet the objectives of this
section.
(8) Suitability of lands. The Common Council shall have sole authority
to determine the suitability and adequacy of parklands proposed
for dedication. Drainageways, wetlands or areas reserved for
streets shall not be considered as satisfying land dedication
requirements.
(9) Access to dedicated land. All dedicated land shall have frontage on
a public street and shall have unrestricted public access.
(10) Utility extensions. The subdivider shall install or provide for
installation of water and sanitary sewer lines to the property line of
all dedicated land where such services are to be provided to the
adjacent properties.
E. Reservation of additional land. When public parks and sites for other
public areas as shown on the Master Plan or Master Plan component lie
within the proposed area for development and are greater in area than
required by Subsection D, the owner shall reserve for acquisition by the
City, through agreement, purchase or condemnation, the remaining
greater public area for a period of one year of final plat approval unless
extended by mutual agreement.
F. Development of park area.
(1) When parklands are dedicated to the City, the subdivider is
required to:
(a) Properly grade and contour for proper drainage;
(b) Provide surface contour suitable for anticipated use of area as
approved by the City Engineer; and
(c) Cover areas to be seeded with a minimum of four inches of
quality topsoil, seed as specified by the City Engineer, fertilized
with 16-6-6 at a rate of seven pounds per 1,000 square feet,
and mulched as specified in the standard "Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction, Sections 627 and 629." The
topsoil furnished for the park site shall consist of the natural
loam, sandy loam, silt loam, silty clay loam or clay loam humusbearing
soils adapted to the sustenance of plant life, and such
topsoil shall be neither excessively acid nor excessively
alkaline. Fine grading and seeding must occur within one year
following issuance of the first building permit within that land
division unless otherwise authorized by the Common Council.
The improved area shall not be deemed officially accepted until
a uniform grass cover to a two-inch height has been
established. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to
maintain the area until the City accepts the dedication.
§ 473-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 473-5
1:581
§ 473-6. Administrative and other fees.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the City to maintain the dedicated
areas upon their dedication and acceptance by the City.
(3) A neighborhood park area shall be provided by the subdivider with
a standard residential water service unless located directly
adjacent to a fire hydrant. A community park area shall be provided
by the developer with a minimum six-inch water service or at least
one fire hydrant and at least one four-inch sanitary sewer lateral,
all located at the street property line.
(4) The Common Council may require certification of compliance by
the subdivider with this chapter. The cost of such report shall be
paid by the subdivider.
(5) If the subdivider fails to satisfy the requirements of this section, the
Common Council may contract said completion and bill such costs
to the subdivider following a public hearing and written notice to
the subdivider of noncompliance. Failure to pay such costs may
result in the immediate withholding of all building permits until
such costs are paid.
(6) The subdivider shall pay all costs of public improvements in the
public streets adjacent to or within all public and/or park lands.
A. General. The subdivider shall pay the City of Monona all fees as
hereinafter required and at the times specified before being entitled to
recording of a plat or certified survey map. At the time of submission of
a plat or certified survey, the Plan Commission, at its sole discretion,
may require the subdivider to make a good faith deposit with the City
Clerk to cover, in all or part, the expenses anticipated to be incurred by
the City because of the land division. Unused portions of such fund may
be refunded to the subdivider.
B. Engineering fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost
to the City for all engineering work incurred by the City in connection
with the plat or certified survey map, including inspections required by
the City. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the
City for such engineering work and inspection as the Common Council
and/or City Engineer deems necessary to assure that the construction
of the required improvements is in compliance with the plans,
specifications and ordinances of the City or any other governmental
authority. Engineering work shall include the preparation of
construction plans, standard specifications and administration of the
engineering work.
C. Administrative fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee to the City equal to
the cost of any legal, administrative or fiscal work which may be
undertaken by the City in connection with the plat or certified survey
map.
§ 473-5 MONONA CODE § 473-6
1:582
D. Concept plan. There shall be no fee for the City's review of a concept or
sketch plan of a proposed land division. However, such reviews shall be
conducted only as staff time permits.
E. Preliminary plat.299
(1) A subdivider who submits a preliminary plat for the Plan
Commission and the Common Council shall file said preliminary
plat with the City Clerk and shall deposit with the City Clerk a fee
as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule to cover the costs of
reviewing said application. If the plat is rejected, no part of the fee
shall be returned to the petitioner.
(2) A reapplication fee as set in the City's Fee Schedule shall be paid to
the City Clerk at the time of reapplication for approval or
amendment of any preliminary plat which has previously been
reviewed.
F. Final plat review fee.300
(1) The subdivider shall pay a fee as set forth in the City's Fee
Schedule for every lot within the final plat.
(2) A reapplication fee as set forth in the City's Fee Schedule shall be
paid to the City Clerk at the time of a reapplication for approval or
amendment of any final plat which has previously been reviewed.
G. Certified survey.301
(1) The subdivider shall pay an application fee plus a fee per lot as set
forth in the City's Fee Schedule for each lot in a certified survey
map submitted for Plan Commission and Common Council review.
(2) Should the subdivider submit an amended or revised certified
survey, the resubmittal fee shall be as set forth in the City's Fee
Schedule for each amended or revised certified survey.
H. Objecting agency review fees. The subdivider shall transmit all fees
required for state agency review to the City Clerk at the time of
application. Said review fees shall be retransmitted to the proper state
review agency by the City Clerk. Said fees shall be applicable, where
appropriate, to review fees required by the Wisconsin Department of
Development, Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services and the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
299. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
300. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
301. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 473-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 473-6
1:583
§ 473-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in § 1-4 of the Code of the City of Monona.
Sections 236.30 and 236.31, Wis. Stats., shall also be available remedies for
violations of this chapter.
I. Public site fee. If the subdivision does not contain lands to be dedicated
as required in this chapter, the City Clerk shall require a fee pursuant to
§ 473-5 for the acquisition and development of public sites to serve the
future inhabitants of the proposed subdivision.
J. Assessments. All outstanding assessments due to the City shall be due
prior to the signing of the final plat or certified survey by the City.
K. Cost determination. The subdivider of land divisions within the City
shall reimburse the City for its actual cost of design, inspection, testing,
construction and associated legal and real estate fees incurred in
connection with the preliminary plat, final plat, replat or certified
survey. The City's costs shall be determined as follows:
(1) The cost of City employees' time engaged in any way with the land
division, based on the hourly rate paid to the employee multiplied
by a factor determined by the City Clerk to represent the City's cost
for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, vacation and
similar benefits.
(2) The cost of City equipment employed.
(3) The cost of mileage reimbursed to City employees which is
attributed to the land division.
(4) The actual costs of City materials incorporated into the work,
including transportation costs plus a restocking and/or handling
fee not to exceed 10% of the cost of the materials.
(5) All consultant fees, including but not limited to legal and
engineering, at the invoiced amount plus administrative costs.
Unless the amount totals less than $50, the City shall bill the
subdivider monthly for expenses incurred by the City. Statements
outstanding for more than 30 days shall accrue interest at the rate
of 1 1/2% per month. Bills outstanding for more than 90 days shall
be forwarded to the subdivider's surety agency for payment.
Amounts less than $50 shall be held for billing by the City until
amounts total more than $50 or until the conclusion of project
activities.
§ 473-6 MONONA CODE § 473-7
1:584
Chapter 480
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plan Commission — See § 18-1.
Zoning Board of Appeals — See § 18-2.
Landmarks Commission — See § 18-8.
Community Development Authority — See
§ 18-11.
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 145.
Building construction — See Ch. 175.
Erosion and stormwater control — See Ch.
216.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 232.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 303.
Solid waste — See Ch. 381.
Waterways — See Ch. 450.
Floodplain and shoreland-wetland
zoning — See Ch. 466.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
473.
§ 473-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 473-7
1:585

ARTICLE I
Introduction; Performance Requirements
§ 480-1. Performance zoning.
A. This is a performance zoning code, which differs from traditional
specification zoning. The previous Monona Zoning Ordinance was a
specification ordinance, with rigid lists of permitted, conditional and
prohibited uses for each district. For all districts there were regulations
to specify the exact minimum lot and yard dimensions, building heights
and setbacks, and open space requirements. Complicated procedures
were required to obtain permission for minor variances from the
regulations, yet the regulations were unsuccessful in preventing
development which was unattractive, environmentally unsound and
incompatible with the needs of the community.
B. Performance zoning substitutes sensible judgment and efficient
administration for rigid regulations. The intent of this performance
zoning code is to regulate development according to flexible standards,
with individual review of each development proposal. Proposed
developments are to be judged on the basis of their compatibility with
the land, the environment, surrounding uses, the goals of the
Comprehensive Plan, general use and site performance standards and
specific district performance standards.
C. Monona is a landlocked community. Since Monona is almost fully
developed, it is crucial that the development of its remaining vacant
land be carefully regulated to meet the community's needs for services,
a diversity of housing, economic growth, jobs convenient to employees'
homes, and an improved environmental and aesthetic quality. Monona
faces the conditions of scarce land and an impending shift from the
rapid development of raw land to a slower process of redevelopment of
existing uses. Under these circumstances, maintenance of the quality of
life in Monona requires individual project review according to
performance standards instead of specification standards, which were
more appropriate when Monona was less developed and more rapidly
growing.
D. In many cases, the specification zoning previously used in Monona
obstructed creative and desirable development because the zoning
regulations were too rigid and arbitrary and because any deviation from
these regulations required cumbersome administrative and
governmental procedures. This performance zoning code is designed to
be more flexible and to use more efficient administrative and
governmental procedures. In order to avoid delays in processing
development applications, this chapter establishes strict time limits for
the review process. In order to ensure administrative fairness, this
chapter requires that decisions of the reviewing agency be put in
writing and be based only on how the evidence presented to it for
review meets the standards set by this chapter.
§ 480-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-2
1:587
§ 480-2. Intent and purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are:
§ 480-3. Interpretation.
A. To promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare
of the community with due consideration of the needs of the region
affected by the City's land use policies.
B. To lessen congestion in the streets and to provide for convenient access
to property.
C. To secure safety from fire, panic, environmental hazards and other
dangers.
D. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and open space.
E. To prevent the overcrowding of land.
F. To avoid undue concentration of population.
G. To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks and other public services.
H. To conserve the value of buildings and the quality of neighborhood and
environmental amenities.
I. To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the City and
the region.
J. To regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, location and use of buildings, structures or land for
residence, trade, industry or other purposes in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan.
K. To regulate and restrict the dimensions of buildings and structures,
yards and other open spaces, and the intensity of development in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan.
L. To designate zoning districts with reasonable consideration of the
character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses.
M. To establish zoning districts of such number, shape and area as may be
deemed best suited to carry out these purposes while implementing the
goals of the Comprehensive Plan.
A. This chapter shall be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public health, safety and general welfare of the City.
B. This chapter is not intended to repeal, impair or interfere with any
existing provisions of law or ordinance or with any rules, regulations or
permits which have been or will be adopted or issued according to law
or with any private restriction placed on property by covenant,
§ 480-2 MONONA CODE § 480-3
1:588
§ 480-4. Definitions.
easement or other private agreement. But if this chapter imposes a
greater restriction than is imposed by another law, ordinance, rule,
regulation, covenant, easement or private agreement, this chapter shall
govern.
A. General. If not otherwise defined in this chapter and other provisions of
the City's Code of ordinances, words used herein have their ordinary
and accepted meanings. Words used in the present tense include the
future; the singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular. "Shall" is mandatory, not directory. The masculine includes the
feminine, and the feminine the masculine.
B. Specific definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this
chapter:
CODE — The City of Monona Zoning Code.
COMMISSION — The Plan Commission of the City of Monona.
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage, domestic
partnership or adoption, including foster children, to a member of the
family occupying the dwelling unit.302
FINISHED GRADE — Refers to the finished elevation (height) of the
ground following construction or land-altering activities, as measured
at any point on the property.303
GRADING PLAN — A plan that generally documents the natural grade
and finished grade at important reference points, such as property
boundaries, building edges, building entrances, driveway entrances
and top and bottom of retaining walls.304
HEIGHT — A distance to be measured from the lowest point of the
finished grade at any point along the structure's foundation to the
deckline of a mansard roof, the midpoint of a shed roof, to the highest
point of a flat, round or arch-type roof, or to the midpoint of the highest
gable on a pitched or hip roof.305
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any area covered by building footprints
and paved surfaces, including principal buildings, accessory buildings,
driveways, walkways, patios and parking areas, including any
nonpermeable gravel, concrete or asphalt surfaces. For waterfront
properties, the lot area used to calculate impervious surface shall
include any land between the meander line and the ordinary high-water
mark.306
302. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
303. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
304. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
305. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 480-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-4
1:589
§ 480-5. Performance code requirements.
Without complying with the requirements listed below, no person shall
construct, substantially relocate or substantially enlarge any structure or
building; and without complying with the requirements listed below, no
person shall use or substantially change the use of any land, water,
structure or building.
LOT COVERAGE — Area of the lot covered by all structures, including
but not limited to detached garages, carports, gazebos, screen
enclosures, patios, decks, storage buildings, sheds and enclosures, pet
houses/runs.307
NATURAL GRADE — Refers to the elevation (height) of the ground
prior to any land alteration or construction, as measured at any point
on the property.308
PERSONS AGGRIEVED — Includes any individual, partnership,
corporation, association, public or private organization, officer,
department, board, commission or agency of the City, whose rights,
duties or privileges are adversely affected by a determination of the
Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals.
STRUCTURE — Includes "building."
UNRELATED PERSON — Any person who is not related by blood,
marriage, domestic partnership or adoption, including foster children,
to a member of the family occupying the dwelling unit.309
A. The regulations of the zoning district. The zoning districts are shown on
the Zoning District Map, which may be examined at City Hall. This
chapter specifies the regulations for each district (§§ 480-24 through
480-38). The regulations list permitted, conditional and/or prohibited
uses for each zoning district. Uses listed as permitted are allowed in a
district, subject to review by the City for conformance to applicable
performance standards. Uses listed as conditional are allowed only
after review to make sure that the general performance standards and
any special performance standards are met. Uses listed as prohibited
are not allowed in the district.
B. The goals, objectives and policies of the Monona Comprehensive Plan,
which is adopted by reference and is on file in the office of the Zoning
Administrator.310
306. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
307. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
308. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
309. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
310. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 480-4 MONONA CODE § 480-5
1:590
C. The general performance standards, consisting of use performance
standards and site performance standards listed in §§ 480-6 through
480-23 of this chapter.
D. The appropriate district performance standards, which are included as
part of the regulations of each zoning district (§§ 480-24 through
480-38).
E. The requirement of obtaining a zoning or occupancy permit under
§§ 480-52 through 480-55.
F. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to grant a permit for a
temporary change in the use of a building or land for a period not to
exceed 30 days without Plan Commission review of the change of use.
No substantial building or land alterations are authorized by this
section.
§ 480-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-5
1:591

ARTICLE II
General Performance Standards
§ 480-6. Purpose.
Article III, Use Performance Standards, and Article IV, Site Performance
Standards, set general performance for all uses and for all zoning districts.
The performance standards are designed to permit only uses and site
arrangements which are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and which
promote the public health, safety, welfare, comfort and convenience,
without causing nuisance, hazard or environmental degradation.
§ 480-7. Comprehensive Plan. [Amended 4-19-2010 by Ord. No.
4-10-613]
In exercising their review functions under this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator, Zoning Board of Appeals, Plan Commission and the Common
Council shall consider and apply the goals, objectives and policies of the
City of Monona Comprehensive Plan and the Urban Design Guidelines for
Monona Drive. (The Comprehensive Plan is adopted by reference and is on
file in the office of the Zoning Administrator.)
§ 480-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-7
1:593

ARTICLE III
Use Performance Standards
§ 480-8. Applicability.
The following use performance standards in this article shall apply to
any construction or substantial reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure or building and to
any use or substantial change in the use of any land, water, structure or
building.
§ 480-9. General use performance standards.
A. The proposed use shall not adversely affect the character or quality of
the district or neighborhood and shall not be detrimental to the health,
safety, comfort or general welfare of the residents and workers in the
general neighborhood.
B. The proposed use shall not impede the normal and orderly development
and improvement of the area with uses permitted in the district. The
proposed use shall not cause substantial detriment to the public good or
substantially impair the intent and purpose of this chapter or the
Comprehensive Plan.
C. The proposed use shall promote economical and efficient land use, an
improved level of amenities, creative design and a better environment.
D. The proposed use shall not substantially impair or diminish the
development, use, value, character or enjoyment of other property in
the neighborhood for uses already permitted.
E. The proposed use shall not be adversely affected by existing uses in the
area.
F. The proposed use is reasonable in terms of logical, efficient and
economical provision of public services and facilities provided by the
City, school district and other units of government.
G. The proposed use is appropriate to the immediate neighborhood.
H. The proposed use is of an appropriate size, located and laid out with
respect to access streets so that vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic
to and from the use shall not create undue congestion or hazards which
would be detrimental to the character of the general neighborhood.
I. The proposed use shall be subject to conditions imposed by the Plan
Commission with respect to the minimizing of traffic congestion by
providing appropriate entrances and exits so as to assure the public
safety and by providing landscaping located to screen the premises
from any residential use or district.
J. The proposed use shall not create or add to hazards to persons or
property, on site or off site, including danger of flooding, erosion,
§ 480-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-9
1:595
§ 480-10. Operational use performance standards. [Amended
4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1-13-641]
The intent of this section is to set operational standards for uses in the
zoning districts. No use shall be permitted except in compliance with the
standards established or amended by the Department of Natural Resources
for air pollution, liquid or solid wastes, malodorous emissions and with the
following City standards:
subsidence or slipping of the soil, or other dangers, annoyances or
inconveniences. The use or development shall not create environmental
damage which will affect any other property. Conditions of soil,
groundwater level, drainage and topography shall be appropriate to
both the kind and pattern of use intended.
K. The proposed use shall be subject to such conditions and safeguards as
may be imposed by the Plan Commission to preserve and protect the
intent and purpose of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan.
L. The proposed use shall produce an attractive environment of sustained
aesthetic and ecological desirability, economic stability and functional
practicality compatible with the general policy guidelines of the
Comprehensive Plan.
M. Where feasible and appropriate, the proposed use shall contribute
towards serving regional and community needs for employment,
services, open space, moderate-cost housing, lake access and/or
recreational facilities.
A. Noise. No use shall regularly emit noise beyond the premises of the
source in excess of 65 decibels between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and 55
decibels between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any octave band of
frequency above 300 cycles per second as measured by a standard
sound level meter. Noise shall be so muffled or otherwise controlled as
not to become objectionable due to intermittence, duration, beat,
frequency, impulse character, periodic character or shrillness. Sirens,
whistles, bells, etc., which are maintained and utilized solely to serve
the public purpose, are excluded from this regulation.
B. Vibration. No use shall cause vibration which is discernible to human
feeling beyond the premises of the source.
C. Glare and heat. No use shall emit glare or heat which is visible or
measurable beyond the premises of the source.
D. Electrical disturbance. No use shall emit any electrical disturbance
which adversely affects the use of any other premises.
E. Fire and explosion hazards. All uses involving the manufacturing,
utilization, processing or storage of flammable or explosive materials
shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of
fire and explosion, as determined by the Fire Chief.
§ 480-9 MONONA CODE § 480-10
1:596
§ 480-11. Home occupations.
§ 480-12. Garage sales.
F. Outside storage. All materials, equipment and receptacles and
containers for refuse and recyclables shall be stored within a building
or be fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties,
except for clotheslines and construction and landscaping materials and
equipment currently being used or intended for use within a period of
12 months on the premises. No exterior storage shall be permitted
which has a depreciating effect on nearby property values, impairs
scenic views, constitutes a threat to living amenities or which is a
hazard to public health, safety or morals.
G. Screening of HVAC and mechanicals. All building and site heating,
ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) and other mechanical
equipment shall be screened from view with materials and landscaping
complementary and harmonious to the building and site.
A. Any occupation may be conducted and permitted in a residence if it
complies with this section and all other applicable codes.
B. A home occupation shall not be conducted or permitted in a manner
which detracts from the residential character of the neighborhood or
which tends to create a business atmosphere in the neighborhood. A
home occupation shall not be conducted or permitted in a manner
which causes the premises to differ substantially from nearby
residential uses by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting or
signs; by the emission of sound, noise or vibration; or in any other way,
which would be noticeable to a casual observer. A home occupation
shall not be conducted or permitted unless it is clearly incidental and
secondary to the principal use of the dwelling purposes. The exterior
appearance of a residential structure shall not be altered to conduct a
home occupation. A home occupation shall not generate traffic,
parking, commercial traffic, parking of commercial vehicles, sound,
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, electrical interference or
nuisances beyond what is customarily and ordinarily found in a
residential area or which detracts from the residential character of the
neighborhood. An accessory building may be used for a home
occupation, but no area outside a building shall be used for storage or
other purpose in the conduct of a home occupation.
A. Garage sales, yard sales and similar merchandise sales may be held no
more than two times per year at any residence and for a total of not
more than six days in that year. The Zoning Administrator may
authorize additional sales and/or sale days if warranted by unusual
circumstances. All goods offered for sale shall be household goods or
personal possessions from the residence where the sale is being held or,
in the case of a group sale(s), from the residences of the participating
§ 480-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-12
1:597
§ 480-13. Maintenance.
All land shall be kept free of unhealthy and unsightly debris and shall be
maintained to be compatible with neighboring property. All land, structures
and buildings shall be maintained so as not to become a nuisance to the
neighborhood.
§ 480-14. Earth station dish antennas. [Amended 10-16-2017 by
Ord. No. 9-17-689]
households. In no case shall any sales become outlets for wholesale or
retain commercial sales.
B. Any garage sales, yard sales and similar merchandise sales by
nonprofit, philanthropic or civic organizations must be approved by the
Zoning Administrator and may be held no more than two times per year
for not more than a total of six days in that year. The Zoning
Administrator may authorize additional sales and/or sale days if
warranted by unusual circumstances. In no case shall any sales become
outlets for wholesale or retail commercial sales.
C. Garage sale signs may not have an area more than three square feet
with a maximum of two faces. Garage sale signs shall identify the
location of the sale and must be located at least five feet from the street
line.
D. No garage sale sign may be located on utility poles, traffic control
devices, or on property or the adjoining right-of-way of property, the
owner of which has not given explicit permission for its location.
E. No garage sale sign shall be displayed before one day before the sale or
one day following the sale.
F. No more than one garage sale sign may be located at the sale site, and
no more than two garage sale signs may be located off the site.
A. Requirements of this section shall not apply to an earth station dish two
feet in diameter or less.
B. Earth station dish antennas over two feet in diameter are prohibited in
residential areas.
C. Earth station dish antennas over two feet in diameter may be permitted
in commercial, industrial and public/institutional zoning districts upon
approval of a conditional use permit by the Plan Commission.
D. All earth dish antennas and the construction and installation thereof
shall conform to applicable City Building Code and Electrical Code
regulations and requirements. A fee shall be paid as set by the Common
Council in the City's Fee Schedule prior to issuance of a building
permit.
§ 480-12 MONONA CODE § 480-14
1:598
§ 480-15. Antennas, communications towers and related facilities/
technology.
This section provides the procedures and standards for issuance of
conditional use permits for the placement, construction or modification of
antenna arrays, communications towers and related facilities/technology as
defined in this chapter.
E. Any earth station dish antenna existing on the date of adoption of this
section which does not conform to these regulations shall be treated in
accordance with Article VII of this chapter.
A. Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section:
ANTENNA ARRAY — The array of metal rods, dipoles, parasitic
elements and associated appurtenances which are attached to the
communications tower and which are connected to the transmission
lines or waveguides.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure, whether freestanding
or attached to an existing building or structure, that is designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more
antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or
monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone
towers, alternative tower structures and the like.
B. Policy. It is intended that conditional use permits shall be issued under
this section to accommodate the expansion of wireless communications
technology while minimizing the number of antenna arrays, tower sites
and/or related facilities through the requirement that permitted
antenna arrays, towers and/or related facilities be sited or constructed
so that they may be utilized for the co-location of antenna arrays and
related equipment to the extent technologically and economically
feasible.
C. Application.
(1) The application process for a conditional use permit for the siting
or construction of an antenna array, communications tower or
related facility shall be governed by the procedures contained in
this chapter and §§ 480-52, 480-54 and 480-55.
(2) Any decision to deny a request under this section shall be in writing
and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written
record. Such denial shall state the denial and shall provide the
reasons for the denial.
(3) The provisions and limitations of § 66.0404, Wis. Stats., shall apply.
[Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
D. Standards. No conditional use permit for the siting or construction of an
antenna array, communications tower or related facility shall be issued
§ 480-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-15
1:599
unless the applicant presents to the Plan Commission credible evidence
to a reasonable degree of certainty the following:
(1) Compliance with all general performance standards, use
performance standards and site performance standards, as well as
zoning district and Building Code requirements contained in the
Monona Municipal Code; and
(2) Compliance with all radio frequency emissions requirements
established by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC);
and
(3) Compliance with all Federal Aviation Administration rules as to
height; and
(4) Compliance with all federal environmental laws, including the
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969; and
(5) No existing communications tower or site is located within the area
in which the applicant's equipment must be located; or
(6) No existing communications tower or site within the area in which
the applicant's equipment must be located is of sufficient height to
meet the applicant's requirements, and the deficiency in height
cannot be remedied at a reasonable cost; or
(7) No existing communications tower or site within the area in which
the applicant's equipment must be located has sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's equipment, and the deficiency in
structural strength cannot be remedied at a reasonable cost; or
(8) The applicant's equipment would cause electromagnetic
interference with equipment on the existing communications
tower(s) or site(s) within the area in which the applicant's
equipment must be located or the equipment on the existing
communications tower(s) or site(s) would cause interference with
the applicant's equipment, and the interference, from whatever
source, cannot be eliminated at a reasonable cost; or
(9) The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to co-locate on an existing communications tower or site are
unreasonable relative to industry norms; or
(10) The applicant demonstrates that there are other factors that
render existing communications towers or sites unsuitable or
unavailable and establishes that the public interest is best served
by the siting or construction of a new communications tower or
site.
E. Conditions and guarantees. Prior to the granting of a conditional use
permit for the siting or construction of an antenna array,
communications tower or related facility, the Plan Commission may
stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment,
§ 480-15 MONONA CODE § 480-15
1:600
location, constructing, maintenance and operation of the antenna array,
communications tower or related facility as deemed necessary to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community,
and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements
specified in Subsection D above. Such conditions may include, but are
not limited to, minimizing adverse visual effects through careful design,
siting, co-location of carriers and screening, harmonizing aesthetic
aspects with the surrounding area, and maintaining the appearance
and structural integrity of the antenna array, communications tower
or related facility. The Commission shall require such evidence that
the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be
complied with.311
F. Special requirements. The use of certain City-owned property, such as
water tower sites and parks, for wireless telecommunications antennas
or towers brings with it special concerns due to the unique nature of
these sites. The placement of wireless telecommunications antennas on
these special City-owned sites will be allowed only when the following
additional requirements are met.
(1) Water tower sites. The City's water towers represent a large public
investment in water pressure stabilization and peak capacity
reserves. Protection of the quality of the City's water supply is of
prime importance to the City and the health and welfare of its
citizens. As access to the City's water storage systems increases, so
too increases the potential for contamination of the public water
supply. For these reasons, the placement of wireless
telecommunications antennas or towers on the water tower sites
will be allowed only when the City is fully satisfied the following
requirements are met:
(a) The applicant's access to the facility will not increase the risks
of contamination to the City's water supply.
(b) There is sufficient room on the structure and/or on the grounds
to accommodate the applicant's facility.
(c) The presence of the facility will not increase the water tower or
reservoir maintenance costs to the City.
(d) The presence of the facility will not be harmful to the health of
workers maintaining the water tower.
(2) Parks. The presence of certain wireless telecommunications
antennas or towers represents a potential conflict with the
purposes of City-owned parks. Wireless telecommunications
antennas or towers will be considered in City-owned parks and land
zoned P - Public Facilities only after the recommendation of the
311. Editor's Note: Original subsection (f), Prohibition in certain districts, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 480-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-15
1:601
Park and Recreation Board, Plan Commission and approval by the
City Council.
G. Reasonableness of costs. The cost of eliminating impediments to colocation
shall be deemed reasonable if it does not exceed by 25% of the
cost of constructing or placement of a new tower or site on which to
mount applicant's equipment.
H. Outside consultation. In the event the Plan Commission determines that
it is necessary to consult a third party in considering the factors listed
in Subsection D above, all reasonable costs and expenses associated
with such consultation shall be borne by the applicant. Failure to pay
such costs and expenses or provide information requested by the Plan
Commission shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a conditional
use permit. The applicant may provide to the Plan Commission the
names of consultants which the applicant believes are qualified to assist
in resolving the issues before the Plan Commission.
I. Co-location encouraged. It is the intent of this chapter to encourage the
co-location of antenna arrays and related equipment whenever
possible. Accordingly, in applying the standards and criteria set forth in
Subsection D to applicants for conditional use permits for the
placement or construction of an antenna array, a communications tower
or a related facility, the Plan Commission shall, unless it is shown to be
unreasonable, condition the grant of the permit upon the applicant
siting or constructing the antenna array and/or communications tower
and/or related facility so as to reasonably accommodate co-location of
two additional antenna arrays or related equipment similar in size and
function to that placed on the tower or site by the applicant. Co-location
sites need not be available on the tower or site as initially placed or
constructed, provided that the tower or site will support at the specified
height the later addition of the required number of co-location sites.
The holder of a permit under this section shall make the co-location
sites required hereunder available for the placement of technologically
compatible antenna arrays and related equipment upon contractual
provisions which are standard in the industry and at prevailing market
rates allowing the permit holder to recoup the cost of providing the colocation
sites and a fair return on investment.312
J. Modification of antenna array or tower. Unless otherwise provided
herein, a conditional use permit is required for any modification of an
antenna array, communications tower or related facility which
significantly alters the appearance or structural integrity of the tower
or site or which involves the installation of antenna or related
equipment differing in size and function from that previously installed
on the tower or site. The Plan Commission shall apply the standards
under Subsection D when considering an application for a conditional
use permit to allow the modification of an existing antenna array,
312. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 480-15 MONONA CODE § 480-15
1:602
communications tower or related facility. In addition, the Plan
Commission shall consider the reasonableness, based on the economic
and technological feasibility, of conditioning the grant of the conditional
use permit upon modifying the antenna array, tower or related facility
in a manner which would accommodate the co-location of one or more
additional antenna arrays or related equipment.
K. Continued compliance with conditions of permit required. Upon written
inquiry by the Plan Commission, the recipient of a conditional use
permit under this section shall have the burden of presenting credible
evidence establishing to a reasonable certainty the continued
compliance with all conditions placed upon the conditional use permit.
Failure to establish compliance with all conditions placed upon the
conditional use permit shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. In
the event the Plan Commission determines that it is necessary to
consult with a third party to ascertain compliance with conditions on a
conditional use permit, all reasonable costs and expenses associated
with such consultation shall be borne by the holder of the subject
conditional use permit. Failure to pay such costs and expenses or
provide information requested by the Plan Commission shall be
grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit. The holder of the
subject conditional use permit may provide to the Plan Commission
names of consultants which the permit holder believes are qualified to
assist in resolving the issues before the Plan Commission. In any event,
where a dispute arises under this chapter involving an applicant for a
conditional use permit and the holder of a conditional use permit
hereunder, the Plan Commission may allocate consulting costs and
expenses between the applicant and the permit holder.
L. Notice of co-location. A conditional use permit shall not be required for
co-location on an existing tower or site permitted under this section,
provided the co-location antenna array or related equipment is similar
in size and function to that installed by the holder of the conditional use
permit for the tower or site; does not significantly alter the appearance
or structural integrity of the tower or site approved and permitted
under this section; and is fully in compliance with all conditions
contained in the original conditional use permit. The holder of the
conditional use permit for any tower or site on which co-location occurs
shall, within 30 days of such co-location, provide the Plan Commission
with written notification of the identity of the co-locator and the nature
of the equipment installed. Within 30 days of the date on which any colocated
use ceases, the permit holder shall provide the Plan
Commission with written notice of the cessation of such use.
M. Storage buildings. The holder of a conditional use permit for a
communications tower or site and any user co-locating under this
chapter shall each be permitted, upon approval of the Plan Commission,
to construct a building of no more than 14 feet in height and 314 square
feet in floor area for use directly incidental and necessary to the use of
the tower or site. Two or more users of the tower or site may build a
§ 480-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-15
1:603
single building with a floor area of no more than 314 square feet
per user sharing the building. Buildings constructed or used by tower
or site co-locators shall be subject to conditions established for the
conditional use permit for the tower or site.
N. Removal. Conditional use permits issued hereunder shall identify the
primary type or types of transmission equipment which are to be placed
on the subject communications tower or site. Any communications
tower on which the transmission equipment so identified is no longer
placed or used for a continuous period of 12 months shall, upon
notification by the Plan Commission, be removed by the holder of the
conditional use permit issued under this section. If the tower is not
removed within 60 days of such notification, the City may remove the
tower at the expense of the holder of the conditional use permit.
O. Future plans. The Plan Commission may require that an applicant for a
conditional use permit under this section provide information regarding
the applicant's then current plans for future placement or construction
of communications towers and/or sites in the City of Monona in addition
to the tower or site which is the subject of the application.
§ 480-15 MONONA CODE § 480-15
1:604
ARTICLE IV
Site Performance Standards
§ 480-16. Applicability.
The following site performance standards in this article shall apply to any
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or
enlargement of any structure or building.
§ 480-17. General site performance standards.
A. To the extent reasonably possible, the existing natural character of the
site shall be preserved.
B. Safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and
loading shall be assured.
C. Traffic flow to and from the site shall not cause undue congestion of the
public street or streets; the number, size and location of off-street
parking spaces shall be in conformity with this chapter. The Access
Management Guidelines313 adopted as part of this chapter shall be used
as standards in determining the number, size, location and design of
driveway openings on a site.
D. The site shall be screened, landscaped and structures located in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) The landscape of the site shall be improved in character with
neighboring properties. All areas not covered by structures,
driveways, walks or other permitted coverage shall be planted and
maintained in lawn, ground cover, trees, shrubs or other
appropriate plant materials, and all parking, utility, loading, service
and recreation areas shall be reasonably screened. The City of
Monona Site Design Standards for Parking, Landscaping and
Lighting, adopted as part of this chapter, shall be used as standards
in determining the required type, size and quantity of landscape
plantings required on site.314
(2) The arrangements of buildings on the site shall create a
harmonious appearance with respect to each other and with
existing buildings in the immediate neighborhood. Due
consideration shall be given to topographic conditions, the spatial
relationship between buildings both on and off the site and the
effect that the plans, if developed, would have on surrounding
properties.
313. Editor's Note: The Access Management Guidelines are included as an attachment this
chapter.
314. Editor's Note: The City of Monona Site Design Standards for Parking, Landscaping and
Lighting are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 480-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-17
1:605
§ 480-18. Parking standards.
(3) The design of buildings and structures and the kind of building
materials shall provide a harmonious relationship of color and/or
texture between the buildings and structures. All accessory
buildings shall bear a close relationship to the principal structure
or structures in their design and building materials.
E. Exterior lighting needed for safety reasons shall be provided in addition
to any requirements for streetlighting. The Site Design Standards for
Parking, Landscaping and Lighting, adopted as part of this chapter,
shall be used as standards in determining exterior lighting
requirements for a building and site.315
F. The layout or arrangement of a subdivision or land development shall
be consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
G. All lots shall abut upon a public street. All principal buildings and
structures shall be located on a lot. Except for planned community
developments and Commercial/Industrial, Community Design and
Retail Business Districts, only one principal building or structure shall
be located, erected or moved onto a lot.
H. Streets in a subdivision or land development shall be of sufficient width
and suitable grade and shall be suitably located to accommodate
prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting and emergency
equipment to buildings.
I. Adequate water supply, drainage, shade trees, sewage facilities and
other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and
occupants shall be provided.
J. Land subject to flooding shall be regulated to avoid danger to life or
property.
K. Soils shall be protected from erosion by wind or water or from
excavating or grading.
L. The final development plan shall be substantially complied with.
M. Off-site water, sewer, drainage and street improvements which are
necessitated by development shall be provided.
A. Off-street parking requirement. In all districts, for all uses except onefamily
and two-family dwellings, all construction shall be provided with
sufficient off-street parking to accommodate all vehicles which are
expected to use the premises in the normal course of events. If a
building permit is required for the enlargement, extension or
remodeling for substantial change in use of an existing principal
building or structure, sufficient off-street parking shall be provided
315. Editor's Note: The City of Monona Site Design Standards for Parking, Landscaping and
Lighting are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 480-17 MONONA CODE § 480-18
1:606
§ 480-19. Architectural compatibility.
according to the standards that would apply if the entire building or
structure were being newly constructed.
B. Number of required parking spaces.
(1) Determination. The number of required parking spaces shall be
determined by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall
base its determination on the City of Monona Site Design
Standards for Parking, Landscaping and Lighting, adopted as part
of this chapter.316
(2) Collective provision. Parking for separate uses may be provided
collectively.
(3) Parking standards. Parking lot standards shall be based on the City
of Monona Site Design Standards for Parking, Landscaping and
Lighting, adopted as part of this chapter, subject to approval of the
Plan Commission. These shall include surfacing, size, arrangement
and access of parking spaces, drainage and landscaping. Such
standards shall apply to all open off-street parking areas designed
for more than three vehicles, with the exception of parking areas
which are on the premises of a one-family or two-family dwelling,
and are intended for use by the occupants of the dwelling. If a
building permit is required for the enlargement, extension or
remodeling of an existing principal building, off-street parking shall
be provided in conformance with such standards. If an existing
parking lot is extended or expanded, it shall be made to conform to
such standards.
C. Off-street loading spaces. Any building occupied by commercial,
industrial, cemetery, warehouse, wholesale, storage, retail, restaurant
or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution in vehicles
of material or merchandise shall provide and maintain off-street loading
spaces on the premises as required by the Zoning Administrator
according to standards established by him or her and approved by the
Plan Commission.
A. Purpose. Development of the City to provide for aesthetic quality,
architectural and natural beauty and harmony will enhance the wellbeing
and contentment of its residents and encourage economic
stability through the preservation and enhancement of property values.
Therefore, standards are needed to ensure that architectural design is
harmonious and compatible with nearby development and with nature.
This section is not intended to impose regimented conformity to any
specific architectural style or taste but is intended solely to prevent
development which would have a substantially adverse effect on the
316. Editor's Note: The City of Monona Site Design Standards for Parking, Landscaping and
Lighting are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 480-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-19
1:607
§ 480-20. Historic preservation. [Amended 1-19-2016 by Ord. No.
1-16-673; 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689; 6-4-2018 by Ord. No.
5-18-699]
existing or potential beauty and character of a neighborhood, would
reduce its desirability or would depreciate its property values.
B. Standards. The following standards are adopted to establish criteria for
the purposes described in Subsection A above:
(1) No building shall be permitted if its design or exterior appearance
is of such unorthodox or abnormal character in relation to the
surroundings as to be unsightly or offensive to generally accepted
taste.
(2) No building shall be permitted if its design or exterior appearance
is so identical with those adjoining as to create excessive monotony
and drabness.
(3) No building shall be permitted if any exposed facade is not
constructed or faced with a finished material which is aesthetically
compatible with the other facades and presents an attractive
appearance to the public and to surrounding properties.
(4) No building shall be permitted to be so situated on a lot as to
unnecessarily destroy or substantially damage the natural beauty
of the area, particularly if it would adversely affect property values
in the area or if it would adversely affect the beauty and general
enjoyment of existing buildings on adjoining properties.
A. Purpose and intent. The protection, enhancement, perpetuation and
use of improvements of special character or special historical interest
or value are in the public interest. The purpose of historic conservation
is to:
(1) Protect, enhance and perpetuate improvements and districts which
represent or reflect elements of the City's cultural, social,
economic, political and architectural history;
(2) Safeguard the City's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied
and reflected in such landmarks and historic districts;
(3) Stabilize and improve property values;
(4) Foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past;
(5) Protect and enhance the City's attractions to residents, tourists and
visitors, and serve as a support and stimulus to business and
industry;
(6) Strengthen the economy of the City; and
§ 480-19 MONONA CODE § 480-20
1:608
(7) Promote the use of historic districts and landmarks for the
education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the City.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The certificate issued which
approves alteration, rehabilitation, construction, reconstruction or
razing of an historic structure or site or any improvement in an historic
district.
CONTRIBUTING RESOURCES — Contributing resources are the
buildings, objects, sites and structures that played a role or, more
simply, existed at the time the event associated with the proposed
historic landmark occurred. The resources' status as contributing shall
be identified on the official landmark designation.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — Any area designated pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter that contains two or more historic improvements or sites
as well as those abutting improvement parcels which the Commission
determines should fall under the provisions of this section to assure
that their appearance and development is harmonious with such
landmarks or landmark sites.
LANDMARK SITE — Any parcel of land of historic significance due to
a substantial value in tracing the history of aboriginal people or upon
which an historic event has occurred, and which has been designated
as a landmark site under this chapter, or a parcel or part thereof on
which is situated a landmark.
LANDMARK STRUCTURE — Any improvement which has a special
character or special historic interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City, state or
nation, and which has been designated as a landmark pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
NONCONTRIBUTING RESOURCES — Noncontributing resources are
the buildings, objects, sites, and structures that did not exist at the time
the event(s) associated with the proposed historic landmark occurred
or have lost integrity from that historic period.
C. Historic structure, site, and district designation criteria. For the
purposes of this chapter, an historic structure, site, or district
designation may be placed on any site, natural or improved, including
any building, improvement or structure located thereon, or any area of
particular historic, architectural, or cultural significance to the city,
which:
(1) Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state or community; or
(2) Is associated with the lives of important persons or with important
events in national, state or local history; or
§ 480-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-20
1:609
(3) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
type inherently valuable for a study of a period, style, method of
construction or of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or
(4) Is representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer
or architect; or
(5) Exhibits important archaeological or anthropological significance.
D. Nomination. Any person, or the Landmarks Commission, may nominate
a building or structure, site, or historic district for designation as a
landmark. The person or Commission shall submit the nomination to
the City Planning Division, to the attention of the City Planner, on a
nomination form approved by the Landmarks Commission. The
nomination shall clearly identify the proposed landmark structure,
landmark site, or historic district and document why it qualifies under
Subsection C. The City Planner may ask the person or Commission to
submit additional information and documentation as needed to
complete or clarify the nomination. When the City Planner determines
that the nomination is complete, the City Planner shall refer the
nomination to the Landmarks Commission. Any property nominated for
landmark status located within a redevelopment area or tax increment
financing district shall also be referred to the Community Development
Authority for review and recommendation prior to Common Council
action.
E. Landmarks Commission review and public hearing of nomination.
Whenever the Landmarks Commission receives a complete, accurate
nomination under Subsection D, the Commission shall review the
nomination. As part of its review, the Commission shall hold a public
hearing, preceded by a Class 1 notice and notice to the owner of record
of the proposed landmark, and to the owner of record of each lot
located within 200 feet of the lot on which the proposed landmark is
located. If any person or persons other than the owner of record files
the nomination, the owner of record shall be notified of the nomination
via certified mail no later than 10 days prior to the public hearing.
F. Designation. After the Landmarks Commission holds a public hearing
and completes its review under Subsection E, the Commission shall file
a report recommending approval, disapproval, or approval subject to
conditions. Final approval of the designation shall be granted by the
Common Council. Once designated, such historic structures, sites, and
districts shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter.
G. Notification and recording of designation. The City Clerk shall promptly
notify the Building Inspector of each landmark designation, as well as
the owner of record of the site. The City Clerk shall record the
designation with the Dane County Register of Deeds at the City's
expense.
H. Voluntary supplemental restrictions. The Common Council may at any
time supplement the terms of a landmark designation, pursuant to an
§ 480-20 MONONA CODE § 480-20
1:610
agreement between the landmark owner and the Landmarks
Commission, to enhance the preservation and protection of the
landmark.
I. Recognition of landmarks. Whenever the Common Council designates a
landmark under Subsection F, the Landmarks Commission may affix a
plaque identifying the property as a landmark to the landmark or
landmark site with the permission of the owner or, in the absence of
permission, in the public right-of-way as approved by the Public Works
Director. The plaque shall be placed so that it is easily visible to passing
pedestrians. In the case of a landmark structure, the plaque or sign
shall include the accepted name of the landmark, the date of its
construction, and other information that the Landmarks Commission
considers appropriate. In the case of a landmark that is not a structure,
the plaque or sign shall include the common name of the landmark and
other information that the Commission considers appropriate. If the
Commission determines that, because the landmark is ecologically or
culturally sensitive, a plaque or sign would be inappropriate, no plaque
or sign is required. No person may remove or modify a plaque without
approval of the City Planner.
J. Amending or rescinding a landmark designation. Any person may
petition the Landmarks Commission to amend or rescind a Landmark
Designation. The process for amending a landmark shall be the same as
for designating a landmark under Subsections D through G above.
K. Regulation of construction, reconstruction or alterations. If an
application for a zoning or building permit for exterior work involves a
landmark structure, landmark site, or a contributing resource within an
historic district, the permit shall first be referred to the Landmarks
Commission for consideration of a certificate of appropriateness. No
permit may be issued until the Commission has issued a certificate of
appropriateness under Subsection N. In cases where a building permit
is not required, ordinary maintenance and repairs may be undertaken
without a certificate of appropriateness provided that the work involves
repairs to existing features of an historic structure or site or the
replacement of elements of a structure with pieces and materials
identical in appearance and provided that the work does not change the
exterior appearance of the structure or site. This consideration shall be
based on the considerations below, and the United States Secretary of
the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, 36 CFR 67.317
(1) Whether the proposed work would detrimentally change, destroy
or adversely affect any architectural feature of the landmark; and
(2) In the case of a new construction, whether the exterior of such
construction would be in harmony with the external appearance of
other landmarks on the site; and
317. Editor's Note: See 36 CFR 67.1 et seq.
§ 480-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-20
1:611
(3) Whether the proposal would significantly alter or destroy the
historic characteristics of the landmark or the landmark site.
L. Regulation of demolition. No permit to demolish all or part of an
historic structure or contributing resource in an historic district shall
be granted by the Building Inspector except as follows:
(1) No person in charge of an historic structure shall be granted a
permit to demolish such property under any circumstances without
first receiving the written approval of the Commission.
(2) At the time a person applies for a permit to demolish such property,
an application shall be forwarded to the Commission. The
Commission may refuse to grant written approval of a period of up
to six months from the time of the application, during which time
the Commission and the applicant shall undertake serious and
continuing discussions for the purpose of finding a method to save
the property. The six-month period may be extended by mutual
agreement of the applicant and the Commission. If the time period
is not extended, the Commission's denial of the certificate of
appropriateness shall become final unless a formal application for
funds from any governmental unit or nonprofit to preserve the
property is pending. The Commission's denial of a certificate of
appropriateness may be appealed to the Common Council within 60
days of a final denial under Subsection N. If a mutually agreeable
method of saving the property or an application for funds is
apparent after the six-month period, but is then unsuccessful
within a period of 60 days following the end of the required time
period, the Commission's denial of the certificate of
appropriateness stands and the applicant may appeal to the
Council under Subsection N.
(3) In determining whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness for
any demolition, the Commission shall consider the following:
(a) Whether the building or structure is of such an architectural or
historic significance that its demolition would be detrimental
to the public interest and contrary to the general welfare of the
people of the City of Monona and the state.
(b) Whether the demolition of the subject property would be
contrary to the purpose and intent of this chapter.
(c) Whether the building or structure is of such old and unusual or
uncommon design, texture and/or material that it could not be
reproduced or reproduced only with great difficulty and/or
expense.
(d) Whether the retention of the building or structure would
promote the general welfare of the people of the City of
Monona and the state by encouraging study of American
§ 480-20 MONONA CODE § 480-20
1:612
history, architecture, and design or by developing an
understanding of American culture and heritage.
(e) Whether the building or structure is in such deteriorated
condition that it is not structurally or economically feasible to
preserve or restore it, provided that any hardship claimed by
the owner is not self-created, or is a result of failure to
maintain the property in good repair.
M. Certificate of appropriateness. If the Commission determines that the
application for a certificate of appropriateness and the proposed
changes are consistent with the character and features of the property
or district, and considering the matters referred to in Subsection K, it
shall issue the certificate of appropriateness. The Commission shall
make this decision within 45 days of filing of the application. The
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall not relieve the
applicant from obtaining other permits and approvals required by the
City. If the Commission fails to issue a certificate of appropriateness,
the Commission shall, at the request of the applicant, cooperate and
work with the applicant in an attempt to obtain a certificate of
appropriateness within the guidelines of this chapter.
N. Appeals. Should the Commission fail to issue a certificate of
appropriateness due to the failure of the proposal to conform to the
guidelines, the applicant may appeal such decision to the Common
Council in accordance with Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes by
filing a written notice with the City Clerk within 30 days after expiration
of the applicable period set forth in Subsections L and M above.
O. Sale of historic structures and historic sites. Any person who is listed as
the owner of record of an historic structure at the time of its
designation, who can demonstrate to the Commission that by virtue of
such designation, he or she is unable to find a buyer willing to pay fair
market value and to preserve such structure or site, even though he or
she has made reasonable attempts in good faith to find and attract such
a buyer, may petition the Commission for a rescission of its designation.
In the event of such rescission, the Commission shall notify the Building
Inspector as well as the owner of record of the site, and shall cause the
rescission to be recorded with the Dane County Register of Deeds at the
City's expense.
P. Conditions dangerous to life, health, or property. Nothing contained in
this chapter shall prohibit the construction, reconstruction, alteration
or demolition of any historic structure pursuant to the order of any
appropriate City or state governmental official, or any court order
having jurisdiction, for the purpose of remedying conditions
determined to be dangerous to life, health, or property. In such cases,
no approval from the Commission shall be required.
Q. Duty to maintain in good repair. Every person in charge of an historic
structure or historic site shall keep in good repair all of the exterior
§ 480-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-20
1:613
portions of such improvement and all interior portions thereof, which,
if not so maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior portions
of such improvement to fall into a state of disrepair. This provision shall
be in addition to all other provisions of law requiring such improvement
to be kept in good repair.
R. Variances.
(1) General. A property owner who applies for a certificate of
appropriateness may request a variance. The Landmarks
Commission may grant a variance from the standards in Subsection
K for any of the following reasons:
(a) Economic hardship under Subsection R(4) below.
(b) Historic design under Subsection R(5) below.
(c) Alternative design under Subsection R(6) below.
(d) Projects which are necessary for the public interest under
Subsection R(7) below.
(2) Variance request. A property owner shall make a variance request
to the Landmarks Commission. The request shall include:
(a) The name and address of the property owner.
(b) The location of the property to which the request pertains.
(c) The certificate of appropriateness application to which the
variance request pertains.
(d) The type of variance requested under Subsection R(1).
(e) The specific variance requested.
(f) The circumstances and supporting evidence that justify the
requested variance.
(g) Any other materials requested by the City Planner or
Landmarks Commission.
(3) Hearing, decision, and appeal.
(a) The Landmarks Commission shall hold a public hearing on
each variance request. The Commission shall give notice of the
hearing as provided in Subsection E. The Commission may
combine the hearing with a hearing on the proposed certificate
of appropriateness to which the variance request pertains,
provided that the hearing notice identifies both items.
(b) After it holds a public hearing on a variance request, the
Commission shall grant or deny the request.
§ 480-20 MONONA CODE § 480-20
1:614
(c) The Commission's decision may be appealed to the Common
Council as provided under Subsection M.
(4) Economic hardship variance. The Landmarks Commission may
grant a variance if all of the following apply:
(a) Strict literal application of the standards in Subsection K would
deny the property owner a reasonable rate of return on
investment or would impose upon the property owner an
unreasonable and unnecessary financial hardship.
(b) The circumstances justifying the variance are unique to the
property in question, and:
[1] Are not caused by the owner's failure to maintain the
property as required by this chapter; and
[2] Do not apply to a substantial portion of the historic district
or historic resources within 200 feet of the subject
property; and
[3] Will not alter the historic character of the historic district
or historic resources within 200 feet of the subject
property.
(c) The property owner documents the circumstances justifying
the variance. Required documentation may include as
determined by City staff or the Landmarks Commission:
[1] Property purchase costs;
[2] Rental income;
[3] Real estate listings, disclosure statements, asking prices,
and purchase offers;
[4] Tax assessments and real estate listings for comparable
properties;
[5] Improvements made and improvement costs incurred
during ownership;
[6] Routine maintenance costs incurred during ownership;
[7] Costs to comply with the standard from which a variance is
requested;
[8] Other documentation as reasonable requested by the
Landmarks Commission.
(5) Historic design variance. The Landmarks Commission may grant a
variance allowing, as part of the alteration of an existing structure,
elements otherwise prohibited under Subsection K if all of the
following apply:
§ 480-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-20
1:615
(a) The property owner provides photographic or other evidence
to show that other local structures of similar age and style
incorporated similar elements as part of the original design.
(b) The proposed alteration complies with all other applicable
standards under Subsection K.
(c) The alteration will not destroy significant architectural
features on the building.
(6) Alternative design variance. The Landmarks Commission may
grant a variance allowing, in a new or altered structure, elements
that are otherwise prohibited under Subsection K if all of the
following apply:
(a) The elements will enhance the quality of the design.
(b) The design complies with all other applicable standards under
Subsection K.
(c) The design does not allow material deviations from historic
district standards and guidelines in the Secretary of Interior
Standards for Rehabilitation that would undermine the
character or purpose of the historic district.
(d) The design will have a beneficial effect on the historic
character of the area within 200 feet of the subject property.
(7) Public interest variance. The Landmarks Commission may grant a
variance allowing the construction of a new structure, or the
alteration, demolition, or removal of an existing structure, which
would otherwise be prohibited under Subsection K, if the
Commission finds that a variance is necessary in the public
interest. A variance is necessary in the public interest if the
Commission finds all of the following:
(a) The proposed building, object, site or structure provides
unique, high-priority benefits to the general public.
(b) The benefits to the general public substantially outweigh the
strong public interest in preserving historic resources
expressed in this chapter.
(c) There are no reasonable alternatives to granting a variance
that would allow the proposed project to occur in the city and
satisfy the standards of this chapter.
S. Penalties for failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness.
(1) General penalty. Any person who, without obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness, performs acts requiring a certificate of
appropriateness or who violates the terms of the certificate of
§ 480-20 MONONA CODE § 480-20
1:616
§ 480-21. Environmentally sensitive lands.
§ 480-22. Land disturbance.
appropriateness shall be subject to the forfeiture set forth in the
forfeiture schedule.
(2) Permits. The Building Inspector shall not issue a permit allowing
alteration, construction, demolition, removal, or for any other
action for which a certificate of appropriateness is required unless
the certificate has been approved by the Commission and issued by
the City Planner.
(3) Prohibition. No owner, operation, or person in charge of a landmark
structure, landmark site, or contributing resource within an
historic district shall cause or permit any painting of signs,
alteration, construction, demolition, or removal for which a
certificate of appropriateness is required unless a certificate has
been approved by the Commission.
(4) Penalty for work done without certificate of appropriateness. In
addition to any other penalty provided in this chapter, the
Landmarks Commission may order the removal or modification of
any alteration, construction or other work that was performed
without a required certificate, or that was not performance in
compliance with the conditions of an issued certificate, when such
work does not meet the applicable standards for a certificate under
Subsection K. Alternatively, the Commission may order renovation
to make such work comply with those standards.
A. The development shall not detrimentally affect or destroy natural
features such as ponds, streams, lakes, shorelines, wetlands, steep
slopes and forested areas but preserve and incorporate such features
into the development site design.
B. The location of natural features and the site's topography shall be
considered in the design and siting of all physical improvements.
C. The development shall not substantially reduce retention storage
capacity of the watershed within which it is contained. Special effort
shall be made to minimize the alterations which would adversely affect
the surface and subsurface hydrology both on and off the site.
Development which affects the hydrologic character of the basin shall
be approved by the City Engineer.
D. Site soil and subsurface conditions shall be determined by the Zoning
Administrator as suitable for the proposed land use prior to approval.
E. The development shall be free from offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
dust and other particulate matter, odorous matter, fumes, water
pollution and other objectionable influences.
§ 480-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-22
1:617
§ 480-23. Floodplains.
Chapter 466, Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland Zoning, of the Code of the
City of Monona designates floodplains and lists floodplain regulations. In
A. General design principles. Control measures shall apply to all aspects of
the proposed land disturbance and shall be in operation during all
stages of the disturbance activity. The following principles, in addition
to the regulations and requirements provided in Chapter 216, Erosion
and Stormwater Control, shall apply to soil erosion and sediment
control: [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(1) Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be
done in a manner that will minimize soil erosion.
(2) No site shall be cleared of topsoil, trees and other natural features
before the commencement of building operations. Whenever
feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected. Only
those areas approved for the placement of physical improvements
may be cleared. The extent of the disturbed area and the duration
of its exposure shall be kept within practical limits.
(3) Either temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable stabilization
measures shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during
construction or other land disturbance.
(4) Drainage provisions shall accommodate increased runoff resulting
from modified soil and surface conditions during and after
development or disturbance. Such provisions shall be in addition to
all existing requirements.
(5) Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on site whenever
possible to facilitate groundwater recharge.
(6) Sediment shall be retained on site.
(7) Diversions, sediment basins and similar required structures shall
be installed prior to any on-site grading or disturbance.
B. Maintenance. All necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures
installed under this chapter shall be adequately maintained until such
measures are permanently stabilized, as determined by the City
Engineer. The City Engineer shall give the applicant upon request a
certificate indicating the date on which the measures called for in the
approved plans were completed.
C. Exemptions. The following activities are specifically exempt from this
section:
(1) Land disturbance associated with existing one- and two-family
dwellings.
(2) Use of land for gardening, primarily for home consumption.
§ 480-22 MONONA CODE § 480-23
1:618
the areas designated by Chapter 466, Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland
Zoning, any new use or change in use of any building, structure, land
or water, any land disturbance, any development and any construction,
reconstruction, conversion, alteration, relocation or extension of any
building or structure shall be subject to Chapter 466, Floodplain and
Shoreland-Wetland Zoning.
§ 480-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-23
1:619

ARTICLE V
Zoning Districts
§ 480-24. Single Family Residence District.
A. Characteristics of district. The Single-Family Residence District is
characterized by low-density development of one-family dwellings and
accessory buildings. A one-family dwelling is a building not attached to
another dwelling or structure and occupied or intended to be occupied
for residence purposes by one family, but not including trailers, tents or
rooms in hotels, nursing homes or boardinghouses.
B. Administration.
(1) The performance standards for this district shall be interpreted and
enforced by the Zoning Administrator, who shall determine
whether the proposed construction, remodeling or alteration to
which this section applies meets all performance standards. The
Zoning Administrator's determination shall be based on whether or
not the proposed development meets the intent and spirit of the
performance standards. It is intended that the Zoning
Administrator may grant minor variations from the dimensional
guidelines, as long as the spirit and intent of the performance
standards are preserved.
(2) Any person aggrieved may appeal a decision of the Zoning
Administrator to the Plan Commission.
(3) However, conditional use applications shall go directly to the Board
of Zoning Appeals, whose decision may be appealed by persons
aggrieved to the Common Council.
(4) In addition to the general performance standards, uses in this
district shall meet the standards in this article.
C. District performance standards.
(1) Compatibility. All uses shall be compatible with the character of a
one-family residential zone.
(2) Permitted uses.
(a) One-family detached houses.
(b) Owner-occupied dwelling units may be occupied by a family
and not more than two unrelated persons. Dwelling units
which are not owner-occupied may be occupied by a family and
one unrelated person, who are living and cooking together as a
single housekeeping unit and evidencing a stable family
relationship. A dwelling may be occupied by any number of
members of a church, congregation or religious society
recognized under Ch. 187, Wis. Stats., so long as the church
§ 480-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-24
1:621
society or congregation continues to occupy the building which
it occupied on the effective date of this chapter.
(c) Home occupations: see § 480-11.
(d) Public utility uses which are designed to blend with a
residential area and which cannot feasibly be located in a
nonresidential district.
(e) Accessory uses which are customarily incidental and
subordinate to a permitted principal use.
(f) Signs of the following types:
[1] Real estate signs with an area not more than six square
feet per face, with a maximum of two faces, which
advertise the sale or rental of only the premises on which
they are placed and are located at least five feet from the
street line. No real estate sign or part thereof shall be
taller than five feet above the ground. No real estate sign
with a sold label shall remain upon the premises longer
than one week.
[2] Directional and identification signs for public or nonprofit
institutions shall not exceed eight square feet. All
directional and identification signs for public or nonprofit
institutions existing upon the effective date of this chapter
shall be deemed in conformance with this section.
[3] Signs or nameplates for home occupations are prohibited,
except that signs no larger than three square feet may be
placed on buildings which face Monona Drive.
[4] Garage sale signs as regulated under § 480-12.
(3) Conditional uses, permitted only if the Plan Commission
determines that the proposed use complies with § 480-9, General
use performance standards:
(a) Churches and ancillary facilities.
(b) Libraries.
(c) Public or private schools.
(d) Municipal building and facilities.
(e) Use similar in character to uses specified as permitted in this
district.
(4) Prohibited uses.
(a) Agriculture, except for small home gardens for personal use.
§ 480-24 MONONA CODE § 480-24
1:622
(b) Any other use which is neither a permitted use nor an
authorized conditional use.
D. District dimensional guidelines.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet (unless lot was platted prior
to adoption of this chapter).
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 70 feet in width along a public street or 50
feet if abutting a public street with a curvature exceeding 33.3°.
(3) Minimum lot width at building line: 60 feet.
(4) Minimum setbacks.
(a) Street yard: 30 feet (but if 40% or more of the frontage on one
side of a street between two intersecting streets has been
developed with a setback other than 30 feet, the street yard
setback so established shall prevail).
(b) Side yard: seven feet.
(c) Rear yard: 40 feet.
(d) Shore yard: 50 feet from the meander line. (May be increased
to average shore yard setback of two adjacent houses on both
sides, up to seventy-five-foot maximum requirement.)
(5) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
(7) Accessory buildings and structures.
(a) Maximum height: 14 feet.
(b) Distance. Must be no less than six feet from principal building.
(c) Minimum setbacks.
[1] Street yard. Same as principal building.
[2] Side yard: three feet. Overhangs shall not project more
than 1/3 into setback area.
[3] Rear yard: three feet. Overhangs shall not project more
than 1/3 into setback area.
[4] Shore yard: None, but the only accessory buildings
permitted in shore yards are boathouses, boat shelters,
boat landings and piers.
(d) Lot coverage. Maximum total lot coverage of all accessory
buildings on lot: 1,000 square feet.
(8) Permitted encroachments into required yard setbacks.318
§ 480-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-24
1:623
(a) Roof overhangs that are not supported to the ground may
extend into any required yard by not more than 2.5 feet.
(b) Uncovered steps not over three feet above the ground level
which are necessary for access to a permitted building.
(9) Maximum impervious surface.319
(a) Lots over 10,000 square feet: 65%. A special exception permit
may be granted by the Plan Commission up to seventy-percent
impervious surface if the applicant demonstrates there is no
substantial negative impact caused by the additional
impervious surface to the adjoining water bodies or adjacent
parcels as a result of stormwater runoff.
(b) Lots less than 10,000 square feet: 70%. A special exception
permit may be granted by the Plan Commission up to seventyfive-
percent impervious surface if the applicant demonstrates
there is no substantial negative impact caused by the
additional impervious surface to the adjoining water bodies or
adjacent parcels as a result of stormwater runoff.
(c) Any request above and beyond the special exceptions allowed
in Subsection D(9)(a) and (b) shall be reviewed as a variance
request by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(10) Grading requirements. The difference between the natural grade of
the property and the finished grade of the property shall not
cumulatively exceed two feet at any point on the lot, as shown on a
submitted grading plan certified by a professional landscape
architect, engineer or surveyor. A special exception permit may be
granted by the Plan Commission for a grade change of up to eight
feet, if the applicant demonstrates there is no substantial negative
impact to adjoining water bodies or adjacent parcels. These
regulations shall not prohibit compliance with floodplain
development regulations. Any request above eight feet shall be
reviewed as a variance request by the Zoning Board of Appeals.320
(11) Yard designations.
(a) "Front yard," a confusing term, shall be replaced by "shore
yard" and "street yard," depending on location.
(b) Any lot area abutting a body of water: shore yard.
(c) Any lot area abutting a street: street yard.
(d) Any lot area abutting another lot will be either a side yard or a
rear yard:
318. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
319. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
320. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 480-24 MONONA CODE § 480-24
1:624
§ 480-25. Two-Family Residence District.
[1] If there is one such yard in a lot, it is a side yard.
[2] If there are two such yards, both are side yards.
[3] If there are three or more such yards, the yard which is
farthest from the street yard is a rear yard, and the others
are side yards.
Lot and Yard Designation Diagram
A. Characteristics of district. The Two-Family Residence District is
characterized by more dense development than the Single-Family
Residence District, including two-family residences and accessory
buildings. A two-family residence is a building not attached to another
dwelling or structure and occupied or intended to be occupied for
residence purposes by two families, but not including one-family
dwellings, trailers, tents or rooms in hotels, nursing homes or
boardinghouses.
B. Administration.
(1) The performance standards for this district shall be interpreted and
enforced by the Zoning Administrator, who shall determine
whether the proposed construction, remodeling or alteration meets
all performance standards. The Zoning Administrator's
determination shall be based on whether or not the proposed
development meets the intent and spirit of the performance
standards. It is intended that the Zoning Administrator may grant
§ 480-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-25
1:625
minor variations from the dimensional guidelines, as long as the
spirit and intent of the performance standards are preserved.
(2) Any person aggrieved may appeal a decision of the Zoning
Administrator to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(3) However, conditional use applications shall go directly to the Plan
Commission, whose decision may be appealed by persons
aggrieved to the Common Council.
(4) In addition to the general performance standards, uses in this
district shall meet the standards of this article.
C. District performance standards.
(1) Compatibility. All uses shall be compatible with the character of a
two-family residential zone.
(2) Permitted uses.
(a) One-family detached houses.
(b) Owner-occupied dwelling units may be occupied by a family
and not more than two unrelated persons. Dwelling units
which are not owner-occupied may be occupied by a family and
one unrelated person, who are living and cooking together as a
single housekeeping unit and evidencing a stable family
relationship. A dwelling may be occupied by any number of
members of a church, congregation or religious society
recognized under Ch. 187, Wis. Stats., so long as the church
society or congregation continues to occupy the building which
it occupied on the effective date of this chapter.
(c) Two-family detached houses.
(d) Home occupations: see § 480-11.
(e) Public utility uses which are designed to blend with a
residential area and which cannot feasibly be located in a
nonresidential district.
(f) Accessory uses, which are customarily incidental and
subordinate to a permitted principal use.
(g) Signs of the following types:
[1] Real estate signs with an area not more than six square
feet per face, with a maximum of two faces, which
advertise the sale or rental of only the premises on which
they are placed and are located at least five feet from the
street line. No real estate sign or part thereof shall be
taller than five feet above the ground. No real estate sign
with a "sold" label shall remain upon the premises longer
than one week.
§ 480-25 MONONA CODE § 480-25
1:626
[2] Directional and identification signs for public or nonprofit
institutions shall not exceed eight square feet. All
directional and identification signs for public or nonprofit
institutions existing upon the effective date of this chapter
shall be deemed in conformance with this section.
[3] Signs and nameplates for home occupations are
prohibited.
[4] Garage sale signs as regulated under § 480-12.
(3) Conditional uses, permitted only if the Plan Commission
determines that the proposed use complies with § 480-9, General
use performance standards:
(a) Churches and ancillary facilities.
(b) Libraries.
(c) Public or private schools.
(d) Municipal buildings and facilities.
(e) Uses similar in character to uses specified as permitted in this
district.
(4) Prohibited uses.
(a) Agriculture, except for small home gardens for personal use.
(b) Any other use which is neither a permitted use nor an
authorized conditional use.
D. District dimensional guidelines.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet (unless lot was platted prior
to this chapter).
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 70 feet in width along a public street or 50
feet if abutting a public street with a curvature exceeding 33.3°.
(3) Minimum lot width at building line: 60 feet.
(4) Minimum setbacks.
(a) Street yard: 25 feet (but if 40% or more of the frontage on one
side of a street between two intersecting streets has been
developed with a setback other than 25 feet, the street yard
setback so established shall prevail).
(b) Side yard: 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 40 feet.
(d) Shore yard: 50 feet from the meander line.
§ 480-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-25
1:627
§ 480-26. Multifamily Residence District.
(5) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
(7) Accessory buildings and structures.
(a) Maximum height: 14 feet.
(b) Distance: must be no less than six feet from principal building.
(c) Minimum setbacks.
[1] Street yard: same as principal building.
[2] Side yard: same as principal building.
[3] Rear yard: 10 feet.
[4] Shore yard: none, but the only accessory buildings
permitted in shore yards are boathouses, boat shelters,
boat landings and piers.
(d) Lot coverage. Maximum total lot coverage of all accessory
buildings on lot: 1,000 square feet.
(8) Yard designations.
(a) "Front yard," a confusing term, shall be replaced by "shore
yard" and "street yard," depending on location.
(b) Any lot area abutting a body of water: shore yard.
(c) Any lot area abutting a street: street yard.
(d) Any lot area abutting another lot will be either a side yard or a
rear yard.
[1] If there is one such yard in a lot, it is a side yard.
[2] If there are two such yards, both are side yards.
[3] If there are three or more such yards, the yard which is
farthest from the street yard is a rear yard, and the others
are side yards.
A. Characteristics of district. The Multifamily Residence District is
characterized by high-density dwelling units having proximity to
commercial developments or major streets.
B. District performance standards.
(1) Standards. In addition to the general performance standards,
proposed uses in this district shall meet the following additional
standards:
§ 480-25 MONONA CODE § 480-26
1:628
§ 480-27. Neighborhood Small Business District.
(a) Multifamily residential uses shall be designed, sited and
located to serve effectively as a smooth transition between
commercial uses and low-density residential uses.
(b) Multifamily residential uses shall be designed to be compatible
with nearby low-density residential uses.
(c) To the extent feasible, a reasonable proportion of new
multifamily residential construction shall be made available at
moderate cost to low-income, elderly and large households.
(d) No multifamily residential units shall be occupied to exceed a
density greater than two adults per bedroom.
(2) Permitted uses.
(a) Home occupations: see § 480-11.
(b) Multifamily residential units may be occupied by one or more
families, not exceeding a density greater than two adults per
bedroom.
(3) Signs. Signs of the following types:
(a) Real estate signs with an area not more than six square feet
per face, with a maximum of two faces, which advertise the
sale or rental of only the premises on which they are placed,
and which are located at least five feet from the street line.
[1] No real estate sign or part thereof shall be taller than five
feet above the ground.
[2] No real estate sign with a "sold" label shall remain upon
the premises longer than one week.
(b) Directional and identification signs for public or nonprofit
institutions, not to exceed eight square feet. All directional and
identification signs for public or nonprofit institutions existing
upon the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed in
conformance with this section.
(c) Signs or nameplates for home occupations are prohibited.
(d) Garage sale signs as regulated under § 480-12.
A. Characteristics of district. The goal of this district is to provide
convenient and accessible sites for small business establishments
without harming the historic, architectural and aesthetic quality of the
area.
B. District performance standards. This district is intended to serve the
daily or frequent shopping needs of residents in adjacent areas by
§ 480-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-27
1:629
§ 480-28. Retail Business District.
permitting limited commercial establishments within walking distance
of a large number of residences. It is intended that one-family
residences, two-family residences and small-scale neighborhood retail
and service businesses are to be permitted in this district. This district
is restricted to uses with a limited number of employees, limited traffic
generation and minimal parking needs, in order to avoid disrupting
the surrounding low-density residential neighborhood. It is intended
that existing businesses located in historic buildings may be continued,
provided that the exterior walls of the building are preserved
substantially undisturbed and in substantially the same appearance as
they were on the effective date of this chapter. Use and development
in this district shall blend with the historic, architectural and aesthetic
character of the area. Uses in this district shall not emit smoke, fumes,
gases, dust, odors, vibration, noise or glare in amounts which are
discernible beyond the boundaries of the site. Dimensions of any
development shall be compatible with nearby residential development.
A. Characteristics of district. The Retail Business District is characterized
by retail trade, service, office, financial, professional, ancillary
residential and entertainment activities serving the community.
B. District performance standards. In addition to the general performance
standards, proposed uses in this district shall meet the following
additional standards:
(1) The proposed use shall be related to the general development
pattern and the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan to provide a
balanced local economy; to provide needed goods and services not
otherwise available in the immediate area; and to protect and
enhance the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(2) Because of the limited supply of vacant land, the proposed use shall
not unnecessarily duplicate retail or service uses already existing
in the immediate vicinity.
(3) Whenever feasible, building shall be physically oriented away from
residential development and the layout of parking and service
areas, access, landscaping, yards, walls, signs, lighting and control
of loud and/or discordant noise, glare and other potentially adverse
effects shall be such as to protect nearby residential development.
Yards, fences, walls, landscaping or other screening or buffering
shall be provided where needed to protect nearby residents from
undesirable views, lighting, noise or other adverse influences. In
particular, extensive off-street parking areas, service areas, loading
areas and areas for storage and collection of garbage shall be
adequately screened.
(4) Whenever possible, development shall occur according to a largescale
plan rather than on a piecemeal basis. For example, whenever
§ 480-27 MONONA CODE § 480-28
1:630
§ 480-29. Commercial/Industrial District.
practical, development shall be planned in a coordinated fashion
for an entire block rather than occurring on a lot-by-lot basis. This
could be accomplished by single ownership or control of an entire
block, by agreement among the owners of lots in a block, or by the
adoption of a policy resolution for the area by the Plan Commission.
However it is organized or enforced, the large-scale plan shall
provide the benefits of coordinated site planning in the following
manner:
(a) To provide for features such as shared parking lots, to
minimize the number of driveway entrances and exits through
use of the Access Management Guidelines,321 to provide for
safe and efficient traffic flow, to minimize the paved area and to
facilitate on-site absorption and retention of stormwater.
(b) To provide more landscaping.
(c) To encourage more attractive building design and layout.
(d) To permit the construction of appropriately sized indoor and
outdoor pedestrian plaza areas and attractively landscaped
open spaces.
(e) To prevent the proliferation of unattractive alleys and yards
which are too small or inappropriately located to be
aesthetically pleasing.
A. Characteristics of district. The Commercial/Industrial District is
characterized by retail, service, commercial, office, recreational,
warehouse and light industrial uses which are highway-oriented.
Typical light industrial uses include manufacturing, fabrication,
packing, packaging, assembly, repair, terminals, depots and storage. It
is contemplated that multifamily residential development shall be
permitted in this district only as part of a rezoning to Planned
Community Development District.
B. Adult entertainment district. Adult-oriented establishments are allowed
in this section, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Such establishments shall be licensed as provided in §§ 145-1
through 145-13 of the Monona City Code.
(2) All exterior windows in any premises occupied by such
establishment shall be blackened to the extent necessary to make
them opaque.
(3) No such establishment shall be located within 500 lineal feet of a
church or any other place of worship, or a private or public
321. Editor's Note: The Access Management Guidelines are included as an attachment this
chapter.
§ 480-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-29
1:631
§ 480-30. Community Design District.
elementary, secondary or vocational school, or a public park, or
within 500 lineal feet of any residence district.
(4) Such establishment may have one nonflashing business sign, which
sign may only indicate the name of the business and identify it as an
adult entertainment establishment.
C. District performance standards. In addition to the general performance
standards, proposed uses in this district shall meet the following
additional standards:
(1) The proposed use shall be related to the general development
pattern and the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan to provide a
balanced local economy and to provide stable employment suitable
for residents of Monona and the surrounding area.
(2) The proposed use shall be compatible with nearby development as
built or contemplated for construction in the near future.
(3) Because of the limited supply of vacant land, any proposed retail or
service uses shall not unnecessarily duplicate retail or service use
already existing in the immediate vicinity.
A. Characteristics of district. The Community Design District is
characterized by large predominately undeveloped tracts. Because of
the salience of these properties, the community vests a particular
interest in rational, comprehensively planned development. As part of
the limited remaining area of undeveloped land within the City, these
properties are of critical importance in establishing a balance in land
uses and in community services. It is expected that the development of
property within this district will take advantage of the flexibility
provided by the planned community development procedure. Further, it
is expected that the district's development will include a compatible
mix of residential, commercial, industrial or open space uses which
realize the goals of the Comprehensive Plan.
B. District performance standards.
(1) Development shall occur only after coordinated advance site
planning to retain the unique character of these tracts and to strike
an acceptable balance between natural preservation, growth and
development.
(2) For each tract, development shall occur according to a large-scale
plan rather than on a piecemeal basis. It is intended that this plan
be a mutual product of efforts of the property owner and the City.
This could be implemented by a policy resolution of the Plan
Commission to accept the owner's general development plan for
the tract or it could be implemented by a mutual decision by the
§ 480-29 MONONA CODE § 480-30
1:632
§ 480-31. Conservancy District.
owner and the City to rezone the tract to a Planned Community
Development based on a general development plan.
(3) Development shall preserve the maximum possible amount of open
space and environmental amenities through techniques such as
clustering, site planning and permanent reservation of open space.
(4) All uses and their intensity, appearance and arrangement shall be
of a visual and operational character, which:
(a) Is compatible with the physical nature of the site, with
particular concern for preservation of natural features, open
space, tree growth, unique or environmentally significant
landforms and unobstructed public views of bodies of water.
(b) Would produce an attractive environment of sustained
aesthetic and ecological desirability, economic stability and
functional practicality compatible with the general policy
guidelines of the Comprehensive Plan as well as the specific
concerns expressed by the community.
(c) Would not create traffic or parking demand incompatible with
the existing or proposed facilities to serve it unless jointly
resolved.
(d) Would not seriously affect the anticipated provision of school
or municipal services unless jointly resolved.
(e) Serve regional and community needs for employment, open
space, moderate-cost housing, lake access and/or recreational
facilities.
A. Purpose and intent. The Conservancy District is established to preserve
in a natural open state certain areas such as lakes, waterways,
shorelands, wetlands, marshes, floodplains, streambeds, slopes and
other areas of aesthetic and ecological value, which because of their
unique physical features are desirable and functional as natural
drainageways, water retention area, natural habitats for plant and
animal life or protected open space. The regulations of the Conservancy
District are intended not only to preserve certain open space land and
water areas for uses consistent with the intent and purpose of this
chapter but also to protect the community from the costs which may be
incurred when unsuitable development occurs in certain areas.
Development in the Conservancy District is limited in character,
although certain agricultural, public and recreational uses are
permitted when controlled by specific limitations.
B. Characteristics of district. The Conservancy District is characterized by
land and water preserves, arboretums, boating, fishing, harvesting by
hand of wild crops, public recreational facilities, the practice of wildlife
§ 480-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-31
1:633
§ 480-32. Public Facilities District.
§ 480-33. Cemetery District.
and fish management and similar uses which protect the environmental
quality of the area. It is intended that public highways and parkways
will be permitted if they are designed to minimize damage to the
conservancy area, to provide the public with a view of the conservancy
area, and to relieve safety and traffic congestion problems along
existing highways.
C. Permits. The applicant shall secure all necessary permits from all
appropriate federal, state and local agencies, including those required
under Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as
amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
A. Characteristics of district. This district is characterized by facilities
owned by a government or governmental agency and by public utility
facilities which are compatible with the environment.
B. District performance standards. In addition to the general performance
standards, proposed uses in this district shall meet the following
standards:
(1) To the extent feasible, a substantial portion of the property shall be
maintained as landscaped open space.
(2) The proposed use shall be related to the general development
pattern and the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan to promote a
balanced local economy, to promote needed goods and services not
otherwise available in the immediate area and to protect and
enhance the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(3) All uses and structures within this district must receive a zoning
permit.
A. Characteristics of district. The Cemetery District is characterized by
cemeteries, mausoleums, funeral chapels, monuments and ancillary
facilities.
B. District performance standards. In addition to the general performance
standards, proposed uses in this district shall meet the following
standards:
(1) To the extent feasible, a substantial portion of the property shall be
maintained as landscaped open space.
§ 480-31 MONONA CODE § 480-33
1:634
ARTICLE VI
Planned Community Developments
§ 480-34. Intent and purpose.
The intent of this article is to encourage and promote improved
environmental design in the development of land by allowing greater
freedom and flexibility than is possible under the precise and rigid
requirements of conventional zoning districts, through the use of objective
standards establishing goals and criteria for judgment rather than the
application of a fixed formula. To this intent it allows diversification in
the uses permitted and variation in the relationship of uses, structures,
open spaces and heights of structures in developments conceived and
implemented as comprehensive and cohesive unified projects, while still
requiring substantial compliance to the general plan for community
development. It is further intended to encourage more imaginative site
planning, to assist in achieving more rational and economic development
with relationship to public services, to permit optimum development of
land and to encourage and facilitate the conservation of open land and
other natural features such as woods, streams, wetlands, etc., as integral
components of a balanced ecology. It is expected that the planned
community development tool will be used to provide comprehensive mixeduse
developments within the community design districts.
§ 480-35. Minimum planned community development area.
To qualify for consideration as a planned community development, the site
shall be of sufficient size in relation to the proposed uses to justify the
application of the special regulations set forth in this article and shall be
under the single or unified ownership of the applicant.
§ 480-36. Permitted uses.
In a planned community development, any use may be permitted, subject to
the standards as herein set forth, provided no use shall be permitted except
in conformity with a specific and precise development plan pursuant to the
procedural and regulatory provisions as set forth.
§ 480-37. Standards.
A. General. As a basis for determining the acceptability of a planned
proposal, consideration shall be given as to whether or not it is
consistent with the spirit and intent of the purposes of this section, has
been prepared with competent professional advice and guidance in
terms of planning, architecture and engineering, and produces
significant benefits in terms of improved environment design.
B. Height and area. Specific lot size, density, open space, building
location, height, size, floor area, yard, parking and other such
requirements shall be based upon determination as to their
appropriateness to the uses or structures as they relate to the total
§ 480-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-37
1:635
environmental concept of the planned development and consistent with
the criteria set forth in this chapter and with those generally accepted
basic standards necessary to ensure the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare.
C. Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided consistent with
the uses proposed in the development.
D. Design standards. Engineering and subdivision design standards
relative to street type, location and width, sidewalks, streetlighting,
storm drainage, lot arrangement or other elements of site design shall
be based upon determination as the appropriate standards necessary to
effectively implement the specific function in the specific situation and
as it relates to the total plan concept; and consistent with the necessity
for compatibility with the existing pattern in areas peripheral to the
development. In no case shall minimal construction standards be less
than those necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. To
this intent, the subdivision control ordinance may be waived where
deemed appropriate in the case of a planned community development.
E. Intensity and character of land use. In a planned community
development, the suitability of the type and character of uses proposed
and their intensity and arrangement on the site shall be based upon the
following standards:
(1) Compatibility to the physical nature of the site, with particular
concern for conservation of natural features such as tree growth,
streams, wetlands, geological features, natural resources, etc.; for
suitability of soils for the uses proposed; for preservation of open
space; for careful shaping of terrain to minimize scarring, ensure
suitable drainage and for preservation of natural terrain wherever
appropriate.
(2) Achievement of an attractive environment appropriate to the uses
proposed and compatible with existing development in the
surrounding area and with official development plans for the area,
with particular concern for preservation of ecologic and economic
balance.
(3) Capacity to be effectively serviced without creating a demand for
schools, sanitary sewer, water, stormwater drainage, recreational
areas, highways or other public services substantially in conflict
with that anticipated by the appropriate jurisdictional plans for
such services or which could not be provided without adverse effect
upon the jurisdictional area involved.
(4) Adequate provision for the practical functioning of the
development in terms of circulation, parking, emergency services,
mail and delivery service, street maintenance and utility service.
§ 480-37 MONONA CODE § 480-37
1:636
(5) Adequate provision for appropriate sites for schools, parks,
highways and other public facilities serving the proposed
development.
F. Common open space, park or other amenities.
(1) In a planned community development, consideration shall be given
to the preservation of open space and other natural features such
as woods, streams, wetland, etc., as common open space, parkland
or other amenity area serving the recreational and aesthetic needs
of the people in the development, the need created for such area by
the development, and the suitability or potential of the area for
such use.
(2) Such areas may include landscaped or naturalistic grounds, water
bodies or specific recreational activity facilities and shall be of such
size, shape, character and location as makes them a practical
recreational amenity to the residents of the development or a
contribution to the environmental quality of the development.
(3) Adequate provision shall be made for the establishment,
permanent preservation and maintenance of such common open
space, parkland or amenity areas either by private reservation or
dedication to the public.
(a) Dedication shall not be mandatory, but where public ownership
is desired, reservation for such purpose may be required.
(b) In the case of private open space reservation, the open area to
be reserved shall be protected against building development
by conveying to the City, as part of the conditions for project
approval, an open space easement over such open areas,
restricting the area against any future building or use except
as is consistent with that of providing landscaped open space
for the aesthetic and recreational benefit of the development.
Buildings or uses for recreational, cultural or other purposes
compatible with the open space objective may be permitted
only where specifically authorized as part of the development
plan or subsequently with the express approval of the
Commission following approval of building, site and
operational plans.
(c) The care and maintenance of private open space reservations
or amenity areas shall be assured by establishment of
appropriate management organization for the project. The
manner of assuring maintenance and assessing such cost to
individual properties shall be determined prior to the approval
of the final project plans and shall be included in the conditions
of approval and in the title to each property.
(d) Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservation
or amenity areas shall be established in a manner acceptable
§ 480-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-37
1:637
§ 480-38. Procedures.
to the City and made a part of the conditions of the plan
approved.
G. Economic feasibility and impact. In order to minimize the possibility of
adverse effect resulting from failure to implement an approved project
or from the economic impact of its development upon the community,
the proponents of a planned development shall provide satisfactory
evidence of their economic feasibility to finance the project and that the
economic prosperity of the area or the values of surrounding properties
would not be adversely affected as compared to the impact of
development which might reasonably have been anticipated under the
zoning in effect at the time the planned development was proposed.
H. Implementation schedule. The proponents of a planned community
development district shall submit a reasonable schedule for the
implementation of the development to the satisfaction of the Council.
The schedule shall include suitable provisions to assure that each phase
could be brought to completion in a manner which would not result in
adverse effect upon the community as a result of termination at that
point.
I. Enforceability. Such requirements as are made a part of an approved
precise development plan shall be, along with the plan itself, construed
to be enforced as a part of this chapter.
A. Generally. The procedure for a planned community development shall
be as required for any other zoning permit application under this
chapter.
B. Preapplication conference. Prior to the submittal of a formal application
for approval of a planned community development, the applicant shall
meet with the Commission for an informal discussion of the proposed
development in order to provide the basis for proper submittal and
processing.
C. Application.
(1) The submittal for approval of a planned community development
shall be in the form of a general development plan and a precise
implementation plan. The application may be for a preliminary
approval of a general development plan, followed by the submittal,
in whole or part, of final detail plans for approval as a precise
implementation plan or for a combined general development plan.
(2) The application for a general development plan, a general
development plan with a precise implementation plan, or a precise
implementation plan shall be submitted in triplicate to the City
Clerk, who shall transmit it directly to the Commission for
processing.
§ 480-37 MONONA CODE § 480-38
1:638
D. General development plan.
(1) The application for approval of a general development plan is
intended to provide sufficient definition of the proposed
development to make possible a determination as to its basic
acceptability in terms of its character; its use pattern; its intensity
of use; its economic, environmental and service impact; and such
other factors as would be pertinent to such basic decision prior to
the preparation of detailed engineering, architectural and
landscape architectural plans.
(2) The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of
collecting public input on the general development plan. The
Commission shall provide a Class I notice in the official newspaper
and shall also give at least 10 days' written notice of the proposed
plan and the time and place of the hearing at which any proposed
change will be considered to the owner of any lot or parcel of land
immediately adjacent, contiguous or separated only by a public
right-of-way.
E. Referral. Within 60 days after completion of the filing of the petition for
approval of a general development plan, the Commission shall forward
the petition to the Common Council with a recommendation that the
plan be approved as submitted, approved with modification, or
disapproved. Such report shall include findings of fact specifying the
reasons for the Commission's recommendation.
F. Common Council action. Within 30 days following receipt of the report
of the Commission, the Council shall approve the recommendation,
approve the recommendation with modifications, disapprove the
recommendation, or refer the matter back to the Commission for
further consideration. In the case of approval or approval with
modification, the Council shall approve the general development plan
and may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that
the development shall establish the basic right of use for the area in
conformity with the plan as approved but shall be conditioned upon
approval by a precise implementation plan and shall not make
permissible any of the uses as proposed until a precise implementation
plan is submitted and approved for all or a portion of the general
development plan.
G. Precise implementation plan. A precise plan for implementation of all or
part of a proposed planned community development district may be
submitted concurrently with a general development plan or within a
reasonable period of time as determined by the Council. If a precise
implementation plan, which the Council determines to be a reasonable
phase of the total plan, has not been submitted within such time, the
Council may revoke the approval of the general development plan. The
precise implementation plan shall present in greater detail the
information given approximately in the general development plan. The
§ 480-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-38
1:639
precise implementation plan shall include detailed construction and
engineering plans and related detailed documents and schedules.
H. Public hearing. Whenever the precise implementation plan is
submitted, the Commission shall hold a public hearing for the purpose
of collecting public input on the precise implementation plan. The
Commission shall provide a Class I notice in the official newspaper and
shall also give at least 10 days' written notice of the proposed precise
implementation plan and the time and place of the hearing at which the
precise implementation plan will be considered to the owner of any lot
or parcel of land immediately adjacent, contiguous or separated only by
a public right-of-way. A precise implementation plan submitted for
approval shall be deemed to conform substantially to the general
development plan approved, provided any modification therein,
including any modification in location, design and number of buildings,
roadways and utilities, does not:
(1) Change the concept or intent of the preliminary plan approved; or
(2) Increase the gross residential density or intensity of use by more
than 10%; or
(3) Reduce the area set aside for community open space by more than
10% or in any case below that required for a minimum; or
(4) Increase by more than 10% the floor area for nonresidential use; or
(5) Increase by more than 5% the total ground area covered by
buildings or structures.
I. Referral. Within 30 days after completion of the filing for approval of
the precise implementation plan, the Commission shall forward the
petition to the Common Council with a recommendation that the
precise implementation plan be approved as submitted, approved with
modifications, or disapproved. Such report shall include findings of fact
specifying the reasons for the Commission's recommendations.
J. Common Council action. Within 30 days following receipt of the report
of the Commission, the Council shall approve the recommendation,
approve the recommendation with modifications, disapprove the
recommendation, or refer the matter back to the Commission for
further consideration. In the case of approval or approval with
modification, the Council shall approve the precise implementation plan
and may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that
the precise implementation plan conforms with and implements the
previously approved general development plan.
K. Recording. In the event of approval of the precise implementation plan,
the building site and operational plans for the development, as
approved, as well as all other commitments and contractual
agreements with the City offered or required with regard to project
value, character and other factors pertinent to an assurance that the
§ 480-38 MONONA CODE § 480-38
1:640
proposed development will be carried out basically as presented in the
official submittal plans, shall be recorded by the developer within a
reasonable period of time as determined by the Council in the County
Register of Deeds office. This shall be accomplished prior to the
issuance of any building permit.
L. Changes. If the precise implementation plan submitted does not
conform substantially to the general development plan previously
approved, or if the applicant desires to amend substantially a
development therein, amendments thereto may be approved only by
following the procedure for original approval. No changes in the
precise implementation plan approved hereunder shall be considered to
waive any of the covenants or agreements limiting the use of land,
buildings, structures and improvements within the planned community
development unless specifically stated.
M. Extension or revocation. If no substantial construction has begun in the
planned community development within two years after the approval by
the Council of a precise implementation plan, the general development
plan shall be subject to revocation upon written notice to the applicant
from the City. The City may grant extensions of such period. In the
event of revocation hereunder, an appropriate instrument of revocation
shall be filed in the County Register of Deeds office.
N. Additions. Land contiguous to an existing planned community
development may be added to such planned community development,
provided such land is made a part of the original development plan in all
respects prior to its incorporation into such plan by an amendment of
the development plan as provided in Subsection L.
§ 480-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-38
1:641

ARTICLE VII
Nonconforming Uses
§ 480-39. Existing nonconforming uses.
A. When continuation permitted. The lawful nonconforming use of a
building, structure, land or water existing on the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment to this chapter may be continued although
the use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, provided
that:
(1) Only the use of that portion of the land or water in actual use may
be so continued, and the building or structure shall not be
extended, enlarged, reconstructed, substituted, moved or
structurally altered except when required by law or order so as to
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The total lifetime structural repairs or alterations to buildings and
structures devoted to nonconforming uses shall not exceed 50% of
the replacement cost or acceptable substitute indicator of market
value, determined at the time the building or structure was listed
as a legal nonconforming use under Subsection C, unless the
building or structure is permanently changed to a conforming use.
(3) Substitution of new equipment may be permitted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals if such equipment will reduce the incompatibility of
the nonconforming use with the neighboring uses.
B. Discontinuation required.
(1) If such nonconforming use is discontinued or terminated for 12
consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure, land
or water shall conform to the provisions of this chapter.
(2) When a nonconforming use, building or structure is damaged by
fire, explosion, flood, the public enemy or other calamity to the
extent of more than 50% of its market value, it shall not be restored
except in compliance with the use provisions of this chapter.
C. Pursuant to § 62.23(7)(hc), Wis. Stats., and notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, a nonconforming structure damaged or
destroyed by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold or
infestation after March 2, 2006, may be restored to the size, location
and use that it had immediately before the damage or destruction
occurred, and no limits may be imposed on the costs of the repair,
reconstruction or improvement of said structure. The size of the
restored structure may be larger than the size it was immediately
before the damage or destruction if necessary for the structure to
comply with applicable state or federal requirements.322
322. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 480-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-39
1:643
§ 480-40. Existing nonconforming buildings and structures.
§ 480-41. Changes and substitutions of nonconforming uses,
buildings or structures.
D. Records. As existing nonconforming uses are observed, the Zoning
Administrator shall establish and maintain a file of nonconforming uses,
listing the following:
(1) Owner's name and address.
(2) Use of the building, structure, land or water.
(3) Market value of the structure at the time of its becoming a
nonconforming use.
E. Certificate of nonconformity. When the Zoning Administrator lists a
nonconforming use, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of
legal nonconformity to the property owner, which shall include the
current replacement cost or an acceptable substitute indicator of
market value.323
A. Generally. Any lawful nonconforming building or structure existing on
the effective date of this chapter or any amendment to this chapter may
be continued although its size or location does not conform with the lot
width, lot area, yard, height other dimensional, parking, loading, access
or site performance standards of this chapter, provided it shall not be
extended, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered
except when required by law or order or so to comply with such
provisions or when there would be no additional encroachment on
zoning regulations. This chapter shall not prevent compliance with
lawful orders of the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector or
prevent strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any part of any
structure the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector declares
unsafe.
B. Records. A record of nonconforming buildings and structures shall be
established and maintained by the Zoning Administrator as provided in
§ 480-39D. The Zoning Administrator shall issue certificates of
nonconformity as in § 480-39E.324
C. Maintaining nonconforming buildings and structures. Buildings and
structures which are nonconforming for reasons other than use may be
repaired and maintained.
323. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
324. Editor's Note: Original subsection (c), amortization of nonconforming structures, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II) and reference to that subsection deleted from § 480-40C.
§ 480-39 MONONA CODE § 480-41
1:644
§ 480-42. Substandard lots.
A. Once a nonconforming use, building or structure has been changed to
conform, it shall not revert back to a nonconforming use, building or
structure.
B. Once the Zoning Board of Appeals has permitted the substitution of a
more restrictive nonconforming use for an existing nonconforming use,
the substituted use shall lose its status as a legal nonconforming use
and become subject to all the conditions required by the Board of
Appeals.
A. Use of substandard lots. In any residential district, a one-family
detached dwelling and its accessory structures may be erected on any
legal lot or parcel of record which was recorded in the office of the
County Register of Deeds before the effective date of this chapter or the
effective date of any applicable amendment to this chapter, provided
such lot or parcel is developed in accordance with this section.
However, if abutting lands and a substandard lot of less than 50 feet in
width at the building line are owned by the same owner, a substandard
lot shall not be sold or used without full compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
B. Development standards.
(1) Any substandard lot that is allowed to be developed under
Subsection A shall be developed in accordance with the side yard,
rear yard and front yard setback limitations as set forth in the
Single-Family Residence District, regardless of its zoning district
classification. In addition to this requirement, no structure may be
built within 14 feet of any adjoining dwelling structure.
(2) In addition, the lot coverage ratio and floor area ratio shall not be
less than 80% of the average lot coverage ratio and the average
floor area ratio for other single-family-resident occupied lots within
the neighborhood. The proposed use must meet the use
performance standards of § 480-9 and the site performance
standards of § 480-17.
(3) For the purposes of this section, "neighborhood" means those lands
designated as single-family by the Zoning Map lying within 200 feet
of the exterior boundaries of any substandard lot that is the subject
of an application for a zoning permit under this section.
§ 480-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-42
1:645

ARTICLE VIII
Zoning Map
§ 480-43. Map of existing and planned uses.
The existing and planned uses within the City shall be shown on a Zoning
Map prepared and adopted by the Common Council under § 62.23(7)(b),
Wis. Stats. Within such areas or "districts" the land shall be used only
for uses compatible with the general characteristics of the districts as
enumerated in §§ 480-17 through 480-38.
§ 480-44. Determination of compatibility.
Since §§ 480-26 through 480-38 do not enumerate uses permitted by right,
conditional uses or prohibited uses but indicate the general characteristics
of each district, the Zoning Administrator under §§ 480-24 through 480-25,
except for conditional uses, and the Commission in these and in all cases
shall determine whether the proposed use is compatible with the district
by applying the general performance standards and the performance
standards enumerated in each section.
§ 480-45. Amendment of Zoning Map.
Since uses within the zoning districts are not specifically enumerated
except according to the characteristics of the district, a rezoning
amendment will not be required unless the Commission determines that
a proposed use is incompatible with the district characteristics. If such
is the case, the rezoning procedure of § 480-46 shall apply. However, the
Commission shall annually review the Zoning Map and, on its own motion,
may propose amendments to the Zoning Map to the Common Council
pursuant to § 480-46.
§ 480-46. Amendment procedure.
A. Council may award. The Common Council may from time to time on its
own motion or on petition, after first submitting the proposal to the
Commission, amend, supplement or change the district boundaries or
the regulations for the zoning districts, after hearing and report
thereon by the Commission.
B. Notice and action on district changes.
(1) Commission. Any proposal to change the classification of any lot or
parcel of land or the boundaries of any zoning district or the district
regulations shall be submitted to the Commission for
recommendation and report to the Common Council.
(2) Notice and hearing. Upon referral of any proposal under
Subsection B(1) to it, the Commission shall give notice by
publication of a Class II notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., in the
official newspaper of the proposed changes and of hearings
§ 480-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-46
1:647
thereon and shall give any person interested an opportunity to be
heard. The Commission shall also give at least 10 days' written
notice of the proposed changes and the time and place of the
hearing at which any proposed change will be considered to the
owner of any lot or parcel of land immediately adjacent to or
extending 100 feet from the land included in the proposed change
and extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite
land. Such notice shall contain the street names and house, lot
or parcel numbers of the land included in the proposed change.
Such notice shall also be accompanied by a scale or plat map
showing the land included in the proposed change in relation to
nearby streets. The Commission shall also give at least 10 days'
prior written notice of any such change in the district plan to
the clerk of any municipality whose boundaries are within 1,000
feet of the land to be affected by the proposed change. Failure to
give personal notice to any property owner or to the clerk of any
affected municipality shall not invalidate any such change.
(3) Report to Common Council. The Commission shall report the result
of any such hearing and its recommendation on any proposed
change to the Common Council at the next regular meeting of the
Council following such hearing. The Commission shall recommend
adoption of the opposed change or recommend its rejection or
report that the Commission took no action thereon. Written notice
of the Commission's recommendation shall be given prior to the
Council meeting at which the recommendation will be reported to
the Council to each person who appeared before the Commission
and to any other person who requests such notice. Failure to give
such notice shall not affect Council action on any such
recommendation. The Commission may also recommend that any
proposed change be amended, and if such suggestion is accepted in
writing by the petitioners, a hearing on the revised change shall be
held at a subsequent meeting of the Commission and notice shall be
given as required herein. The Commission shall report any such
recommendation to the Council for information purposes only.
C. Action by Council. If the recommendation is to grant the proposed
change, the City Clerk upon receipt of the recommendation shall refer
the report and recommendations to the City Attorney for drafting the
appropriate ordinance. The Common Council may, however, grant a
zoning change which the Commission has not recommended or may
deny a zoning change recommended by the Commission. If any such
action requires the drafting of an amendment to this chapter, the
matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for drafting.
D. Appearances before Council. Any person interested in any such petition
and the report and recommendation of the Commission may appear
before the Common Council and shall be given an opportunity to appear
and be heard with respect thereto. Any such person shall be heard
under the order of business permitting public appearances as provided
§ 480-46 MONONA CODE § 480-46
1:648
§ 480-47. Zoning upon annexation.
Territory annexed to the City shall be zoned as provided in the annexation
ordinance under § 66.0217(8)(a), Wis. Stats., until amended.
in Chapter 94, Mayor and Common Council, of the Code of the City of
Monona. The Common Council may amend any zoning changed before
it, but if the effect of such amendment is to make the change a new
proposal, such matter shall be re-referred to the Commission, and the
notice and hearing provisions of this section shall apply.
E. Protests. In case of protest against such change duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more either of the areas of land
included in such proposed amendment, supplement or change or by the
owners of 20% or more of the area of the land immediately adjacent
extending 100 feet therefrom or by the owners of 20% or more of the
land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street
frontage of such opposite land, such amendment, supplement or change
shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of 3/4 of the
members of the Council.
(Note: This section was adopted as Charter Ordinance C1-76-92.)
§ 480-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-47
1:649

ARTICLE IX
Administration
§ 480-48. Zoning Administrator; powers and duties.
A. Duties. In addition to any other duties set by the Mayor and Common
Council, the Zoning Administrator shall administer, supervise and
enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall:
(1) Prepare all forms necessary or useful in the administration of this
chapter.
(2) Inspect each project for which a permit has been applied for or
granted.
(3) Issue zoning and occupancy permits when authorized or required
to do so under this chapter.
(4) Record violations and provide this information to the Common
Council.
(5) Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including
but not limited to all maps, amendments, permits, variances,
appeals and applications therefor, and nonconforming uses as such
uses come to his/her attention.
(6) Receive, file and forward to the Commission all applications for
amendments to this chapter.
(7) Receive, file and forward to the Commission all applications for
zoning permits for uses other than single-family and two-family
residences.
(8) Receive, file and forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals all
applications for appeals, variances and other matters upon which
the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to act under this chapter.
(9) Receive, file and forward to the Common Council all appeals under
§ 480-55F.
(10) Make periodic activity reports to the Commission and Common
Council.
B. Powers and authority. In the enforcement of this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator shall have the power and authority for the following:
(1) At any reasonable time and for any proper purpose to enter upon
any public premises and make inspection thereof.
(2) Upon reasonable cause or question as to proper compliance, to
revoke any zoning or occupancy permit and issue cease and desist
orders requiring the cessation of any building, moving, alteration
or use which is in violation of this chapter, such revocation to be in
effect until reinstated by him/her or the Board of Appeals; or take
§ 480-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-48
1:651
§ 480-49. Zoning Board of Appeals.
any other action as directed by the Common Council to ensure
compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
(3) In the name of the City and with approval of the City Attorney,
commence any legal proceedings necessary to enforce this chapter.
(4) To prepare and recommend to the Council rules and regulations for
the administration of this chapter, which when they become
effective under this chapter shall have the force of ordinances.
A. Composition. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have a composition as
prescribed in § 18-2 of the Code.
B. Procedure.
(1) General. The Board shall adopt rules for its government and
procedure not inconsistent with law and with the provisions of this
or of any other ordinance of the City. Meetings of the Board shall be
held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the
Board may determine. The Chair, or in the Chair's absence the
acting Chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. Sessions of the
Board may be closed to the public only as provided in § 19.85, Wis.
Stats. The Board shall keep minutes of it proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon each question, if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public
record. The presence of four members shall constitute a quorum.
The Board shall act by motion or resolution. The concurring vote of
four members of such Board shall be necessary to reverse any
other requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning
Administrator or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any
variation of this chapter. Those items before the Board which do not
by state statute require an absolute majority vote shall require a
vote of three members for approval.
C. Applications and appeals.
(1) An application to the Board, in cases in which it has original
jurisdiction under this chapter, may be taken by any property
owner, including a tenant, or by a governmental officer, department
or board. Such application shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator, who shall transmit the same, together with all the
plans, specifications and other papers pertaining to the application,
to the Board. In the case of a request for a conditional use permit
within the one- or two-family residence zone, the decision of the
§ 480-48 MONONA CODE § 480-49
1:652
Board may be appealed by a person aggrieved to the Common
Council.
(2) An appeal to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or
any governmental officer, department or board affected by any
ruling of the Zoning Administrator. An appeal from a ruling of the
Zoning Administrator shall be taken within a reasonable time, as
prescribed by the rules of the Board, by filing with the Zoning
Administrator and with the Board notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit
to the Board such notice of appeal, together with all the plans and
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
(3) The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an
application or of an appeal. It shall give public notice of such
hearing as well as notice to the owners of all property adjacent to
the property affected by any appeal or application for a variance a
reasonable time before such application or appeal shall be
considered by the Board. The Board shall also notify the applicant
or appellant and the Zoning Administrator. The owners of adjacent
property as referred to herein shall be deemed to be the owners as
shown on the assessment records in the City Hall. Any party may
appear at such hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. The
Board shall decide the application or appeal within a reasonable
time.
(4) The Board shall not have jurisdiction of appeals from
determinations of the Commission or Common Council unless
otherwise provided in this chapter.
D. Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies
to the Board after notice of appeal is filed that by reason of facts stated
in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in
which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than for good
cause by a restraining order granted by the Board or by the circuit
court, on application, on notice to the Zoning Administrator.
E. Powers of the Board.
(1) The Board may hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and filed as herein provided, requests or
applications for special exceptions or for interpretation of the
District Map or for decisions upon other special questions upon
which the Board is authorized to pass.
(2) In addition to permitting special exceptions specified in this
chapter, the Board may permit the following:
(a) Nonconforming uses. See §§ 480-39 through 480-42.325
§ 480-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-49
1:653
(b) Temporary uses and permits. The temporary use of a building
or premises for a purpose incidental to commerce or industry
in a residential district, provided such be of a true temporary
nature and not involve the erection of permanent buildings.
Such permit shall be granted for not more than one year,
subject to such conditions as will safeguard the public health,
safety, convenience and the general welfare.
(c) Social and recreational buildings. Where it is desired to locate
in an area zoned for residence purposes clubs, lodges, social
and recreational center buildings, except those the chief
activity of which is carried on or is one customarily carried on
primarily for gain, the Board of Appeals may issue a permit for
such use or any extension thereof. Such uses shall comply with
the following requirements:
[1] Plans of the site and of the buildings proposed shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator with a written
request for approval of such use.
[2] Any such building shall be located not less than 75 feet
from any lot in any residential district not used for similar
purposes.
[3] The Board shall give notice to adjacent property owners
and hold public hearings as required.
(3) The Board shall interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a
way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this plan as shown on
the District Map and as provided in the Comprehensive Plan.
(4) The Board may hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision,
grant or refusal made by the Zoning Administrator in the carrying
out or enforcement of this chapter. In accordance with the above,
the Board shall have the following general powers:
(a) To permit the projection of a building into a required front
yard, side yard or rear yard, but only to an extent necessary to
construct a building or structure practicable in construction
and arrangement for an exceptionally narrow, shallow or
irregular lot, or for exceptional topography so existing on the
effective date of this chapter.
(b) To permit in any district such modification of the requirements
of this chapter as the Board may deem necessary to secure an
appropriate development of a lot, where adjacent to such lot
there are buildings or uses that do not conform to regulations
prescribed by this chapter for the district in which these are
325. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 480-49 MONONA CODE § 480-49
1:654
§ 480-50. Fees.
The Common Council shall annually determine the average cost and
establish a fee for processing applications for zoning permits, occupancy
permits, rezonings, variances and appeals. An applicant for a zoning permit,
occupancy permit, rezoning, variance or appeal shall pay the required fee
upon final submission of the application. An application shall not be deemed
complete until the required fee has been paid. A copy of the current fees
established by the Common Council shall be kept on file by the City Clerk.
§ 480-51. Enforcement and penalties.
located, provided the Board shall not permit in any district
a use not permitted under the district regulations or a use
denied by the Plan Commission.
(c) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property on the effective date of
this chapter or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions
or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or conditions
of such property, the strict application of any provision of this
chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner
of such property, the Board may authorize, upon appeal
relating to such property, a variance from such strict
application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardships,
provided such relief may be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantially
impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter.
A. Any building or structure hereafter erected, moved or structurally
altered or any use hereafter established in violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be deemed an unlawful building, structure or use. The
Zoning Administrator shall promptly report all such violations to the
City Attorney who shall cause an action to be brought to enjoin the
erection, moving or structural alteration of such building or the
establishment of such use or to cause such building, structure or use to
be vacated or removed.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or disobeys or
refuses to comply with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter
shall also be subject to a forfeiture under § 1-4 of the Code. Each day a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 480-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-51
1:655

ARTICLE X
Zoning and Occupancy Permits
§ 480-52. Zoning permits.
§ 480-53. Occupancy permits.
A. Definition. A "zoning permit" is a document, signed by the Zoning
Administrator, which states that a specific proposed use, structure or
building complies with the standard procedures and other provisions of
this chapter.
B. When required.
(1) A zoning permit is required for any construction, substantial
relocation or substantial enlargement of any structure or building.
A zoning permit is also required for any use or substantial change
in the use of any land, water, structure or building, as determined
by the Zoning Administrator. A zoning permit is not required for a
change of ownership. However, if a change in ownership is
accompanied by another action which requires a zoning permit, a
zoning permit is required for such other action.
(2) When any use of land, water, structure or building is discontinued
for a period of six months or more, a zoning permit shall be
required prior to any reuse of the land, water, structure or building
as required in this section.
(3) Determination that a business has closed will be made based on a
decision by the Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator that
the operation of the business on the premises has ceased.
C. How obtained. For property located in the Single-Family Residence and
Two-Family Residence Districts, except for conditional uses, if it is
determined that the proposal meets all requirements of this chapter the
Zoning Administrator may directly issue a zoning permit. If the Zoning
Administrator fails to determine that the proposal meets the
requirements of this chapter for property located in the Single-Family
Residence and Two-Family Residence Districts, except for conditional
uses, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall review and approve the
proposal before the Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning permit.
For conditional uses in the Single-Family Residence and Two-Family
Residence Districts and all other districts, the Plan Commission shall
review and approve a zoning permit. A zoning permit may be issued
subject to conditions required by the Board or Commission. These
conditions shall be noted on the zoning permit. If construction on a site,
building or structure as approved in a zoning permit has not
commenced within six months of the issuance of that zoning permit, the
permit shall be void. The Plan Commission may extend this date for just
cause.
§ 480-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-53
1:657
§ 480-54. Single-Family and Two-Family Residence Districts.
§ 480-55. All other districts.
A. Definition. An "occupancy permit" is a document, signed by the Zoning
Administrator, which states that a use, structure or building complies
with the requirements, standards and other provisions of the Zoning
Code, the Building Code and other applicable codes, as well as any
conditions specified in the zoning permit. An occupancy permit allows
the property to be occupied and used as outlined in the zoning permit. If
a use, structure or building does not fully comply with the
requirements, standards and other provisions of the Zoning Code,
Building Code and other applicable codes, as well as any conditions
specified in the zoning permit, the occupancy permit may be withheld
by the Zoning Administrator or a bond or irrevocable letter of credit
required for performance.
B. When required. No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no
building, structure or part thereof undergoing activity which requires a
building permit shall be occupied or used until an occupancy permit has
been issued. An occupancy permit is not required for a change solely in
ownership or occupancy.
C. Temporary occupancy permit. If a use, structure or building is
substantially in compliance, but compliance with some requirements is
still pending, a temporary occupancy permit with a limited term may be
issued. If all requirements are not met when the temporary occupancy
permit expires, the use becomes illegal. Such temporary permit shall
not be issued except under such restrictions and provisions as will
adequately ensure the safety of the occupants. A temporary permit shall
be void if the building fails to conform to this chapter or other
applicable codes to such a degree as to render it unsafe for the
occupancy proposed.
D. Review of grant or denial of occupancy permit. The grant or denial of an
occupancy permit shall be reviewable by the Zoning Board of Appeals
under § 480-49.
A. Zoning Administrator. Under §§ 480-52 and 480-53, the Zoning
Administrator may issue zoning and occupancy permits for the Single-
Family Residence and Two-Family Residence Districts upon compliance
with all applicable provisions.
B. Review of grant or denial of permit. The grant or denial of a zoning or
occupancy permit shall be appealable to the Zoning Board of Appeals
under § 480-49.
A. Application. Application for a zoning and/or occupancy permit shall be
made to the Zoning Administrator by the owner of the property for
which the permit is being requested. The property owner shall be
§ 480-53 MONONA CODE § 480-55
1:658
ultimately responsible for the implementation of any plans and
conditions of a zoning permit.
B. Preapplication review by Zoning Administrator. Prior to formal
application for a zoning permit under this article, the Zoning
Administrator shall confer with the applicant or a designated
representative to advise the applicant or representatives as to what
information will be required by the Commission in order to act on the
application. Such information may include an engineering survey, a
comprehensive site plan, topographic data, a public utilities plan, a
traffic circulation plan, an off-street parking plan, a preliminary sketch
of any planned subdivision, architectural renderings of proposed
buildings, a comprehensive landscape plan and a plan for erosion and
runoff control including site restoration. The Zoning Administrator shall
not advise the applicant or the applicant's representatives as to the
possibility of favorable or unfavorable action by the Commission on the
application.
C. Prehearing conference with the Plan Commission. After the
preapplication review by the Zoning Administrator, the applicant may
request an informal prehearing conference with the Commission or a
subcommittee thereof to review the applicant's proposal. The purpose
of such conference shall be to familiarize the Commission with the
applicant's proposal and to familiarize the applicant with the
requirements which may be imposed by the Commission and the City
before favorable action can be taken by the Commission on the
application. The Plan Commission or its subcommittee may at this time
require the applicant to submit information in addition to that which
will be required under Subsection B when formal application is made.
Any prehearing conference will be open to the public. At least five days
prior to the public hearing, the Zoning Administrator shall send notice
of the public hearing to adjacent property owners within 200 feet of the
property for which an application has been filed. [Amended
10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
D. Formal hearing before the Plan Commission. Within 30 days of
submission of a formal application, the Commission shall hold a formal
hearing on the application. Any formal hearing will be open to the
public, and the Zoning Administrator shall send notice of the public
hearing to adjacent property owners within 200 feet of the property for
which an application has been filed at least five days prior to the
hearing. The applicant may elect to have his or her application
considered a contested case, in which case the rules of procedure for
such cases established by the Zoning Board of Appeals for applications
for variances shall apply. The time for the formal hearing may be
extended by agreement of the applicant or for 15 additional days by the
Chairperson of the Commission upon notice to the applicant specifying
the reasons for such extension. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No.
9-17-689]
§ 480-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-55
1:659
E. Decision of the Commission. The Commission may approve, approve
conditionally or reject the application for a zoning permit. Ch. 68, Wis.
Stats., shall apply to the decision of the Commission. If no request for
review of approval of the application is received within 30 days of
notice of such determination as provided in § 68.08, Wis. Stats., the
Zoning Administrator shall issue the zoning permit. Upon request of the
applicant, the Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning permit upon
approval of the Commission; however, such permit shall state on its face
that the issuance is subject to review and appeal if a request therefor is
filed by an aggrieved person within 30 days. If the Commission's
approval is conditional, the Zoning Administrator may issue the permit
on satisfaction of the conditions; however, the application may be
referred back to the Commission for determination of whether or not
the conditions have been satisfied. If the Plan Commission determines
that the conditions have not been satisfied, the zoning permit and
occupancy permit may be revoked. If a request for review of the
determination of the Commission is filed pursuant to § 68.08, Wis.
Stats., the Commission shall review its own determination. In all cases,
any decision of the Commission shall be in writing and shall state the
reasons for the decision and shall indicate the evidence in support of
the decision. The Zoning Administrator or the Commission shall mail
copies of any decision to the applicant and anyone appearing at the
hearing who has requested a copy. The Commission may reconsider and
change its decision on its own motion at its next regular meeting or a
special meeting called for that purpose.326
F. Appeal to Common Council. Appeal of the decision of the Commission
after review under §§ 68.08 and 68.09, Wis. Stats., may be made to the
Common Council pursuant to Ch. 68, Wis. Stats. For purposes of such
appeal, the Common Council shall be the impartial decision maker
required under § 68.11(2), Wis. Stats. If the appellant had a hearing or
opportunity for hearing before the Commission substantially in
compliance with § 68.11, Wis. Stats., the decision of the Common
Council shall be on the basis of the hearing record made before the
Commission and a due process type hearing as required under § 68.11,
Wis. Stats., shall not be necessary. Ch. 68, Wis. Stats., shall otherwise
apply.
326. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 480-55 MONONA CODE § 480-55
1:660
ARTICLE XI
Mobile Home Parks
§ 480-56. Mobile home parks defined and permitted.
§ 480-57. Licensing of mobile home parks.
In addition to satisfying the requirements herein, mobile home parks shall
also be licensed and annually inspected pursuant to §§ 303-2 and 303-3.
§ 480-58. Mobile home park standards.
A. Definition. The definitions contained in § 66.0435(1), Wis. Stats., are
adopted herein by reference.
B. Locations outside parks.
(1) Except as provided in this section, no person shall park any mobile
home on any street, alley or highway or other public place or on any
tract of land within the City.
(2) Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any
street, alley or highway for not longer than one hour, subject to any
other prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic
and parking regulations or ordinances.
C. Location of mobile home parks.
(1) Mobile home parks shall be located in Commercial/Industrial (CI)
Zoning Districts and are a conditional use subject to Plan
Commission approval according to § 480-52.
(2) No occupied mobile home within the City shall be located less than
10 feet away from any building or other mobile home.
A. Applicability of plumbing, electrical and building ordinances. All
plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any park
approved under this chapter shall be in accordance with the ordinances
of the City and the requirements of the State Department of Natural
Resources. Permits granted hereunder grant no right to erect or repair
any structure, to do any plumbing work, or to do any electrical work.327
B. Adoption of Wisconsin Administrative Code. Ch. ATCP 125, Wis. Adm.
Code, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference,
including any subsequent changes or amendments thereto.
C. Conflict between codes. In the event that any of the codes listed in this
article are in conflict, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
D. Application of codes to existing parks.
327. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 480-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-58
1:661
§ 480-59. Special regulations.
(1) Any code enforcement officer of the City may waive any technical
violation of this article as to any park that was approved on July 1,
1982, if the violation does not pose a threat to persons or property.
The code enforcement officer may impose as a condition of such
waiver that no new mobile homes be added to the park or existing
mobile homes replaced until the code violation is cured. The
conditions listed for waiver of defects may also be applied to a
given part of an existing park.
(2) As a condition of granting a waiver from the strict application of
this section, the Zoning Administrator may require the park owner
to submit a compliance plan outlining the degree to which the park
will be brought into compliance with the terms of this article and
the time frame for such compliance. The compliance plan may
include permanent waiver of requirements of this article that do
not involve lifesafety. The Zoning Administrator shall review any
compliance plan submitted to it and recommend adoption,
modification or rejection of same to the Plan Commission. The
Zoning Administrator shall annually review the compliance plan
and the progress made by the owner in establishing the goals
outlined in the plan.
A. Waste and garbage disposal.
(1) All liquid waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets, lavatories,
etc., shall be discharged into the public sewer system.
(2) Every space designed to serve a nondependent unit shall be
provided with sewer connections which shall comply with the State
Plumbing Code. The sewer connection shall be provided with
suitable fittings so that watertight connections can be made. Such
connections shall be so constructed so that they can be closed
when not connected and trapped in such a manner as to be
maintained in odor-free condition.
(3) All sanitary facilities in any unit which are not connected with a
public sewer system by approved pipe connections shall be sealed,
and their use is unlawful.
(4) Each faucet shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of waste
and excess water.
(5) Storage and disposal of solid waste shall be as required by the
Director of Public Works in accordance with the City's solid refuse
collection rules.
B. Management.
(1) In every mobile home park there shall be located the office of the
attendant or person in charge of such park. A copy of the park
§ 480-58 MONONA CODE § 480-59
1:662
license and of this section shall be posted therein, and the park
register shall be kept in such office at all times.
(2) The attendant or person in charge, together with the licensee,
shall:
(a) Keep a register of all adult occupants, to be open at all times to
inspection by City, state and federal officers, which shall show
for all adult occupants:
[1] Names and addresses.
[2] Number of children of school age.
[3] State of legal residence.
[4] Dates of entrance and departure.
(b) Maintain the park in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at
all times.
(c) Ensure that the provisions of this section are complied with
and enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any
violations of this section or any other violations of law which
may come to his or her attention.
(d) Maintain in convenient places, approved by the Fire Chief,
hand fire extinguishers in the ratio of one to each eight units.
(e) Collect the monthly permit fee provided for in § 303-1 of
Chapter 303, Mobile Homes. A book shall be kept showing the
names of the persons paying such fees and the amount paid.
[Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689]
(f) Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises.
(g) Allow inspections of park premises and facilities at reasonable
times by City officials or their agents or employees.
C. Maximum height. No mobile home or its accessory structure may
exceed a maximum height of 14 feet.
D. Utilities. All park utilities shall be located underground.
E. Changes in approved plan. The owner shall inform the City in writing of
any change or amendment of the plan submitted pursuant to these
requirements within 30 days of such change.
§ 480-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-59
1:663

ARTICLE XII
Signs, Canopies, Awnings and Billboards328
[Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 9-17-689; 5-20-2019 by Ord. No.
5-19-717]
§ 480-60. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish standards for the fabrication,
erection, and use of signs, and to regulate the location, type, size, and
height of signage for all properties within the City of Monona. The
adoption of this article reflects the formal finding of fact by the City of
Monona Plan Commission and Common Council that regulation of
signage advances the following compelling governmental interests:
(1) Reduce signage that the City has determined to be a cause of
unsafe traffic and visibility conditions for pedestrians, bicyclists,
drivers, and passengers.
(2) Protect pedestrians, bicyclists, drivers, and passengers from injury
caused by the faulty and uncontrolled construction and use of signs
within the City.
(3) Protect pedestrians, bicyclists, drivers, and passengers from injury
caused by distractions, obstructions, and hazards created by
certain signs or by cluttered, distracting, or illegible signage.
(4) Promote the public welfare, health, and safety of all persons using
public thoroughfares and rights-of-way within the City of Monona
in relation to the signage displayed thereon, or overhanging, or
projecting into such public spaces.
(5) Preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility
of signs with surrounding land uses.
(6) Assure that public benefits derived from expenditures of public
funds for the improvement and beautification of public streets and
other public structures and spaces are protected by exercising
reasonable controls over character and design of signage.
(7) Advance the aesthetic goals of the City throughout the community
and ensure the effectiveness and flexibility in the design, creativity,
or use of signage without creating a detriment to the general
public.
B. Furthermore, this article leaves ample and adequate alternative
channels of commercial speech communication for the messages
portrayed on advertising signs - namely, distributed print media,
broadcast media, and point-of-purchase display - and is narrowly
defined so as to limit said prohibition to commercial speech on exterior
328. Editor's Note: The City's Signage Districts Map is on file and available for inspection in
the City offices.
§ 480-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-60
1:665
§ 480-61. (Reserved)
§ 480-62. Definition of "sign".
signage and signage intended to be viewed from beyond the boundaries
of a site.
C. Signs that fail to comply with the requirements in this article are
subject to the penalties found in § 1-4 of the City of Monona Municipal
Code.
A. Definition of a sign. In this article, the word "sign" means any object,
device, display, structure, or part thereof, situated or visible from
outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, or location by any means, including words,
letters, figures, designs, logos, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or
projected images.
B. "Signs" do not include:
(1) Traffic control and other government messages located within a
right-of-way.
(2) Decorations that are incidentally and customarily associated with
any national holiday or religious holiday, or with any community
festival or similar event.
(3) Art works, including but not limited to wall murals, which do not
contain a commercial message, logo, or colors; and/or which
contain pictorial representations referring to businesses,
merchandise, products, or services of an exclusively historic nature
of 50 years or older (meaning no longer offered as an active
commercial enterprise).
(4) Building colors and lighting which do not contain a commercial
message or commercial logo.
(5) Interior site signs located on the interior of the grounds of the
Conservancy Zoning District and Public Facilities Zoning District,
which are primarily oriented to persons within the grounds.
(6) Interior building signs located on the interior of a building and not
attached to or located within three feet of the inside of a window,
which are primarily oriented to persons within the building.
(7) Window displays of merchandise, pictures, or models of products or
services incorporated in a window display, which are not directly
attached to an interior or exterior window surface.
(8) Vehicles that are licensed, operable, and parked in legal parking
spaces, except where in violation of § 434-11 of the City of Monona
Municipal Code.
§ 480-60 MONONA CODE § 480-63
1:666
§ 480-63. (Reserved)
§ 480-64. Definitions and rules related to sign groups, sign
categories, and sign types.
This section provides the definitions and rules related to various sign
groups, sign categories, and sign types. Figures 480-70(1) through
480-70(4) provide the regulations for these signs applicable to each zoning
district.329 Any sign type not addressed by this article shall be construed to
be prohibited. The term "site" has a unique and distinct definition within
this article. See § 480-64F(19) for the complete definition.
A. Definitions and rules related to the permanent business signs group.
Permanent business sign: A sign permanently installed in the ground or
affixed to a building which directs attention to the activity conducted
upon the site where the sign is located. "permanent business signs" is a
sign group containing various sign categories and sign types that a
business is eligible to use. Permanent business signs include the
following sign categories: freestanding signs, on-building signs,
pedestrian signs, and daily notice signs. See Figure 480-70(1) for
additional rules for permanent business signs related to zoning
districts.330
(1) Freestanding sign category. A sign permanently resting on or
supported by a slab, pedestal, post, pylon, or any other form of base
located on the ground. The sign must be designed of materials
complementary to and harmonious with the building and site, and
closely integrated with site landscaping. Freestanding signs shall
not interfere with vehicle or visibility or circulation. The footing
and related supporting structure of a permanent freestanding sign
including bolts, flanges, and brackets, shall be concealed by
landscaping as approved by the Plan Commission. Said landscaping
shall be encouraged to be diverse and colorful, and shall be
continuously maintained to comply with the approved landscaping
plan. There are the following types of freestanding sign types:
(a) Monument sign. A type of freestanding sign in which the
bottom edge of the sign face is located within one foot of a
ground-mounted pedestal or is type of freestanding sign
mounted to the sides or ends of two or more posts, with the
majority of the sign area located between the outermost posts.
(b) Pylon sign. A type of freestanding sign erected upon one or
more pylons or poles, generally of a height that is taller than
permitted for a monument sign. Pylon signs shall be
constructed of decorative poles or poles encased in a
decorative enclosure. Bare metal, wood, or other poles are not
permitted. Pylon signs are only allowed on sites identified
329. Editor's Note: Said figures are included as an attachment to this chapter.
330. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 480-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-64
1:667
within the City of Monona Pylon Sign Parcel Map. See
§ 480-65.
(2) On-building sign category. A type of sign permanently affixed to an
outside wall of a building and shall be made of durable all-weather
materials. There are the following on-building sign types:
(a) Wall sign. A type of on-building sign that is mounted directly
on, and parallel to, a building facade or other vertical building
surface. A wall sign also includes a sign located on the interior
of a building that is intended to be viewed primarily from
beyond the boundaries of the site. Whether an interior sign is
considered a wall sign shall be determined by the Zoning
Administrator during the sign permit review process.
[1] The top edge of a wall sign shall not extend above the top
edge of the vertical exterior wall or above the lowest edge
of a roofline of the portion of the building to which it is
mounted.
[2] Wall signs shall not project more than 18 inches
horizontally beyond the face of any wall or other surface to
which they are mounted.
(b) Canopy sign. A type of on-building sign that is directly affixed
via bolts, brackets, or similar method to a rigid permanent
canopy which is mounted to, or adjacent to, the face of a
building. The structural support of the canopy shall be
designed by a licensed professional engineer and approved by
the Building Inspector as in compliance with the Monona
Building Code. All frames and supports shall be of metal and
designed to withstand pressure as provided in § 480-92. No
supports shall exist beyond the setback line between the
canopy and the sidewalk or ground below.
[1] Sign copy shall be horizontally and vertically centered on
the face(s) of the canopy. Sign copy shall not project above
or below the canopy face.
[2] Script shall be limited to eight inches in height and shall
cover no more than 10% of the canopy area.
(c) Marquee sign. A type of on-building sign that is mounted to a
permanent roof-like structure that projects out from the
exterior wall of a building and shelters the entrance and/or
entrance approaches to a building. The structural support shall
be designed by a licensed professional engineer and approved
by the Building Inspector as in compliance with the Monona
Building Code. All frames and supports shall be of metal and
designed to withstand pressure as provided in § 480-92. No
supports shall exist beyond the setback line between the
marquee sign and the sidewalk or ground below.
§ 480-64 MONONA CODE § 480-64
1:668
[1] Sign copy shall be horizontally and vertically centered on
the face(s) of the marquee.
[2] Marquee signs must be finished and enclosed on both the
top and bottom of the sign between the back of the sign
face and the building face.
[3] Marquee signs may only be approved through the
conditional use permit process. See § 480-52.
(d) Awning sign. A type of on-building sign that is directly affixed
via sewing, silk screening, painting, or similar method to a
nonrigid removable awning which is mounted to the face of a
building, securely attached to and supported by the building
and shall be without posts or columns beyond the setback line.
The structural support, if any, shall be designed by a licensed
professional engineer and approved by the Building Inspector
as in compliance with the Monona Building Code. All frames
and supports shall be of metal and designed to withstand
pressure as provided in § 480-92. No supports shall exist
beyond the setback line between the awning and the sidewalk
or ground below.
[1] Sign copy shall be horizontally and vertically centered on
the face(s) of the awning.
[2] Sign copy shall not project above, below, or beyond the
awning surface.
[3] Sign copy shall not exceed 50% of the area of an angled
face of the awning.
[4] Sign copy shall not be more than 12 inches tall on a
vertical face of the awning.
[5] The entire awning (including the vertical and angled faces
combined) shall be considered a sign for purposes of area
measurement. See Figure 480-70(1).331
[6] The area of the sign copy shall be measured using the
methods described in Figure 480-74(2).332
(e) Projecting sign. A type of on-building sign that is mounted at
any angle other than parallel to the wall on which it is
mounted, extending from the face of the wall.
(3) Pedestrian category. A sign attached perpendicularly to the face of
a building and mounted above sidewalk level, and which is oriented
and sized for visibility to nearby pedestrians rather than to
motorists. See Table 480-70(1) for exact dimensional requirements
331. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
332. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 480-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-64
1:669
of this category.333 The sign shall be made of durable all-weather
materials. The following pedestrian sign types are regulated by this
article:
(a) Blade sign. A type of pedestrian sign that is mounted
perpendicular to the wall on which it is mounted, extends less
than four feet from the wall.
(b) Suspended sign. A type of pedestrian sign that is mounted
perpendicular to the nearest wall and suspended from the
underside of a horizontal plane surface, such as a covered
porch, arcade, or canopy.
(4) Daily notice sign category. A sign typically used to advertise daily
specials, daily menu items, or on-site events that change on a daily
basis, which usually includes changeable copy. This type of sign is
often associated with restaurants, taverns, retail stores, and music
venues. There are the following daily notice sign types:
(a) Menu board sign. A type of daily notice sign mounted flat
against a wall containing changeable copy.
[1] Menu board signs shall be securely affixed to the exterior
wall of the building containing the use.
[2] Menu board signs shall not extend more than four inches
from the wall on which they are mounted.
(b) Order board sign. A type of daily notice sign used only in
conjunction with drive-through or drive-in establishments.
[1] Order board signs shall require a conditional use permit.
The conditional use permit application for a drive-through
sign is typically reviewed as a component of a conditional
use permit application for an entire site, but a drivethrough
sign may be applied for as a distinct conditional
use permit.
[2] Order board signs shall be freestanding or mounted on the
exterior wall of the building containing the use.
[3] Freestanding two-way microphone/speaker devices shall
not count toward the maximum permitted area of the
order board sign.
[4] Order board sign audio components shall meet the noise
standards set forth in § 480-10A of the Zoning Ordinance.
B. Definitions and rules related to the temporary business signs group.
Temporary business sign: A temporary sign which directs attention to
the activity conducted upon the site where the sign is located.
333. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 480-64 MONONA CODE § 480-64
1:670
"Temporary business signs" is a sign group containing various sign
categories and sign types. "Temporary business signs" includes the
following sign categories: window signs, temporary board and banner
signs, and temporary approved development signs. See Figure
480-70(2) for additional rules for temporary business signs related to
zoning districts.334
(1) Window sign category. A sign located within a building that is
attached to the inside face of an exterior window. The following
window sign types are addressed by this article:
(a) Window sign. A type of sign that is either painted onto a
window, attached to the inside face of an exterior window, or
located inside a building within three feet of a window and
intended to be viewed from the exterior of the building.
Window signs may face toward the outside, the inside, or both.
They shall not be placed on a door window, other windows
needed to be clear for pedestrian safety, or on any window
outside of the ground-floor.
(2) Temporary board and banner sign category. A sign located outside
of a building for a period not to exceed 28 calendar days in any sixmonth
period. Such signs are often used for the purpose of
informing the public of a sale or special offer. There are the
following temporary board and banner sign types:
(a) Board sign. A type of temporary board and banner sign that is
placed on the ground and is made of rigid material.
[1] Board signs are not permitted in the City of Monona.
(b) Sandwich board sign. A type of temporary board and banner
sign placed on the ground and constructed in such a manner as
to form an "A"-like shape, hinged or not hinged at the top. Each
angular face shall be held together by a supporting element
such as a folding bar, latch, or chain.
[1] Anything attached to a sandwich board sign shall not
project outside the perimeter of the sign face nor project
in excess of one inch from the sign face.
(c) Banner sign. A type of temporary board and banner sign that is
made of flexible material such as cloth or vinyl and is
supported along one or more sides or at two or more corners
by wires, ropes, string, nails, or other removable fastening
materials.
(d) Feather sign. A type of temporary board and banner sign
consisting of a piece of vertically elongated, flexible material
such as cloth or vinyl which is affixed to a single pole driven
334. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 480-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-64
1:671
into the ground. The pole may be rigid or flexible but is not
permanent.
[1] Feather signs are not permitted in the City of Monona.
(3) Temporary approved development sign category. A sign which is
limited to display only during the active development of a building
or plat. Mesh screens containing images and/or text are permitted
only during this time period, but are not considered signs. There
are the following temporary approved development sign types:
(a) Active building or plat board sign. A type of temporary
approved development sign that is made of a rigid material,
but does not constitute a construction site fence within the
meaning of § 66.1102(5), Wis. Stats.
[1] "Active Building" means when a building on site is under
construction. The sign can only be displayed during the
period between the issuance of a building permit and the
issuance of the first building occupancy permit.
[2] "Active Plat" means when a subdivision plat on site is
under construction. The sign can only be displayed during
the time period between the recording of the final plat and
the issuance of building permits for 90% of the lots; as
applied to each development phase in the final plat.
(4) Prohibited temporary sign category. Exterior signs or similar eyecatching
devices with the characteristics described in § 480-64E
are prohibited at all times by this article.
C. Definitions and rules related to the permanent miscellaneous signs
group. Permanent miscellaneous sign: A permanent sign that is
available to all sites in the City regardless of land use (with the
exception of the institutional information sign, which is only permitted
on sites used for municipal buildings or academic facilities and requires
a conditional use permit.) "Permanent miscellaneous signs" is a sign
group containing various sign categories and sign types. Permanent
miscellaneous signs includes the following sign categories: Cityrequired
signs and optional miscellaneous signs. See Figure 480-70(3)
for additional rules for permanent miscellaneous signs related to zoning
districts.335
(1) City-required sign category. A sign category that includes signs
that the City finds essential in order to protect the public health,
safety, and/or welfare. Specifically, these signs are used to facilitate
the following public purposes: to deliver mail; to identify property
addresses for the provision of emergency services such as fire or
rescue service; to identify the management of rental properties for
the provision of emergency services; to impose parking limitations
335. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 480-64 MONONA CODE § 480-64
1:672
or warnings against trespass; and, to facilitate traffic flow where
a safe path to a destination is not evident. There are the following
City-required sign types:
(a) Address sign. A type of City-required sign that identifies the
street address of a property.
(b) Building management identification sign. A type of Cityrequired
sign indicating the name and/or address of the
property owner, tenant, and/or manager of the property.
(c) On-site warning sign. A type of City-required sign that
indicates a warning from the property owner related to
conditions on-site and/or that cites a City, State, or Federal law,
order, rule, or regulation. Examples include signs listing
parking hours or "No Trespassing," "No Loitering," or
"Customer Parking Only" signs.
(d) On-site directional sign. A type of City-required sign that
includes a directional arrow or symbol that directs people to a
specific destination within a development or site. On-site
directional signs may also include either the name, logo, or
symbol of the destination, provided that the name, logo, or
symbol is less than or equal to one square foot.
(2) Optional miscellaneous sign category. A sign category that
facilitates placemaking, particularly related to officially-recognized
historic places, officially-designated neighborhoods, and conveying
information for the general public. Metal plaque and institutional
information signs are only permitted through official government
action, including designation of historic places or the presence of
public facilities. There are the following optional miscellaneous
sign types:
(a) Institutional information sign. A type of optional miscellaneous
sign typically facilitating scheduled public events, public
activities, and public facilities.
[1] Institutional information signs shall only be permitted on
sites used for municipal buildings or academic facilities.
[2] Institutional information signs shall require a conditional
use permit.
[3] Institutional information signs shall be configured as
monument signs.
[4] Institutional information signs may have changeable copy
or be configured as an electronic message sign meeting
the requirements of § 480-67.
[a] Electronic message signs shall only be permitted
within the Multifamily Residence, Conservancy, Public
§ 480-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-64
1:673
Facilities, Cemetery, Neighborhood Small Business,
Retail Business, Community Design, and Commercial/
Industrial Districts.
(b) Metal plaque sign. A type of optional miscellaneous sign
available to officially-recognized historic properties, sites, or
districts, typically denoting the name of the building onto
which it is mounted, its date of erection, and/or historical
information.
(c) Flag sign. A type of optional miscellaneous sign that is located
outside of a building with no display limit. It's made of vinyl,
fabric, or other similar lightweight all-weather flexible material
which is mounted on a pole. The pole can either be driven into
the ground or attached to a building. If the pole is driven into
the ground, it must be rigid and permanent. If the pole is
attached to the building, it must also be rigid.
D. Definitions and rules related to the temporary miscellaneous signs
group. Temporary miscellaneous sign: "temporary miscellaneous signs"
is a sign group containing one sign category, yard signs, which is
available to all land uses. See Figure 480-70(4).336
(1) Yard sign category. A sign category that is intended to
accommodate a wide variety of sign purposes (common examples
of yard signs are, but not limited to the following: garage sale signs,
for-sale signs, political signs, "slow down for kids" signs, etc.),
needed on a temporary basis. Such signs are freestanding and
mounted on one or two stakes or posts and do not have footings. All
yard signs must be placed on-premise. See on-premise sign
locations in Figure 480-70(5) and 480-70(6). The following yard
sign types are addressed by this article:
(a) Stake sign. A type of yard sign that consists of a sign face
erected upon one or more metal wires or wood, metal, or
plastic stakes of no more than three inches in width.
(b) Frame sign. A type of yard sign that consists of a frame into
which a sign face can be inserted and erected upon two wood,
metal, or plastic stakes or ground spikes.
(c) Arm and post sign. A type of yard sign mounted on a post or
posts, either with a bracket arm extending outward to support
a hanging sign, with the sign attached directly to the side of
the post, or with the sign mounted between two posts.
E. Prohibited signs. Refer to § 480-90A for additional sign prohibitions and
limitations.
336. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 480-64 MONONA CODE § 480-64
1:674
(1) Abandoned sign. Any sign remaining in place on a site or a portion
of a site (such as a single tenant in a multitenant building) that has
been vacant, closed, or otherwise unoccupied for a period of 90
consecutive days.
(2) Advertising vehicle sign. A vehicle, trailer, or other piece of
equipment which contains any sign, which is unlicensed and/or
inoperable, and which is parked on a public right-of-way or in a
location that is not an active work site so as to be seen from a
public right-of-way.
(a) Business vehicles legally parked in any of the locations
described below shall not be considered advertising vehicle
signs.
[1] A business vehicle parked on-site at the place of business
in a parking space designated for company vehicle parking
or storage on a site plan approved by the City; or
[2] A business vehicle legally parked on-site at the residence
of an employee (including driveways and legal off-street
parking spaces)
(3) Beacon/search beacon sign. Any light with one or more beams
directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not
on the same site as the light source; also, any light with one or
more beams that rotate or move.
(4) Board sign. A sign that is temporarily placed on the ground and is
made of rigid material.
(5) Bulletin board sign. A freestanding sign located on-site containing
changeable copy.
(6) Dangerous, deteriorated, or dilapidated signs. Signs which are an
imitation of or resemble in shape, size, copy or color an official
traffic sign or signal or which block traffic visibility or which,
through age, neglect or weather, are determined to be unsafe by
the Zoning Administrator.
(7) Feather sign. A sign consisting of a piece of vertically elongated,
flexible material such as cloth or vinyl which is affixed to a single
pole driven in the ground.
(8) Flashing/scrolling/animated sign. A sign having lights or
illumination which flashes, scrolls, moves, rotates, twinkles, blinks,
flickers, varies in intensity of color, or uses intermittent electrical
pulsations. Electronic message signs meeting the definition and
requirements of § 480-67 of this article shall not be considered
flashing, scrolling, or animated signs.
(9) Floodlighted signs. Reflection illuminated signs whose light source
is positioned so that 25% or more of light intensity directly from the
§ 480-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-64
1:675
light source is visible from a public right-of-way by vehicular traffic
or whose light source is visible from residential property.
(10) Inflatable sign. A sign capable of being filled with and expanded by
air or other gas, including animated or "dancing" inflatable signs.
(11) Mobile/portable sign. A sign mounted on a frame or chassis
designed to be easily relocated, including unlicensed or inoperable
vehicles and/or trailers. Licensed and operable business vehicles,
trailers, or other pieces of equipment shall not be considered
mobile or portable signs.
(12)Off-premise advertising sign. A sign which directs attention to
activity that is conducted upon the site where the sign is displayed.
Off-premise advertising signs include billboards.
(a) Existing legal off-premise advertising signs made
nonconforming by this section shall be permitted to continue
as legal, nonconforming signs, subject to the requirements of
§ 480-94.
(13) Roof sign. A sign displayed above the eaves or cornice of a building.
F. Other definitions.
(1) Building frontage. The width of the building facade that fronts a
public street, highway, or interstate.
(2) Business/tenant frontage. The portion of a building frontage
occupied by a single tenant space having a public entrance within
the building frontage. For businesses located on the interior of a
building without frontage, the building elevation providing
customer access shall be considered the business frontage.
(3) Copy. Words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic
representations incorporated into a sign.
(4) Changeable copy. Sign copy that may be changed manually to
provide different information such as boards with changeable
letters, bulletin boards, and chalkboards.
(5) Customer entrance. The entrance that the public can use when an
establishment is open to the public.
(6) Electronic message sign. See § 480-67.
(7) Elevation, building. The view of any building or other structure
from any one of four sides regardless of the configuration or
orientation of a building. No building shall be treated as having
more than four building elevations. Each elevation will generally be
identified as a north, south, east or west building elevation.
(8) External illumination. The lighting of an object from a light source
located a distance from the object.
§ 480-64 MONONA CODE § 480-64
1:676
(9) Facade. See "elevation."
(10) Height of sign. The vertical distance from the average ground level
at the base of the sign to the top of the highest attached component
of the sign. See § 480-74B for the measurement of sign height.
(11) Maintain. Maintaining the existing appearance of the sign;
replacing the sign face or the supporting structure with identical
materials, colors, and messages; changing the message of a
marquee sign; or changing the face of an off-premise advertising
sign (billboard).
(12) Lighting, ambient. Illumination in which the only light that falls
onto the sign come from sources that are available naturally (e.g.,
sunlight, moonlight) or from artificial lighting sources used for
other purposes in the vicinity of the sign (e.g., street lights, lighting
installed for other purposes or sites)
(13) Lighting, backlit. Illumination that is arranged in such a way that
the light is cast from behind the sign to the eyes of the viewer.
Often, the lighting element is unshielded but concealed behind
individual freestanding letters, creating a silhouette effect.
(14) Lighting, gooseneck. Illumination resulting from light emitted
directly from a shielded light fixture located at the top of the sign
and angled downward onto the sign face. The light fixture is
attached to a curved neck which is often flexible, allowing the user
to position the light source onto the sign face.
(15) Lighting, internal. Illumination emanating from a lighting element
that is located behind the sign face and which is completely
enclosed.
(a) Internally illuminated signs shall have individual channel
letters or silhouettes, light-colored copy on a dark-colored or
opaque cabinet field background (so the copy is legible during
the day and night), and a translucent message. When
illuminated, the sign shall appear to have an illuminated copy
with a dark or nonilluminated background.
[1] The requirements of Subsection F(15)(a), above, shall not
apply to internally illuminated individual characters,
letters, or shapes that do not contain copy on the sign face.
(b) Neon lighting is not considered to be internal lighting.
(16) Lighting, neon. Glass tube lighting in which a gas and phosphors
are used in combination to create a colored light. Neon lighting is
not considered internal lighting as defined in Subsection F(15)
above.
(17) Sign area. The entire face of a sign, including the extreme limits of
writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with
§ 480-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-64
1:677
§ 480-65. Pylon Sign Parcel Map.
any material or color forming an integral part of the background
of the display but not including any supporting framework. See
§ 480-74D.
(18) Plat phase. The collection of lots, rights-of-way, and outlots located
within the perimeter boundary of a final plat and intended to be
developed concurrently.
(19) Site. A site shall include all lots that are contiguous, under unified
single ownership and intended to remain under unified single
ownership under the jurisdiction of this article. A site may also be
determined to be a portion of a single lot where multiple building
are present or more than one building contains separate businesses
(approved by the City). For the purposes of this article, the site
shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(20) Sign face. The area or display surface used for the message.
(21) Temporary sign. A sign or advertising intended to be displayed for
a certain limited period of time. If a sign display area is permanent,
but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign
shall not be considered as temporary. A mobile or portable sign
shall not be considered a temporary sign or used for such a
purpose. Refer to Figure 480-70(2) and Figure 480-70(4) for rules
related to temporary signs.337
(22) Three-dimensional signs. Signs that have a depth or relief on their
surface. Where a sign consists of one or more three-dimensional
objects (i.e., balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculpture or statuelike
trademarks), fitting within the smallest simple geometric shape
(rectangle, circle, or triangle), the sign area shall be measured as
their maximum projection upon a vertical plane. See § 480-74D(5).
(23)Window. The total area within a single window pane.
A. All parcels identified on the City of Monona Pylon Sign Parcel Map are
eligible for a pylon sign in accordance with all applicable rules of this
Chapter. See Figure 480-65(1).338
(1) All parcels on the Map must directly face U.S. Highway 12/18 (the
Beltline), excluding parcels zoned Conservancy.
(a) Facing U.S. Highway 12/18 shall be defined as a parcel that
either directly abuts the U.S. Highway 12/18 right-of-way or
the parcel directly abuts a public street that is parallel to and
directly abuts the U.S. Highway 12/18 right-of-way (such as the
2100 and 2800 block of Royal Avenue).
337. Editor's Note: Said figures are included as an attachment to this chapter.
338. Editor's Note: Said figures are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 480-64 MONONA CODE § 480-66
1:678
§ 480-66. (Reserved)
§ 480-67. Electronic message signs.
§ 480-68. Fuel price signs.
A. Electronic message sign. A type of sign in which the displays may be
changed electronically, and which includes computer signs, electronic
reader boards, video screens, LCD signs.
(1) Electronic message signs shall only be permitted with a Plan
Commission approved conditional use permit for an institutional
information sign.
(a) No more than one electronic message sign shall be permitted
per site.
(2) In addition to the setback requirements of this article, no electronic
message sign shall be permitted unless the message element is not
visible from any property within a single-family or two-family
Zoning District.
(3) Electronic message signs may only be integrated into the design of
institutional information signs.
(a) No more than 33% of a sign's actual area shall contain an
electronic message sign.
(b) Electronic message signs shall count toward the site's
maximum permitted sign area.
(4) Messages and nontext images shall not change appearance more
than once every 10 seconds, and transitions between messages
shall be via instantaneous change. Use of electronic message signs
for images, text, or lighting that change appearance in a manner
not permitted above shall be considered flashing, scrolling, or
animated signs, which are prohibited per § 480-64E(7).
(5) Electronic message signs shall be equipped with photosensitive
equipment which automatically adjusts the brightness and contrast
of the sign in direct relation to the ambient outdoor illumination.
(6) Electronic message signs shall comply with the lighting
requirements of Chapter 480, Attachment 2.
(7) Electronic message signs shall be maintained so as to be able to
display messages in a complete and legible manner.
A. Fuel price signs. A type of sign required by Wis. Stat. § 100.18(8).
(1) Fuel price signs shall not be separate signs, but rather shall be
integrated into the design of a permitted sign, described in
§ 480-64A and in Figure 480-70(1).339
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-68
1:679
§ 480-69. (Reserved)
§ 480-70. Permitted sign rules.
§ 480-71. through § 480-73. (Reserved)
§ 480-74. Sign setback, height, measurement, and flexibility.
(2) Fuel price signs may be illuminated, per the lighting requirements
of Chapter 480, Attachment 2.
(3) Fuel price signs may contain changeable copy.
(4) All prices posted on fuel price signs shall remain in effect for at
least 24 hours after they are posted, per Wis. Stat. § 100.18(8).
A. Signs shall be allowed on private property in the City in accordance
with Figures 480.70(1) through 480.70(4), which address permitted
signage as it relates to permits, quantity, area, location, lighting, and
zoning districts. The requirements set forth in Figures 480.70(1)
through 480.70(4) shall be declared to be part of this article.340
(1) The rules for permanent business signs are located in Figure
480.70(1).
(2) The rules for temporary business signs are located in Figure
480.70(2).
(3) The rules for permanent miscellaneous signs are located in Figure
480.70(3).
(4) The rules for temporary miscellaneous signs are located in Figure
480.70(4).
(5) The rules for on-premise sign locations are located in Figure
480-70(5) and 480-70(6).341
(6) Signage for all Planned Community Development projects shall be
permitted per the base zoning district and may be granted
flexibility through the Planned Community Development process.
A. Sign setbacks. Signs must be located on-premises, outside of the vision
triangle, and must not be located within any street right-of-way, unless
otherwise specified or approved by the Plan Commission. Each sign
type must be setback in a location consistent with Figure 480-70(1),
Figure 480-70(2), Figure 480-70(3), Figure 480-70(4), and Figure
480-70(5).342
339. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
340. Editor's Note: Said figures are included as an attachment to this chapter.
341. Editor's Note: Said figures are included as an attachment to this chapter.
342. Editor's Note: Said figures are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 480-68 MONONA CODE § 480-74
1:680
B. Sign height.
(1) The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the
average ground level adjacent at the base of the sign to the top of
the highest attached component of the sign, or from the centerline
grade of the nearest adjacent public road, if such information is
supplied with the permit application and confirmed by the Zoning
Administrator, whichever is higher.
(2) The average ground level is defined as the average elevation within
a three-foot radius of the sign on the ground upon which the sign
supports are placed, except when the sign supports rest upon a
berm or other area elevated above the surrounding ground. In such
cases, the average elevation of the base of such berm or other area
shall be considered as the ground level.
C. Minimum ground clearance. All on-building and pedestrian signs shall
have a minimum clearance of 14 feet above a drive, alley, street,
parking space, or other vehicle surface and a minimum of eight feet
above a sidewalk, patio, or other ground-level surface.
D. Measurement of sign area: The measurement of sign area is based on
the arrangement of sign copy and sign background (sign background
does not include building architectural elements such as painted strips
or exterior building material changes, as determined by City staff):
(1) In the case of a freestanding sign (including three-dimensional
objects), sign area shall include the total sign area(s) that can be
viewed from any single vantage point (i.e., for a typical
freestanding sign that faces two directions, only the largest sign
face visible from any single vantage point shall count toward the
total permitted sign area).
(2) For signs comprised of letters and related copy surrounded by one
or more sign background colors on a single panel, frame, or
cabinet, the sign area shall be measured as the smallest single
rectangle enclosing the entire sign message and any and all
background color areas. See Example 1 in Figure 480-74(2).
(3) For signs comprised of individual letters and related copy
surrounded by one or more sign background colors on individual
panels, sign area shall be measured as the smallest single rectangle
enclosing the entire sign message and any and all background color
areas. See Example 1 in Figure 480-74(2).
(4) Groupings of related smaller signs shall be counted as one sign. In
such cases, sign area shall be measured as the smallest single
rectangle enclosing the individual signs and any and all
background color areas. See Example 2 in Figure 480-74(2).
(5) For signs comprised of one or more three-dimensional objects (i.e.,
balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculpture or statue-like
§ 480-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-74
1:681
§ 480-75. through § 480-85. (Reserved)
§ 480-86. Sign permits - application, enforcement, and revocation.
trademarks), fitting within the smallest simple geometric shape
(rectangle, circle, or triangle), the sign area shall be measured
as their maximum projection upon a vertical plane. See Figure
480-74(1) below.
Figure 480-74(1): Measurement of 3D Sign Area
Figure 480-74(2): Measurement of Sign Area
Example 1: Individual letters or
words grouped on one or more
panels
Smallest single rectangle
Example 2: Individual letters on
separate panels
Smallest single rectangle
A. Applicability.
§ 480-74 MONONA CODE § 480-86
1:682
(1) No freestanding sign listed under § 480-64(A)(1), on-building sign
listed under § 480-64(A)(2), order board sign under
§ 480-64(A)(4)(b), on-site warning sign under § 480-64(C)(1)(c), onsite
directional sign under § 480-64(C)(1)(d), or institutional
information sign under § 480-64(C)(2)(a) shall be erected, installed,
or constructed without approval from the City of Monona Plan
Commission.
(2) No pedestrian sign under § 480-64(A)(3), menu board sign under
§ 480-64(A)(4)(a), window sign under § 480-64(B)(1), temporary
board and banner sign under § 480-64(B)(2), or metal plaque sign
or flag sign under § 480-64(C)(2) shall be erected, installed, or
constructed without the granting of a permit from the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(3) No pylon or marquee signs under §§ 480-64(A) and 480-64(B) shall
be erected, installed, constructed, or maintained without the
structural support being designed by a licensed professional
engineer and approved by the Building Inspector as in compliance
with the Building Code of the City. All frames and supports shall be
of metal and designed to withstand pressure as provided in
§ 480-92.
(4) For signs requiring a permit in Subsection A(1), above, this section
shall apply and be construed to require a permit for a change of
copy on any sign or for any conversions or changes in the sign
structure.
(5) This section shall not apply to repainting or re-facing with the same
sign copy, cleaning, repair, or other normal maintenance of the sign
or sign structure.
(6) No new permit is required for signs which are in place as of the
effective date this article, and such signs may remain as legal
nonconforming signs. Any alteration or relocation of such signs
shall conform to the requirements of this article. Refer to § 480-94
for rules pertaining to nonconforming signs.
(7) Any sign permit granted hereunder shall not be assigned or
transferred to any other sign, including a modified sign face or
modified sign structure.
(8) The owner or tenant may request all such signs at one site be
included under one permit.
B. Review authority.
(1) The Plan Commission shall review all freestanding, on-building,
order board, on-site warning, on-site directional, or institutional
information signs, all signs accompanying changes in use or new
use which must receive approval of a zoning permit, and all
proposed signs which would require approval of a comprehensive
§ 480-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-86
1:683
signage plan for a site or sites which will have more than one
sign viewed together as part of a group of signs. This may be
required with a zoning permit for change of use or a sign permit.
All signs which require approval of a sign permit by the Zoning
Administrator or Plan Commission shall be reviewed according to
the following evaluation factors:
(a) Conformance to the zoning and sign code.
(b) Minimization of conflict with vehicular or pedestrian
circulation.
(c) Compatibility with the building characteristics, adjacent uses,
and adjacent signs.
(d) Compatibility with the specific physical site conditions which
warrant approval of the proposed sign.
(e) Materials and maintenance aspects.
(f) Legibility and visual clarity.
(2) The Plan Commission may grant special exception to this article
upon demonstration of due cause. Every applicant for a special
exception to the sign district requirements shall submit a written
statement to the Plan Commission which explains the reason for
the request and how it meets the evaluation factors.
C. Sign permit application. Each sign permit application shall include:
(1) The name, address, phone number, and email address of the
applicant.
(2) The name of the business or land use the proposed sign will serve.
(3) The name, address, phone number, email address, and signature of
the property owner.
(4) The name, address, phone number, and email address of the sign
contractor.
(5) The property's zoning designation.
(6) The property's current land use or uses for the entire subject
property, including all indoor and outdoor areas.
(7) An aerial photograph or approved site plan for the subject property.
If a site plan was not previously required or approved, a site plan
for the subject property with requirements as determined by the
Zoning Administrator shall be provided. At a minimum, the site
plan shall include the following:
(a) Location, type, height, width, and area of the proposed sign.
§ 480-86 MONONA CODE § 480-86
1:684
(b) Location, type, height, width, and area of all existing signs on
the property and indication of whether existing sign(s) will
remain or be removed/replaced.
(c) For all freestanding and institutional information signs, the
location and type of landscaping coordinated with site
landscaping.
(d) All property lines and buildings on the property and within 50
feet of the proposed sign.
(e) All parking areas, driveways, and public roads.
(f) Method of attachment, structural support, method of
illumination, and sign materials.
(g) The total area of all signs on the subject property both before
and after installation of the proposed sign.
(8) Payment of the sign permit fee, as established from time to time by
the Common Council.
(9) A written statement that all temporary signs will be removed per
the limits.
(10) Any other information that may reasonably be requested by the
Zoning Administrator for the purpose of application evaluation.
(11) Any existing or proposed sign on property abutting a state highway,
United States highway, or interstate highway shall comply with all
required approval from the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation and the Federal Highway Administration.
D. Granting and issuance.
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall review the application to ensure it
is complete per the requirements of Subsection B, above.
(2) In cases where no other review or approvals are required under
this article, the Zoning Administrator shall review said application
for compliance with Subsection D, below, and shall, in writing,
either approve or deny said sign permit.
(3) When a proposed sign is associated with any development that
requires a site plan, a sign permit shall not be granted prior to the
approval of a site plan. In such cases, the Zoning Administrator
shall review said application for compliance with Subsection D,
below, and shall schedule the item on the appropriate meeting
agenda(s) or action by the body with recommending or approval
authority, the Zoning Administrator shall approve or deny said sign
permit based on such recommendation or action.
(4) Denial of a sign permit shall not result in total or partial
reimbursement of permit fees paid.
§ 480-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-86
1:685
(5) A granted sign permit shall expire, and shall be null and void, if the
sign is not attached or erected within 180 days after the issuance of
the sign permit.
E. Basis for granting a sign permit. In deciding whether or not to grant a
sign permit, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the
proposed sign is in compliance with the provisions of this article. In
such review, the Zoning Administrator may also consider the following
factors:
(1) Whether the sign is designed, constructed, installed, or maintained
in such a manner that it does not endanger public safety or traffic
safety.
(2) Whether the sign is in compliance with all provisions of the City of
Monona Municipal Code and Building Code, including those related
to traffic safety, traffic visibility, sign setbacks, and structural
integrity.
F. Enforcement and revocation of sign permit.
(1) A sign permit may be revoked if the applicant has failed to comply
with the provisions of this article or any conditions that may have
accompanied the permit at the time of issuance. Revocation
requires written notice by either the Zoning Administrator for
Zoning Ordinance violations or the Building Inspector for Building
Code or other construction code violations.
(2) In the event that construction, installation, or manufacture of a sign
for which a permit has been issued has not commenced within 180
days from the date of the issuance of such permit, said permit shall
be null and void and automatically revoked. If work authorized by
such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days any
time after the work is commenced, the original permit shall become
null and void. In such cases, a new permit shall be obtained to
complete the work and a new permit fee shall be required.
(3) Any sign subject to a revoked permit shall be removed by the
licensee, sign owner, or property owner within 45 days of such
revocation.
(4) Revocation shall not result in total or partial reimbursement of
permit fees paid.
G. Appeals. Any person affected by a decision of the Zoning Administrator
may petition for a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals. The
filing of such petition automatically stays removal of any sign involved
and already legally erected until the Zoning Board of Appeals decides
whether to sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice.
H. Removal of signs in violation of this article.
§ 480-86 MONONA CODE § 480-86
1:686
§ 480-87. through § 480-89. (Reserved)
§ 480-90. Sign prohibitions and limitations.
The regulations contained in this section apply to signs in all zoning
districts.
(1) If the Zoning Administrator determines that any sign exists in
violation of this article, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
sign permit holder or the owner of the property on which the sign is
located. Said notification shall indicate that such violation shall be
corrected within 60 days of receipt of said notice on penalty of
automatic revocation of any sign permit, and that removal of the
sign by the City may occur at the expense of the owner of the
property.
(2) If notification is sent and the violation is not corrected within 60
days, the Zoning Administrator shall revoke the permit for any sign
which is in violation of this article. It shall be the duty of the Zoning
Administrator to cause removal of such sign.
(3) The expense of removing such sign shall be charged to the owner of
the property on which the sign is located. If the owner fails to pay
such expense within one month of being billed therefore, or has not
made arrangement for payment satisfactory to the City Attorney,
then such expense shall be charged against the property as a
special charge pursuant to § 66.0627 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as
may be amended from time to time.
(4) Any sign illegally placed in a public right-of-way shall be subject to
immediate removal and confiscation without notice by the Zoning
Administrator.
A. Sign prohibitions.
(1) No sign shall be erected at any location where it may, by reason of
its position, shape, color or design, interfere with, obstruct the view
of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device,
nor shall such sign make use of words such as "stop," "look,"
"danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such a
manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse users of streets or
highways.
(2) No fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating, or otherwise moving
signs such as windsocks, motorized signs, pennants, and streamers
shall be permitted. This shall not apply to banner signs as defined
in § 480-64B(2).
(3) No signs shall project above the building parapet or eave, or be
mounted on or extend above the roof, if attached to the building.
§ 480-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-90
1:687
§ 480-91. (Reserved)
§ 480-92. Appearance, construction and maintenance of signage.
(4) No flashing, scrolling, or animated signs shall be permitted.
Flashing is defined as changing more than once within a ten-second
time interval.
(5) No signs shall be mounted to an unlicensed trailer or other
unlicensed vehicle.
(6) No beacons or search beacons shall be permitted.
(7) No billboards or off-premise advertising signs shall be permitted.
(8) No abandoned signs shall be permitted. See § 480-64E(1).
(9) No illuminated sign shall be permitted unless the illumination of
the sign is so designed that the lighting element is not visible from
any property within a single-family, two-family, or multifamily
Zoning District.
B. Sign limitations.
(1) No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent
free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape, and
no sign shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(2) No sign shall be placed in a manner that would impede vehicular or
pedestrian safety, or impede access or visibility. Signs shall meet
the requirements of § 480-9.
(3) No private sign shall be attached to or painted on any natural
feature (e.g., tree or rock), fence, fire hydrant, public utility pole,
public light pole, or traffic regulatory structure, unless otherwise
authorized by the Director of Public Works.
(4) Signs must be placed on-premises which includes location on-site
or within the right-of-way adjacent to the site's street frontage
(outside of the vision triangle). They must be in a location approved
by staff through a revocable occupancy permit granted by the City.
(5) No person shall: paste, tape, staple, or otherwise fasten any paper
or other material to, nor paint, stencil, or otherwise write or color
any object, vegetation, or pavement located within any street rightof-
way; nor shall any of such object, vegetation, or pavement be
defaced in any manner. The only exception to these restrictions is
that painting may be allowed on curbs when approved by the
Common Council.
A. All signs shall be constructed, mounted, and maintained so as to comply
with the appropriate provisions of the Building Code as adopted by the
City relating to the design, structural members and connections. Signs
§ 480-90 MONONA CODE § 480-92
1:688
shall also comply with the applicable provisions of the Electrical Code
as adopted by the City.
B. The base or support(s) of all pylon or marquee signs shall be securely
anchored to a concrete base or footing. All signs shall meet minimum
wind load capabilities of 30 pounds per square foot when covered with
1/2 inch of ice.
C. The footing and related supporting structure of a permanent
freestanding sign or institutional information sign, including bolts,
flanges, and brackets, shall be concealed by landscaping as approved
by the Plan Commission. Said landscaping shall be diverse and colorful,
and shall be continuously maintained to comply with the approved
landscaping plan.
D. All pylon signs 20 feet in height or taller shall be required to submit
sign construction plans stamped by a licensed engineer for approval by
the Building Inspector.
E. Signs shall be mounted so that the method of installation is concealed.
Signs applied to masonry surfaces shall be mechanically fastened to
mortar joints only and not directly into brick or stone. Drilling to
provide electrical service shall follow the same rule.
F. No sign shall be suspended in a way that will allow the sign to swing
due to wind action, except for arm and post signs. Signs shall be
anchored to minimize any lateral movement that would cause wear on
the sign face or supporting members or connections.
G. All permanent signs and their supporting members shall be constructed
of standardized, durable, all-weather sign materials.
H. Sign materials shall be compatible with the design of the face of the
facade where they are placed and shall contribute to the legibility of the
sign.
I. No combustible materials other than approved plastics shall be used in
the construction of electric signs.
J. All signage within the jurisdiction of this article shall remain in a state
of proper maintenance. Proper maintenance shall be the absence of
loose materials (including peeling paint, paper or other material), the
lack of excessive rust, the lack of excessive vibration or shaking, and
the presence of the original structural integrity of the sign, its frame
and other supports, its mounting, and all components thereof.
K. Every sign requiring either Plan Commission or Zoning Administrator
approval hereafter erected shall have marked in a conspicuous place
thereon the date of erection, the manufacturer's name, the permit
number, and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used in connection
therewith.
§ 480-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-92
1:689
§ 480-93. (Reserved)
§ 480-94. Nonconforming signs.
L. The repainting, changing of parts, and preventive maintenance of signs
which completely conform to the requirements of this article, and result
in absolutely no change in the appearance of the sign from that
originally approved, shall not be deemed alterations requiring a sign
permit.
M. Any signs which may be, or may hereafter become, rotted, unsafe, or in
a state which is not properly maintained shall be subject to the
provisions of § 1-4.
N. If any sign is suspended or projects above a public right-of-way, the
issuance and continuation of a sign permit shall be conditioned on the
sign owner agreeing to hold the City harmless, and obtaining and
maintaining in force liability insurance for such a sign in such form and
such amount as the City may reasonably from time to time determine,
provided that the amount of such liability insurance shall be at least
$1,000,000 per occurrence per sign.
A. Nonconforming signs. Permanent signs existing as of the effective date
of this article, which do not conform to the provisions of this article,
such as brightness, scrolling, size, height, and location provisions, shall
be nonconforming signs.
B. Continuation of a nonconforming sign.
(1) Legal nonconforming signs may be maintained. Legal
nonconforming signs include signs that were erected under the
authority of proper sign permits prior to the adoption date of this
article or if no sign permit was required by applicable law at the
time the sign was originally constructed.
(2) Nonconforming signs shall not be altered or moved to a new
location without being brought into compliance with the
requirements of this article. See Subsection C(1), below, for what
would constitute an alteration of a sign.
(3) When the principal structure located on the site undergoes a
change that requires a conditional use permit, Planned Community
Development, or building permit exceeding $100,000, all
nonconforming signs shall be brought into conformance with the
provisions of this article or shall be removed.
(a) The new sign user, sign owner, or owner of the property on
which the change has occurred shall forthwith notify the
Zoning Administrator of the change.
C. Alteration of nonconforming signs.
§ 480-92 MONONA CODE § 480-94
1:690
§ 480-95. (Reserved)
§ 480-96. Removal of sign and sign structures where business is no
longer in operation.
(1) For the purpose of this section, alteration of a sign is considered to
be any change to the sign's frame, supporting structure, lighting,
material, height, location, or any other alterations as determined
by the Zoning Administrator.
(2) Altering a sign does not include maintaining the existing
appearance of the sign; changing the appearance of the sign face;
replacing the sign face or the supporting structure with identical
materials, colors, and messages; or changing the message of a
marquee.
(3) A tenant sign which comprises part of multiple businesses may be
replaced to accommodate a new tenant sign without triggering the
need to bring the entire project identification sign, or any of its
parts, into compliance with the provisions of this article.
A. A building, portion of a building, or site shall be determined to be
vacated based on one or more of the following criteria: 1) vacancy; 2)
cessation of some or all utilities; or 3) lapse or termination of
occupational license. Vacation of a building, structure or site shall have
the following effect:
(1) After 60 days, nonconforming signs shall lose their legal
nonconforming status.
(2) After 60 days, the owner of the property shall take the following
action regarding any permanent or temporary business signs and/
or sign structures associated with the vacant building, portion of a
building, or site located on the property. At the property owner's
option, the property owner shall do one of the following: remove all
such signs and structures, or replace the face of such signs with a
blank sign face. If the property owner is granted an extension
under Subsection A(3) below, the requirement shall not apply
during the extension period.
(3) An extension allowing signs and/or sign structures associated with
vacant buildings, portions of buildings, or sites to remain on the
property for an additional six-month time period after the original
60 days have lapsed may be granted under the following
conditions:
(a) The property owner shall submit an application with the
appropriate fee and allow staff to inspect the signs and/or sign
structures on the vacated building, portion of a building, or
site.
§ 480-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-96
1:691
§ 480-97. through § 480-99. (Reserved)
§ 480-100. Fees.
Fees related to signage shall be determined based on the then current Fee,
Forfeiture and Deposit Schedule.343
(b) Staff shall review the application and sign to determine that
the sign will not be a hazard, safety concern, or blight for the
duration of the extended time period.
(c) Signs shall be properly blanked out.
(d) If the sign has been damaged to the point it becomes a safety
hazard or blight on the property, the sign shall be removed.
(e) After the original six-month extension, one additional sixmonth
extension may be approved by staff for up to one year
upon submittal of a new application and fee. Any additional
applications for an extension, beyond the first year, shall be
approved by the Plan Commission.
(f) Owners of nonconforming signs may also apply for an
extension; however, the sign shall not thereafter be
reestablished except in full compliance with this article.
B. Sign structures that have been left without a sign face, or where the
permit holder no longer has any interest in the site as owner or tenant,
any of which for a continuous period of 90 days, shall be deemed
abandoned and shall be removed by the owner of the sign structure.
Should the owner fail to do so the City may proceed to remove such sign
structure pursuant to the terms of this article if the owner has not been
granted an extension.
C. If the sign and/or sign structure(s) have not been removed, the City
shall send written notification to the property owner of record and/or
last known occupant, via certified mail, indicating that said property
owner or occupant remove the sign and/or sign structure or apply for
and be granted an extension. If the sign and/or sign structure has not
been removed within 60 days after the City sends notice, and an
extension has not been granted, the City may have the sign and/or sign
structure removed.
D. Any and all costs incurred by the City in the removal of a sign or sign
structure pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be charged
against the property as a special charge pursuant to § 66.0627 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, as may be amended from time to time.
343. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 480-96 MONONA CODE § 480-100
1:692
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1994 Code to 2017 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title from 1994 Code Location in 2017 Code
Title 1, General Provisions for Use of Code of
Ordinances
Ch. 1, Use and Construction of Code of
Ordinances
§§ 1-1-2, 1-1-3, 1-1-5, 1-1-7 and 1-1-8 Ch. 1, Art. I
§§ 1-1-1, 1-1-4 and 1-1-6 NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. II
Ch. 2, Enforcement of Ordinances; Issuance
of Citations
Ch. 29
Title 2, Government and Administration
Ch. 1, City Government; Elections
§ 2-1-1, City Government Ch. 36
§ 2-1-2, Elections Ch. 47
Ch. 2, Mayor; Common Council Ch. 94
Ch. 3, City Officers Ch. 103
Ch. 4, Boards, Commissions and Committees Ch. 18
Title 3, Finance and Public Records
Ch. 1, Finance Ch. 63, Art. I
Ch. 2, Special Assessments Ch. 63, Art. II
Ch. 3, Public Records Ch. 128
Ch. 4, Disposal of Lost, Abandoned and
Surplus Property
Ch. 119
Ch. 5, Hotel-Motel Room Tax Ch. 63, Art. III
Title 4, Administrative Determinations Review
Ch. 1, Review of Administrative
Determinations
REP; see now Ch. 7
Title 5, Public Safety
Ch. 1, Police and Fire Commission Ch. 112
§ 480-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:693
Chapter/Title from 1994 Code Location in 2017 Code
Ch. 2, Volunteer Fire Department Ch. 70
Ch. 3, Emergency Government Ch. 54
Ch. 4, Ambulance Transportation Ch. 152
Title 6, Public Works
Ch. 1, Streets and Public Works
§§ 6-1-1 to 6-1-11, General Regulations Ch. 395, Art. I
§ 6-1-12, Waterway Maintenance Ch. 450
Ch. 2, Public Tree Maintenance Ch. 411, Art. I
Title 7, Licensing and Regulation
Ch. 1, Licensing of Dogs and Cats;
Regulation of Animals
Ch. 159
Ch. 2, Fermented Malt Beverages and
Intoxicating Liquor
Ch. 272, Art. I
Ch. 3, Cigarette Licenses Ch. 198
Ch. 4, Mobile Homes Ch. 303
Ch. 5, Regulation and Licensing of Fireworks Ch. 238
Ch. 6, Street Use Permits Ch. 395, Art. II
Ch. 7, Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Article
and Jewelry Dealers
Ch. 328
Ch. 8, Adult Oriented Establishments Ch. 145
Ch. 9, Massage Establishments and
Technicians
Ch. 296
Ch. 10, Mechanical or Electronic
Amusement Devices
Repealed by Ord. No.
2-12-636
Ch. 11, Christmas Tree Sales Ch. 191
Ch. 12, Licensees to Pay Local Claims;
Appellate Procedures
Ch. 63, Art. IV
Ch. 13, Regulation of Transient Merchants Superseded by Ord. No.
1-16-674; see now Ch. 404
Ch. 14, Weights and Measures Ch. 457
Ch. 15, Schedule of Fees NI
Title 8, Health and Sanitation
Ch. 1, Health and Sanitation
§§ 8-1-1 to 8-1-9, Health and Sanitation Ch. 263
§ 8-1-10, Day Care Centers and Day Care
Operators Regulated
Ch. 207
§ 8-1-11, Outdoor Furnaces Ch. 245
§ DT-1 MONONA CODE § DT-1
1:694
Chapter/Title from 1994 Code Location in 2017 Code
§ 8-1-12, Smoking Prohibited Indoors in
Public Places and Private Workplaces,
Including Restaurants and Bars
Superseded by statute
Ch. 2, Pollution Abatement Ch. 256
Ch. 3, Solid Waste Disposal and Recycling Ch. 381
Title 9, Public Utilities
Ch. 1, Water and Sewer Utilities Ch. 443
Ch. 2, Sewer Utility Regulations and Rates Ch. 360
Ch. 3, Cable Television REP
Ch. 4, Stormwater Utility Superseded by Ord. No.
12-14-668; see now Ch.
388
Title 10, Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Ch. 1, Traffic and Parking Ch. 434
Ch. 2, Bicycles Ch. 168
Ch. 3, Snowmobiles Ch. 374
Ch. 4, All-Terrain, Off-Road and
Neighborhood Electric Vehicles
Ch. 427
Ch. 5, Abandoned and Junked Vehicles
§ § 10-5-1 to 10-5-7, Abandoned and
Junked Vehicles
Ch. 420
§ 10-5-8, Junked Vehicles and Appliances
on Private Property
Ch. 342, Art. I
Title 11, Offenses and Nuisances
Ch. 1, State Statutes Adopted Ch. 335
Ch. 2, Offenses Against Public Safety and
Peace
§ 11-2-1, Prostitution
Ch. 335
REP
Ch. 3, Offenses Against Property
§ 11-3-5, Regulation of smoking
Ch. 335
REP
Ch. 4, Offenses Involving Alcoholic
Beverages
Ch. 272, Art. II
Ch. 5, Offenses Involving Juveniles Ch. 281
Ch. 6, Public Nuisances Ch. 312
Title 12, Parks and Navigable Waters
Ch. 1, Parks and Navigable Waters Ch. 321
Ch. 2, Public Tree Program Ch. 411, Art. II
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:695
Chapter/Title from 1994 Code Location in 2017 Code
Title 13, Zoning
Ch. 1, Zoning Code Ch. 480
Ch. 2, Floodplain and Shoreland-Wetland
Zoning
Ch. 466
Title 14, Subdivision and Platting
Ch. 1, Subdivision and Platting Ch. 473
Title 15, Building Codes
Ch. 1, Construction Standards Code Ch. 175
Ch. 2, Erosion and Stormwater Runoff
Control
Superseded by Ord. No.
12-14-669; see now Ch.
216
Ch. 3, Fair Housing Ch. 225
Ch. 4, Fire Prevention Code NLP; see Ch. 232
Ch. 5, Grievances Regarding Access to
Public Buildings, Programs, Services and
Employment
NI; superseded by City
policy
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
12-14-667
12-15-2014 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 381
Ord. No.
12-14-668
12-15-2014 Stormwater Utility
amendment
Ch. 388
Ord. No.
12-14-669
12-15-2014 Erosion and
stormwater control
amendment
Ch. 216
Ord. No. 3-15-670 4-8-2014 Boards, commissions
and committees:
Distinguished Service
Award Committee
amendment
Ch. 18
§ DT-1 MONONA CODE § DL-1
1:696
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 5-15-671 5-18-2015 Intoxicating liquor
and fermented malt
beverages : licenses
and permits
amendment
Ch. 272, Art. I
Ord. No.
10-15-672
11-2-2015 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No. 1-16-673 1-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 480
Ord. No. 1-16-674 1-19-2016 Transient merchants Ch. 404
Ord. No. 2-16-675 4-4-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
general regulations
Ch. 395, Art. I
Ord. No. 3-16-677 4-4-2016 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 5-16-678 5-2-2016 Floodplain and
shoreland-wetland
zoning amendment
Ch. 466
Ord. No. 6-16-679 6-20-2016 Peace and good order
amendment; general
provisions:
construction and
penalties amendment
Ch. 335; Ch. 1, Art.
I
Ord. No. 7-16-680 8-1-2016 Official traffic map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 8-16-681 9-19-2016 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 321
Ord. No. 9-16-682 9-19-2016 Boards, commissions
and committees
amendment
Ch. 18
Ord. No. 9-16-683 10-3-2016 Finance and taxation:
hotel-motel room tax
amendment
Ch. 63, Art. III
Ord. No. 9-16-684 10-3-2016 Boards, commissions
and committees
amendment
Ch. 18
Ord. No. 2-17-685 2-20-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 434
Ord. No. 2-17-686 3-20-2017 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 5-17-687 5-15-2017 Boards, commissions
and committees
amendment
Ch. 18
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:697
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 6-17-688 6-19-2017 Erosion and
stormwater control
amendment
Ch. 216
Ord. No. 9-17-689 10-16-2017 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
Ord. No.
10-17-691
10-16-2017 Fire Department
Amendment;
Ambulance
Transportation
Amendment
Ch. 70; Ch. 152
Ord. No.
11-17-692
11-20-2017 Boards, Commissions
and Committees
Amendment
Ch. 18
Ord. No.
12-17-693
12-4-2017 Parking Limits NCM
Ord. No. 1-18-694 2-5-2018 Boards, Commissions
and Committees
Amendment; Mayor
and Common Council
Amendment; Peace
and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 18; Ch. 94; Ch.
335
Ord. No. 2-18-695 2-19-2018 Parking Limits NCM
Ord. No. 2-18-696 2-19-2018 Solid Waste
Amendment
Ch. 381
Ord. No. 3-18-697 3-5-2018 Boards, Commissions
and Committees
Amendment
Ch. 18
Ord. No. 5-18-699 6-4-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 480
Ord. No. 6-18-700 6-18-2018 Temporary No-
Parking Order
NCM
Ord .No. 6-18-701 6-18-2018 Temporary No-
Parking Order
NCM
Ord. No. 7-18-702 8-6-2018 Cigarettes and
Tobacco Products
Amendment
Ch. 198
Ord. No. 7-18-703 8-6-2018 Juveniles Amendment Ch. 281
Ord. No. 7-18-704 8-6-2018 Peace and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 7-18-705 8-6-2018 Peace and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 335
§ DL-1 MONONA CODE § DL-1
1:698
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 7-18-706 8-6-2018 Building Construction
Amendment
Ch. 175
Ord. No. 7-18-707 8-6-2018 Fee schedule
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 7-18-708 8-6-2018 Boards, Commissions
and Committees
Amendment
Ch. 18
Ord. No.
12-18-710
12-3-2018 Parks and Recreation
Areas Amendment
Ch. 321
Ord. No.
12-18-711
12-3-2018 Parks and Recreation
Areas Amendment
Ch. 321
Ord. No. 1-19-712 1-22-2019 Fees, Fines and
Penalties Schedule
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 1-19-713 1-22-2019 Four-Way Stop
Intersection
NCM
Ord. No. 2-19-714 2-18-2019 No-Parking Area NCM
Ord. No. 3-19-715 4-1-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks: General
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 395, Art. I
Ord. No. 5-19-716 5-20-2019 Fires and Fire
Prevention
Amendment;
Nuisances
Amendment
Ch. 232; Ch. 312
Ord. No. 5-19-717 5-20-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 480
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:699