CODE OF
ORDINANCES
April 20, 2020
TOWN OF MIDDLETON
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Adopted by the Town Board of the Town of Middleton April 20, 2020 by Ordinance N o.
20200420 as the Code of Ordinances. Amendments noted where applic able.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1 GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
1.01 Town Board
1.02 Town Board Chair.
1.03 Town Officers, Officials and Employees.
1.04 Town Board Meetings.
1.05 Town Meetings
1.06 Boards, Commissions and Committees
1.07 Ethics Code
1.08 Public Records
1.09 Review of Administrative Determinations
1.10 Elections
CHAPTER 3 FINANCE AND TAXATION
3.01 Preparation and adoption of budget.
3.02 Changes in budget.
3.03 Town funds to be spent in accordance with appropriation.
3.04 Annual financial statement.
3.05 Finance book.
3.06 Financial audits.
3.07 Claims against Town.
3.08 Disbursements from treasury.
3.085 Alternative claims procedure.
3.09 Disposal of Town Property.
3.10 Public depository.
3.11 Temporary investment of funds not immediately needed.
3.12 Public contracts and competitive bidding.
3.13 Receiving money; receipt for same.
3.14 Duplicate Treasurer's bond eliminated.
3.15 Room tax.
3.16 Town Board may levy special assessments.
3.17 Resolution and report required.
3.18 Costs that may be paid by special assessment.
3.19 Exemptions; deductions.
3.20 Notice of proposed or approved project.
3.21 Board actions after hearing.
3.22 Combined assessments.
3.23 Board's power to amend, cancel or confirm special assessment.
3.24 Where cost of improvement is less than assessment.
3.25 Appealed assessments payable when due.
3.26 Special assessment a lien on property.
3.27 Special charges permissible.
3.28 General provisions.
3.29 Payment for public works; special assessments.
CHAPTER 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
4.01 Fire Protection.
4.02 Ambulance Service.
4.03 Impeding Fire Equipment Prohibited.
4.04 Police Power of Fire Departments.
4.05 False Alarm and Interference with Fire Fighting.
4.06 Damaging Fire Hose Prohibited; Parking By Hydrants; Blocking Fire Lanes.
4.07 Firefighters May Enter Adjacent Property.
4.08 Duty of Bystanders to Assist.
4.09 Adoption of State Codes.
4.10 Application to new and existing conditions.
4.11 Fire inspection duties.
4.12 Orders to eliminate fire hazards.
4.13 Service of orders.
4.14 Investigation of fires.
4.15 False Appearance.
4.16 Fire records.
4.17 Annual report.
4.18 Exceptions.
4.19 LP gas containers and equipment.
4.20 Outdoor burning regulated.
4.21 Activities banned or regulated during emergencies.
4.22 Depositing or accumulating combustible material.
4.23 Administration and enforcement.
4.24 New materials, processes, or occupancies which may require permits.
4.25 Fireworks regulations.
4.26 Hazardous Materials
4.27 Penalty.
CHAPTER 5 IMPACT FEES
5.01 Title, Purpose and Authority.
5.02 Definitions.
5.03 Applicability of Impact Fee.
5.04 Imposition of Impact Fee.
5.05 Impact Fee Schedules/Calculation.
5.06 Administration of Impact Fee.
5.07 Bonding of Excess Facility Projects.
5.08 Refunds.
5.09 Appeals.
5.10 Effect of Impact Fee on Subdivision Regulations.
5.11 Impact Fee as Additional and Supplemental Requirement.
5.12 Amendments.
5.13 Credits.
5.14 Penalty.
CHAPTER 6 CITATIONS; MUNICIPAL COURT; MUNICIPAL JUDGE
6.01 Method of enforcement.
6.02 Information contained in citation.
6.03 Schedule of deposits.
6.04 Issuance of citation.
6.05 Procedure on default.
6.06 Nonexclusivity.
6.07 Municipal Court.
CHAPTER 7 LICENSING AND REGULATION
7.01 Licensing of Dogs; Regulation of Animals
7.02 Prohibited and Protected Animals, Fowl, Reptiles and Insects; Animal Protection.
7.03 Penalties.
7.04 Fermented Malt Beverages, Intoxicating Liquor and Wine.
7.05 Cigarette Licenses.
7.06 Direct Sellers
7.07 Dance Licenses.
7.08 Licensees to Pay Local Claims; Appellate Procedures
CHAPTER 8 PUBLIC WORKS
8.01 Driveways and driveway culverts.
8.02 Streets and Sidewalks.
8.03 Sewers
CHAPTER 9 PARKS AND RECREATION
9.01 Park definitions and regulations.
9.02 Radio-controlled devices prohibited in parks.
9.03 Use of metal detectors on public property.
9.04 Fees and user regulations.
9.05 Public utilities and private construction.
9.06 Reservation of park space or shelters.
CHAPTER 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
10.01 State traffic laws adopted.
10.02 State Administrative Code provisions adopted.
10.03 Official traffic signs and control devices; prohibited signs, signals and markers.
10.04 Registration record of vehicle as evidence.
10.05 School bus warning lights.
10.06 Operators to obey traffic control devices.
10.07 Speed limits.
10.08 Special weight limits.
10.09 Restrictions on parking; posted limitations
10.10 Snow emergencies.
10.11 Unlawful removal of parking citations.
10.12 Motor vehicle conduct prohibited.
10.13 Unauthorized vehicles prohibited on public lands.
10.14 Penalties.
10.15 Enforcement.
10.16. State snowmobile laws adopted.
10.17 Applicability of traffic regulations to snowmobiles.
10.18 Operation of Snowmobiles Prohibited on Public Property.
10.19 Penalty.
CHAPTER 11 OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
11.01 Offenses Against State Laws Subject To Forfeiture.
11.02 Throwing Or Shooting Of Arrows, Stones, Or Other Missiles Prohibited.
11.03 Carrying Concealed Firearms, Where Prohibited; Carrying Or Possessing Certain
Weapons Prohibited.
11.04 Safe Use And Transportation Of Firearms And Bows.
11.05 Loud and Unnecessary Noise Prohibited
11.06 Disorderly Conduct.
11.07 Destruction of Property Prohibited.
11.08 Littering Prohibited.
11.09 Abandoned Refrigerators Prohibited.
11.10 Trespass.
11.11 Damage To Public Property.
11.12 Cemetery Regulations.
11.13 Sale of Alcohol Beverages to Underage Or Intoxicated Persons Restricted.
11.14 Underage Persons' Presence in Places of Sale; Penalty.
11.15 Underage Persons; Prohibitions; Penalties
11.16 Defense of Sellers.
11.17 Persons' Who Have Attained The Legal Drinking Age; False Or Altered Identification
Cards.
11.18 Possession of Alcohol Beverages on School Grounds Prohibited
11.19 Adult Permitting or Encouraging Underage Violation.
11.20 Solicitation of Drinks Prohibited.
11.21 Use of Cigarettes, Tobacco and Vapor Products
11.22 Restrictions on Sale Or Gift of Cigarettes, Vapor Products Or Tobacco Products
11.23 Smoking In Enclosed Places
11.24 Public Nuisances Prohibited.
11.25 Public Nuisance Defined.
11.26 Public Nuisances Affecting Health.
11.27 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety.
11.28 Abatement of Public Nuisances.
11.29 Cost of Abatement.
11.30 Penalties.
CHAPTER 12 HEALTH AND SANITATION
12.01 Deposit of Deleterious Substances Prohibited.
12.02 Destruction of Noxious Weeds.
12.03 Recycling.
12.04 Anti Scavenging.
12.05 Illegal Dumping.
12.06 Violations and Penalties.
12.07 Special Assessments.
12.08 Promulgation of Regulations.
12.09 Consistency.
12.10 Administration and Enforcement.
CHAPTER 14 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
14.01 Statutory authority.
14.02 Public participation.
14.03 Plan Commission resolution.
14.04 Public hearing.
14.05 Adoption of plan.
CHAPTER 15 LAND DIVISION AND SUBDIVISIONS
15.01 Introduction and purpose.
15.02 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
15.03 Interpretation.
15.04 Title.
15.05 Definitions.
15.06 Transition area.
15.07 Compliance; jurisdiction; minor subdivisions; building permits; condominiums.
15.08 Land suitability.
15.09 Condominium developments.
15.10 Dedication and reservation of land.
15.11 Hillside protection.
15.12 Administrative fees.
15.13 Landscape requirements.
15.14 Preliminary consultation.
15.15 Submission of Preliminary Plat for major subdivisions.
15.16 Preliminary plat review and approval.
15.17 Final plat review and approval.
15.18 Replat.
15.19 Assessor's plat.
15.20 Technical requirements for Preliminary Plats.
15.21 Technical requirements for final plats.
15.22 Technical requirements for certified survey land divisions; review and approval.
15.23 Cost of improvements; general standards.
15.24 Required agreement providing for proper installation of improvements.
15.25 Required construction plans; Town Review; inspections.
15.26 Street improvements.
15.27 Curb and gutter.
15.28 Sidewalks.
15.29 Park and trail improvements.
15.30 Sanitary sewerage system.
15.31 Stormwater drainage facilities.
15.32 Other utilities.
15.33 Street signs and lighting.
15.34 Erosion control.
15.35 Partition fences.
15.36 Easements.
15.37 Buffer strips.
15.38 Greenways.
15.39 Vegetation in right-of-way.
15.40 General street design standards.
15.41 Pedestrian pathways.
15.42 Lot design standards.
15.43 Drainage system.
15.44 Nonresidential land divisions.
15.45 General park, conservancy area, recreational trail, and public land dedication
requirements.
15.46 Parkland, conservancy areas, and recreational trail dedication.
15.47 Reservation of additional land.
15.48 Development of park area.
15.49 Development of trails.
15.50 Preservation of conservancy areas.
15.51 Variances and exceptions.
15.52 Violations and penalties; appeals.
Environmental Checklist (Attachment 1)
CHAPTER 16 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
16.01 Title; purpose.
16.02 Definitions.
16.03 State Uniform Dwelling Code adopted.
16.04 State Uniform Commercial Building Code Adopted.
16.05 Construction standards; codes adopted.
16.06 Building permits and inspections.
16.07 Electrical and plumbing permits.
16.08 Building construction bond, letter of credit or cash deposit.
16.09 Unsafe buildings.
16.10 Garages.
16.11 Basements; excavations.
16.12 New methods and materials.
16.13 Disclaimer on inspections.
16.14 Regulations for moving buildings.
16.15 Swimming pools.
16.16 Regulation and permit for razing buildings.
16.17 Fees.
16.18 Violations and penalties.
16.19 Severability.
16.20 Outdoor Lighting
16.21 Outdoor furnaces regulated.
CHAPTER 17 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
17.01 Title
17.02 Finding and declaration of purpose.
17.03 Applicability; performance time
17.04 Definitions
17.05 Land-disturbing activities subject to control
17.06 Reporting on stormwater facilities
17.07 Prohibited acts
17.08 Standards and criteria
17.09 Application and issuance of permits
17.10 Violations and penalties
17.11 Appeals
CHAPTER 18 MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE AND
MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITIES
18.01 Definitions.
18.02 Permitted uses and structures.
18.03 Mobile and manufactured homes limited to parks only.
18.04 Mobile and Manufactured Home Community license and application.
18.05 Inspection and enforcement.
18.06 Mobile and Manufactured Home Community Standards.
18.07 Water supply.
18.08 Waste and garbage disposal.
18.09 Number of spaces per parcel.
18.10 Operation of mobile and manufactured Home communities; responsibilities of park
management.
18.11 Responsibilities and duties of Mobile and Manufactured Home Community occupants.
18.12 Additional regulations.
18.13 Compliance with plumbing, electrical and building ordinances.
18.14 Limitations on signs.
18.15 Standards for general site planning for mobile and manufactured home communities.
CHAPTER 19 REGULATION OF WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
19.01 Purpose, intent and applicability.
19.02 Definitions.
19.03 Permits and Application Process
19.04 Conditions for Approval.
19.05 Written Decision.
19.06 Post-Approval Obligations.
19.07 Change of Ownership and Modifications.
19.08 Monitoring Compliance.
19.09 Complaint Process.
19.10 Permit Revocation.
19.11 Fees.
CHAPTER 20 CABLE TELEVISION
20.01 Short title.
20.02 Definitions.
20.03 Rights and privileges of grantee.
20.04. Agreement and incorporation of application by reference.
20.05 Franchise territory.
20.06 Duration and acceptance of franchise.
20.07 Franchise renewal.
20.08 Police powers.
20.09 Cable television franchise required.
20.10 Use of grantee facilities.
20.11 Initial franchise costs.
20.12 Notices.
20.13 Letter of credit/security deposit.
20.14 Construction performance bond.
20.15 Liability and insurance.
20.16 Indemnification.
20.17 Rights of individuals.
20.18 Public notice.
20.19 Service availability and record request.
20.20 System construction.
20.21. Construction and technical standards.
20.22 Use of streets.
26.23. Operational standards.
20.24. Customer service standards.
20.25 Continuity of service mandatory.
20.26. Complaint procedure.
20.27 Grantee rules and regulations.
20.28 Franchise fee.
20.29 Transfer of ownership or control.
20.30 Availability of books and records.
20.31 Other petitions and applications.
20.32 Fiscal reports.
20.33 Removal of cable television system.
20.34 Required services and facilities.
20.35 Rules and regulations.
20.36 Performance evaluation sessions.
20.37 Rate change procedures.
20.38 Forfeiture and termination.
20.39 Foreclosure.
20.40 Approval of transfer and right of acquisition by the Town.
20.41 Receivership.
20.42 Compliance with state and federal laws.
20.43 Landlord/tenant.
20.44 Applicants' bids for initial franchise.
20.46 Damages.
20.47 Procedures.
20.48 Force majeure.
CHAPTER 25 GENERAL PROVISIONS
25.01 Principles of Construction.
25.02 Conflicting Provisions.
25.03 Separability of Provisions.
25.04 Effective Date of Ordinances.
25.05 Certification; Clerk to Maintain Copies of Documents Incorporated by Reference;
Scrivener’s Errors.
25.06. Violations and Penalties; Juvenile Dispositions and Sanctions.
25.07 Fees
STATE OF WISCONSIN )
) ss
COUNTY OF DANE )
CERTIFICATE
I, Barbara Roesslein, do hereby certify that I am the duly appointed, qualified and acting
Town Clerk of the Town of Middleton, Dane County, Wisconsin, and as such have charge of all
of the records and proceedings of the Town Board of said Town as well as the records and files
of said Town together with the official seal thereof. I further certify that attached hereto is a true,
con-ect and compared copy of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Middleton and that said
copy is a true, correct and compared copy of said original Code of Ordinances as adopted by
Town Board of the Town of Middleton, and as the same now appears and is recorded in the
official ordinance book of the Town of Middleton in my office as Clerk of the Town if
Middleton.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand as the Town Clerk of the Town
of Middleton, Dane County, Wisconsin, on this 20th day of April 2020, and affixed an
impression of the official seal of said Town.
Barbara Roesslein
Town Clerk in and for the Town of
Middleton, Dane County, Wisconsin.
TOWN OF MIDDLETON
ORDINANCE NO. 20200420
ORDINANCE ADOPTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF
MIDDLETON, DANE COUNTY, WISCONSIN
THE TOWN BOARD OF THE TOWN OF MIDDLETON, DANE COUNTY,
WISCONSIN, DO HEREBY ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
1. The code of ordinances in book form entitled, "Town of Middleton Code of
Ordinances", having been placed on file and open to public inspection in the office of the town
clerk for a period of two weeks commencing March 25, 2020, pursuant to Wis. Stat. s. 66.0103, is
hereby adopted as the general code of ordinances in and for the Town of Middleton, Dane County,
Wisconsin.
2. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and posting as required by law.
C
Attest:
t;i-~(l/1c~ /loLJ~~
Barbara Roesslein, Town Clerk
Date Adopted: April 20, 2020
Date Recorded: Afr:i( ~4.1 -~:LC
Date Posted:
Effective Date:
1
CHAPTER 1
GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
1.01 Town Board
1.02 Town Board Chair.
1.03 Town Officers, Officials and Employees.
1.04 Town Board Meetings.
1.05 Town Meetings
1.06 Boards, Commissions and Committees
1.07 Ethics Code
1.08 Public Records
1.09 Review of Administrative Determinations
1.10 Elections
1.01 Town Board
(1) Membership and Election. The Town Board shall consist of the Town Chairperson
and 4 Supervisors to be elected as follows:
(a) 3 Supervisors, one of whom shall be designated Chairperson, to be elected
in odd-numbered years to numbered seats; and
(b) 2 Supervisors to be elected in even-numbered years to numbered seats.
(2) General Powers and Duties of the Town Board.
(a) The Town Board shall have charge of all affairs of the Town not committed
by law to another body or officer or to Town employee(s).
(b) As authorized under Wis. Stat. § 60.10(2)(c), the Town Board shall exercise
powers relating to villages and conferred on village boards under Ch. 61,
Wis. Stats., except those powers which conflict with statutes relating to
towns and town boards.
(c) The Town Board may exercise all the powers and shall exercise all of the
duties as authorized by state and federal law and regulations and these
ordinances.
1.02 Town Board Chair. The Town Board Chair shall:
(1) Preside over meetings of the Town Board.
(2) Preside over Town meetings as provided under Wis. Stat. § 60.13.
2
(3) Act, on behalf of the Board, to:
(a) See that Town orders and Ordinances are obeyed.
(b) See that peace and order are maintained in the Town.
(c) Obtain necessary assistance, if available, in case of emergency, except as
provided under Chapter 166, Wis. Stats.
(4) If authorized by the Town Board, act on behalf of the Board to:
(a) Direct, as appropriate, the solicitation of bids and quotations for the Town's
purchase of equipment, materials and services and submit the bids and
quotations to the Town Board for approval. Although the Town Board may
direct the Chair to solicit bids and quotations, the final decision as to which
bid to accept or the decision to enter into a contract shall be made by the
entire Board.
(b) Represent, or designate another officer to represent, the Town at meetings
of, and hearings before, governmental bodies on matters affecting the
Town.
(5) The Town Chair may exercise all the powers and shall exercise all of the duties as
authorized by state and federal law and regulations and these ordinances.
1.03 Town Officers, Officials and Employees.
(1) Town Treasurer. The Town Treasurer shall be appointed by the Town Board for a
one year term. The salary of the Town Treasurer shall be set by the Town Board
from time to time and may be an annual salary, a per diem compensation for each
day or part of a day necessarily devoted to the service of the Town and the discharge
of the duties of Town Treasurer, or a combination thereof. The Town Treasurer
shall perform those duties required by law and such duties as may be assigned by
the Town Board.
(2) Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall be appointed by the Town Board for a one year
term. The salary of the Town Treasurer shall be set by the Town Board from time
to time and may be an annual salary, a per diem compensation for each day or part
of a day necessarily devoted to the service of the Town and the discharge of the
duties of Town Treasurer, or a combination thereof. The Town Clerk shall perform
those duties required by law and such duties as may be assigned by the Town Board.
(3) Town Administrator.
3
(a) The administrator shall be appointed on the basis of merit with due regard
to education, training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness
for the office, by the majority vote of the Board
(b) The administrator shall hold office for an indefinite term subject to removal
at any time by a majority vote of the Board.
(c) The administrator, subject to the limitations defined in resolutions, rules,
policies and ordinances of the Town of Middleton and Wisconsin Statutes,
and the rules, shall be the chief administrative officer of the Town,
responsible only to the Board for the proper administration of business
affairs of the Town.
(4) Deputies.
(a) Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 60.331, the Town Clerk may appoint one or more
deputies for whom the Town Clerk is responsible. The Town Clerk may
designate a deputy to perform the clerk's duties during the absence, sickness
or other disability of the clerk.
(b) Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 60.341, the Town Treasurer may appoint one or
more deputies for whom the Town Treasurer is responsible. In case of the
absence, sickness or other disability of the treasurer, the deputy shall
perform the treasurer's duties.
(5) Employees. The Town Board may employ on a temporary or permanent basis
persons necessary to carry out the functions of Town government. The Board may
establish the qualifications and terms of employment. The Board may delegate the
authority to hire Town employees to any Town official or employee.
(6) Assessor.
(a) The Assessor, or assessment firm, shall be certified by the Department of
Revenue under Section 73.03(2)(b), Wis. Stats., as qualified to perform the
functions of an Assessor. Pursuant to Sec. 60.307(2), Wis. Stats., the
Assessor shall be appointed by majority vote of the Town Board for a term
of office not to exceed 5 years.
(b) The Assessor shall make an assessment of all of the property in the Town
liable to taxation, as prescribed by law. The Assessor shall return the
assessment roll to the Town Clerk at the same time and in the same manner
in which Town Assessors are required to do as required by Chapter 70, Wis.
Stats.
(7) Building Inspector.
4
(a) The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Chair, subject to
confirmation by the Town Board. The Building Inspector shall have an
indefinite term of office. The Building Inspector shall review plans, collect
building code-related fees and arrange for Assistant Inspectors to conduct
on-site inspections. The Building Inspector shall be fully certified by the
State of Wisconsin to enforce the One- and Two-Family Building Dwelling
Code and other Town building ordinances.
(b) Powers and Duties.
(i) The Building Inspector shall enforce the Town's building and
housing codes and all other ordinances, laws and orders of the Town
and State which relate to building construction, alteration,
demolition, and repair. With the authorization of the Town Board,
the Building Inspector may appoint one 1 or more Deputy Inspectors
and may delegate to them the above-mentioned powers and duties.
(ii) The Building Inspector shall have the power to order all work
stopped on construction, alteration, or repair of buildings in the
Town when such work is being done in violation of any provision
of State Statutes, applicable provision of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, policy of the Wisconsin Department of
Commerce, Dane County Ordinance and Town Ordinance. Work
shall not be resumed after the issuance of such an order, exception
on written permission of the Building Inspector.
(iii) The Building Inspector shall issue or cause to be issued all proper
permits for such work after payment of the fees required therefor.
He or she shall process all applications, make all inspections, and
have the authority to issue or cause to be issued a certificate of
completion.
(iv) The Building Inspector shall have the power to make or cause to be
made an entry into any building or premises where the work of
altering, repairing, or constructing any building or structure is going
on, including plumbing and electrical work.
(8) Weed Commissioner. The Weed Commissioner shall be appointed by the Chair.
The term of office of the Weed Commissioner shall commence on the first day of
May following his or her appointment. The Weed Commissioner shall take the
official oath, which oath shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk, and shall
hold office for 1 year. The Weed Commissioner shall hold office pursuant to fulfill
the duties set out in state law. In the event Dane County appoints a weed
commissioner under Wis. Stat. § 66.0517(2)(b), the Town Weed Commissioner
shall become a deputy weed commissioner, who shall work in cooperation with the
county weed commissioner.
5
(9) Town Attorney. The Town Attorney is an appointed position. The Town Attorney
shall be appointed by the Town Board and shall serve at the pleasure of the Board.
The Town Attorney shall conduct all of the law business in which the Town is
interested. The Town Board may employ and compensate special counsel to assist
in or take charge of any matter in which the Town is interested.
(10) Town Engineer. The Town Engineer is an appointed position. The Town Engineer
shall be appointed by the Town Board and shall serve at the pleasure of the Board.
When authorized by the Town Board, the Town Engineer shall provide engineering
services to the Town and perform such services as prescribed in this Code of
Ordinances.
1.04 Town Board Meetings.
(1) Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Middleton Town Board shall be as
scheduled and noticed by the Town Board. All meetings of the Board shall be held
at the Town Hall of the Town of Middleton unless specified otherwise in the
minutes of the preceding meeting or by written notice posted at the regular meeting
place at least 24 hours prior to any meeting. A majority of Supervisors must consent
to any change in the place of any meeting of the Board.
(2) Special Meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Chair or by 2 Supervisors
by notifying the Clerk no less than 36 hours prior to the specified time of the
meeting unless for good cause such notice is impossible or impractical, but in no
case shall any special meeting be held on less than 2 hours’ notice. The Clerk shall
immediately notify all Supervisors of the time and place of the meeting and shall
cause public notice to be posted in at least 3 public places likely to give notice to
persons prior to the time specified for the meeting as required by the Wisconsin
Open Meeting Law.
(3) All Town Board and official Town committee and commission meetings shall be
open to the public and be in compliance with Wisconsin's Open Meeting Law.
(4) The Town Board has power to preserve order at its meetings, compel attendance of
Supervisors and punish nonattendance.
(5) Quorum. A majority of the Supervisors shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser
number may adjourn if a majority is not present.
(6) The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Town Board when present. In the
Chair’s absence, the Town Board may select another Supervisor to preside and, in
such case, the Clerk shall call the meeting to order and preside until the Town Board
selects a Supervisor to preside.
6
(7) Agenda Preparation. The Town Clerk, in consultation with the Town Chair and
other Town officials as needed, shall prepare an agenda incorporating the matters
comprising the order of business.
(8) Order of Business. At all meetings, the following order may be observed in
conducting the business of the Town Board:
(a) Call to Order by presiding officer;
(b) Roll Call;
(c) Reading and correcting the financial report and the minutes of the last
preceding meeting or meetings;
(d) Presentation of communications;
(e) Reports from officials of the Town;
(f) Reports from committees;
(g) Unfinished business remaining from preceding sessions in the order in
which it was introduced;
(h) New business; ordinances and resolutions may be introduced and
considered;
(i) Business as may be presented by the Chairperson and Supervisors;
(j) Miscellaneous;
(k) Adjournment.
(9) Business, Resolutions and Ordinances; Disposition of Communications.
(a) Ordinances to be in Writing. All ordinances submitted to the board shall be
in writing. All written material introduced shall be discussed and acted
upon as the Board deems appropriate.
(b) Notice.
(i) The Town Board may take action on an Ordinance only if it appears
on the written agenda for meeting at which action is requested in
order to provide proper legal notice.
7
(ii) Ordinances will be placed on the agenda for Board action only if
they are submitted to the Town Clerk in written form a minimum of
2 days prior to the meeting at which action is requested.
(c) Disposition of Petitions, Communication, Etc. Every petition or other
writing of any kind, addressed to the Board, Clerk or other Town officer for
reference to the Town Board, shall be delivered by the Clerk or such other
Town officer to the Chair or to the presiding officer of the Board as soon as
convenient and after receipt of same and, in any event, prior to or at the
opening of the next meeting of the Board following the receipt of same.
(10) Conduct Of Deliberations.
(a) A roll call shall not be necessary on any questions or motions except as
follows:
(i) When the ayes and noes are requested by any member.
(ii) On confirmation and on the adoption of any measure assessing or
levying taxes, appropriations or disbursing money, or creating any
liability or charge against the Town or any fund thereof.
(iii) When required by law.
(b) All aye and nay votes shall be recorded in the official minutes.
(c) Except as provided below, the Town Board shall, in all other respects,
determine the rules of its procedure, which shall be governed by Robert's
Rules of Order (Revised), which is hereby incorporated by reference, unless
otherwise provided by Ordinance or Statute, except when otherwise limited
or modified by this Code of Ordinances:
(i) No Supervisor shall address the Board until he or she has been
recognized by the presiding officer. He or she shall thereupon
address himself to the chairman and confine his remarks to the
question under discussion and avoid all personalities.
(ii) When 2 or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the
presiding officer shall name the member who is to speak first.
(11) Procedure at Public Hearings.
(a) The Chair shall recognize those persons who wish to speak regarding the
proposition. Each person wishing to speak regarding the proposition shall
give his or her name and address.
8
(b) Each person speaking on behalf of a matter shall be limited in time of 5
minutes, unless the Board consents to granting additional time.
(c) When the Chair in his or her discretion is satisfied that the proposition has
been heard, he or she shall either announce the fact that the hearing is
concluded or request a motion to close the hearing.
1.05 Town Meetings
(1) Powers. Town Meetings may exercise the authority under Wis. Stat. § 60.10 or as
otherwise provided by law.
(2) Directives or grants of authority to the Town Board may be general and continuing
or may be limited as to purpose, effect or duration. Resolutions shall specify
whether the directive or grant is general and continuing or whether it is limited as
to purpose, effect or duration. A resolution that is continuing remains in effect
until rescinded at a subsequent Town Meeting by a number of electors equal to or
greater that the number of electors who voted for the original resolution. This
paragraph does not limit any authority otherwise conferred on the Town Board by
law.
(3) Annual Town Meeting. The Town of Middleton shall hold an annual Town
meeting as provided in this subsection.
(a) Except as provided in Subsection (3)(b) below, the annual Town meeting
shall be held on the 2nd Tuesday of April.
(b) The annual Town meeting may set a date different than provided under
Subsection (3)(a) above for the next annual Town meeting if the date is
within 10 days after the 2nd Tuesday of April.
(c) The Annual Town meeting may be held in the Town or in any village or
city within or adjoining the Town of Middleton. The annual Town meeting
shall be held at the location of the last annual Town meeting unless the
location is changed by the Town Board. If the Town Board changes the
location, it shall publish a Class 2 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., stating
the location of the meeting, not more than 20 nor less than 15 days before
the date of the meeting.
(d) The annual Town meeting may be recessed to a time and date certain if the
resumed meeting is held within 30 days after the date of the meeting
originally scheduled under Subsection (b). Business not acted on at the
annual meeting, or within the 30 days allowed for adjourning and
reconvening the meeting, shall be left to the next annual meeting or taken
up by a special Town meeting convened under Wis. Stat. § 60.12.
9
(e) Notice. No public notice of the annual Town meeting is required if held as
provided under Subsection (3)(a). If held as provided under Subsection
(3)(b), notice of the time and date of the meeting shall be given under Wis.
Stat. § 60.12(3).
(f) Poll List. The annual Town meeting may require the Clerk of the Town
meeting to keep a poll list with the name and address of every elector voting
at the meeting.
(4) Special Town Meetings.
(a) A Special Town Meeting may be convened if:
(i) Called by a Town Meeting.
(ii) A written request, signed by a number of electors equal to not less
than 10% of the votes cast in the Town for Governor at the last
general election is filed with the Town Clerk.
(iii) Called by the Town Board.
(b) Time, Date and Purpose to Be Stated. If a Special Town Meeting is
requested or called under Subsection (a), the time, date and purpose of the
meeting shall be stated in the request or as part of the call.
(c) Notice. The Town Clerk shall, not more than 20 nor less than 15 days before
the date of a Special Town Meeting, publish a Class 2 notice of the meeting
under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats.. The notice shall state the purpose, date, time
and location of the meeting. If notice is posted instead of published, the
same time and content requirements apply.
(d) Location.
(i) A Special Town Meeting may be held in the Town or in any village
or city within or adjoining the Town.
(ii) A Special Town Meeting shall be held where the preceding annual
Town meeting was held, unless the location is changed by the Town
Board.
(e) Adjournment. A Special Town Meeting may be recessed to a time and date
certain if the resumed meeting is held within 30 days after the date of the
originally scheduled meeting.
(5) Presiding Officer at Town Meetings.
10
(a) If present, the Town Board Chair shall chair the Town meeting. If the Town
Board Chair is absent, another Town Board Supervisor shall chair the Town
meeting. If no Town Board Supervisor is present, the Town meeting shall
elect the chairperson of the meeting.
(b) If the annual Town meeting is held in a year when the office of Town Board
Chair is filled by election, the person holding the office on the day prior to
the date of the election to fill the office shall preside at the annual Town
meeting and is entitled to receive the per diem which is ordinarily paid to
the presiding officer. If such person is absent or refuses to serve as the
presiding officer, the presiding officer shall be chosen under subsection
(5)(a) above.
(c) Duties. The Town meeting chairperson shall conduct the meeting's
proceedings in accordance with accepted parliamentary procedure.
(d) Enforcement Authority. The Town meeting chairperson shall maintain
order and decorum and may order any person to leave a Town meeting if
the person has conducted himself or herself in a disorderly manner and
persisted in such conduct after being directed by the chairperson to cease
the conduct. If the person refuses the chairperson's order to withdraw, the
Town meeting chairperson may order a constable or other law enforcement
officer to take the person into custody until the meeting is adjourned.
(6) Procedure at All Town Meetings.
(a) Qualified Voters. Any qualified elector of the Town, may vote at a Town
meeting. A qualified elector means an individual who is a U.S. citizen, 18
years of age or older, and who has been a resident of the Town for at least
10 days on the date a Town meeting is held.
(b) Method of Action; Necessary Votes. All actions of a Town meeting shall
be by vote. All questions shall be decided by a majority of the electors
voting.
(c) Order of Business. At the beginning of the Town meeting, the Town
meeting chairperson shall state the business to be transacted and the order
in which the business will be considered. No proposal to levy a tax, except
a tax for defraying necessary Town expenses, may be acted on out of the
order stated by the Town meeting chairperson.
(d) Reconsideration of Actions.
(i) No reconsideration of any vote shall be had at any Town meeting
unless it be taken by a majority vote within 1 hour from the time
such vote shall have been passed, or if taken later than 1 hour, unless
11
it be sustained by a number of votes equal to a majority of all the
names entered on the poll list at such election up to the time the
motion therefor shall be made. All other questions upon motions at
a Town meeting shall be determined by a majority of the electors
voting.
(ii) No action of a Town meeting may be reconsidered at a subsequent
Town meeting held prior to the next annual Town meeting unless a
Special Town Meeting is convened under Wis. Stat. § 60.12(1)(b)
or (c) and the written request or the call for the meeting states that a
purpose of the meeting is reconsideration of the action.
(e) The Town Clerk shall serve as clerk of the Town meeting. If the Town
Clerk is absent, the Deputy Town Clerk, if the Town has one, shall serve as
town meeting clerk. If the Deputy Clerk is absent, the Town meeting
chairperson shall appoint a clerk of the meeting. The Clerk of the Town
meeting shall keep a poll list if required by the annual Town meeting under
Wis. Stat. § 60.11(7). The Town meeting minutes shall be signed by the
Clerk of the Town meeting and filed in the Office of the Town Clerk within
5 days after the meeting.
1.06 Boards, Commissions and Committees
(1) Board of Review.
(a) Composition. The Board of Review shall consist of the Chairperson and
Town Board Supervisors.
(b) Duties. The duties and functions of the Board of Review shall be as
prescribed in Wis. Stat. §§ 70.46 and 70.47.
(c) Meetings. The Board of Review shall meet annually on the second Monday
of May at the Town Hall of the Town of Middleton, and notice of such
meeting shall be published pursuant to law. The Board, through its Clerk,
shall establish its meeting hours pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 70.47(3)(b). The
Board may adjourn from day to day or from time to time, until such time as
its business is completed, providing that adequate notice of each
adjournment is so given.
(d) Compensation. Compensation for Board of Review members shall be as
established for regular Town Board meetings.
(2) Plan Commission.
(a) Composition.
12
(i) The Plan Commission shall consist of 7 voting citizen members. In
addition, 1 Supervisor annually selected by majority vote of the
Town Board shall be an ex officio liaison member.
(ii) The citizen members shall be appointed by the Town Chair, subject
to confirmation by the Town Board, to hold office for terms of 3
years, and may only be removable for due cause. Upon expiration,
terms shall end on April 30th. The Town Chair shall appoint the
Chair of the Plan Commission.
(iii) Although the Plan Commission members are to represent the Town
as a whole, the following objectives shall be sought regarding the
commission's composition:
1. 7 members appointed at-large.
2. As much as possible, the character of the Town's population
should be represented; for example, farmers, small businesses,
residential (both rural and subdivision).
(b) Organization of Commission. The Plan Commission shall organize by an
annual election in May of a vice-chair and such other officers as may, in
their judgment, be necessary. The Town Administrator shall be responsible
for performing the duties of secretary and for staffing the Commission.
(c) Record. The Plan Commission shall keep a written record of its proceedings
to include all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with the Town
Clerk. 4 members shall constitute a quorum but all actions shall require the
affirmative approval of a majority of the members of the Commission in
attendance once a quorum is present.
(d) Duties.
(i) The Master Plan.
1. The Plan Commission may make, adopt and, as necessary,
amend, extend or add to the master plan for the physical
development of the Town including areas outside of its
boundaries which, in the Plan Commission's judgment, bear
relation to the development of the Town.
2. The master plan, with the accompanying maps, plats and
descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the
Commission's recommendations for such physical development,
and may include, among other things without limitation because
of enumeration, the general location, character and extent of
13
streets, highways, freeways, street grades, roadways, walks,
parking areas, public places and areas, parks, parkways,
playgrounds, sites for public buildings and structures, and the
general location and extent of sewers, water conduits and other
public utilities whether privately or publicly owned, the
acceptance, widening, narrowing, extension, relocation,
removal, vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the
foregoing public ways, grounds, places, spaces, buildings,
properties, utilities, routes or terminals, the general location,
character and extent of community centers and neighborhood
units and subdivision/platting ordinances.
3. The Commission may adopt the master plan as a whole by a
single resolution, or, as the work of making the whole master
plan progresses, may from time to time by resolution adopt a
part or parts thereof, any such part to correspond generally with
one or more of the functional subdivisions of the subject matter
of the plan.
4. The adoption of the plan or any part, amendment or addition,
shall be by resolution carried by the affirmative votes of not less
than a majority of all the members of the Plan Commission. The
resolution shall refer expressly to the maps, descriptive matter,
and other matters intended by the Commission to form the whole
or any part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on
the adopted plan or part thereof by the identifying signature of
the secretary of the Commission, and a copy of the plan or part
thereof shall be certified to the Town Board.
5. The purpose and effect of the adoption and certifying of the
master plan or part thereof shall be solely to aid the Plan
Commission and the Town Board in the performance of their
duties.
(e) Mandatory Referrals to Commission. The Town Board or officer of the
Town having final authority thereon shall refer to the Plan Commission, for
its consideration and report before final action is taken by the Board, public
body or officer, the following matters: the location of any statue or other
memorial; the location, acceptance, extension, alteration, vacation,
abandonment, change of use, sale, acquisition of land for or lease of land
for any street, alley or other public ways, park, playground, airport, area for
parking vehicles, or other memorial or public grounds; the location,
extension, abandonment or authorization for any public utility whether
publicly or privately owned; all plats of lands and certified surveys in the
Town or within the territory over which the Town is given platting
jurisdiction by Chapter 236, Wis. Stats.; rezoning and conditional use
14
applications; the location, character and extent or acquisition, leasing or sale
of lands for public or semi-public housing, slum clearance, relief of
congestion, or vacation camps for children; and the amendment or repeal of
any land use ordinance. Unless such report from the Commission is made
within 30 days, either the Town Board or other public body or officer may
take final action without it.
(f) Miscellaneous Powers.
(i) The Commission may make reports and recommendations relating
to the plan and development of the Town to public officials and
agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional
and other organizations and citizens. It may recommend to the Town
Board programs for public improvements.
(ii) The Commission, its members and its employees, in the
performance of its functions, may enter upon any land, make
examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary
monuments and markers thereon. In general, the Commission shall
have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its
functions and promote Town planning in cooperation with the Town
Board.
(g) Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of
the unexpired term in the same manner as appointment for the full term.
(h) Compensation. Commission members shall receive such compensation as
shall be determined by the Town Board from time to time. Citizen members
shall take the official oath as required by Wis. Stat. § 19.01, to be filed with
the Town Clerk.
(3) Park Commission.
(a) Composition. The Park Commission shall consist of seven 7 citizen
members appointed by the Chairperson and confirmed by the Town Board.
Each Commission member shall hold such office for a term of 7 years, said
terms to end June 30 in the year of expiration. In addition, 1 Supervisor
annually selected by majority vote of the Town Board shall be an ex officio
liaison member. Commissioners may only be removable for due cause.
(b) Compensation; Oaths. Commission members shall receive such
compensation as shall be determined by the Town Board from time to time.
Members shall take an official oath prescribed by Wis. Stat. § 19.01, to be
filed with the Town Clerk.
15
(c) Organization of Commission. The Commission shall annual in July elect 1
member as Chair and 1 as secretary. The Town Administrator shall be
responsible for taking minutes and staffing the Commission.
(d) Procedure. 4 members shall constitute a quorum. The Chair, or acting
Chair, shall be included in determining a quorum. Action shall be by a
majority of those present and voting. The Commission shall adopt rules of
procedure for governing the conduct of its meetings.
(e) Record. The Park Commission shall keep a written record of its
proceedings to include all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with
the Town Clerk. 4 members shall constitute a quorum, but all actions shall
require the affirmative approval of a majority of the members of the
Commission in attendance once a quorum is present.
(f) Duties. The Park Commission shall have all the powers conferred by law
upon park and recreation commissions and shall be chargeable with all the
duties so required, such as recommend, oversee work and oversee funds of
all parks, playgrounds and recreational activities as part of properties within
the Town. The Park Commission is specifically empowered and directed:
(i) Under the direction of the Town Board, manage, improve and care
for all public parks located within, or partly within and partly
without, the limits of the Town and secure the quiet, orderly and
suitable use and enjoyment thereof by the people; also to adopt rules
and regulations to promote these purposes.
(ii) To acquire in the name of the Town for park purposes by gift,
purchase, devise, bequest or condemnation, either absolutely or in
trust, money, real or personal property, or any incorporeal right or
privilege, provided gifts to the Town of money or other property,
real or personal, either absolutely or in trust, for park purposes shall
be accepted only after they have been recommended by the
Commission to the Town Board.
(iii) With prior Town Board approval, to buy or lease lands in the name
of the Town for park purposes within or without the Town and, with
the approval of the Town Board, to sell or exchange property no
longer required for its purpose.
(iv) To execute every trust imposed upon the use of property or property
rights by the deed, testament or other conveyances transferring the
title of such property to the Town for park purposes.
(v) To have the powers necessary and convenient for the effective and
efficient management, supervision and operation of the Town park
16
system and recreation program, subject to budgetary approval by the
Town Board.
(vi) To establish rules and regulations, including user fees as deemed
necessary as approved by the Town Board and desirable for the
proper use, care and operation of parks, park facilities, recreation
programs and other activities under their control, provided however
that such rules and regulations do not conflict with the laws of the
State of Wisconsin or this Code of Ordinances.
(vii) Such other and further duties as may be necessary for the proper
carrying out of the purposes of said Commission.
(g) Public Recreation Program. The Park Commission shall review the Town's
recreational needs and shall advise the Town Board on the public recreation
program of the Town, including:
(i) Establishing park rules and program policies.
(ii) Cooperating with public school activities.
(iii) Cooperating with any private recreational activities.
(iv) Approving schedules of activities in Town parks.
(h) Record. The Park Commission shall keep a written record of its
proceedings to include all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with
the Town Clerk.
(i) Finance.
(i) Budget. The Park Commission shall assist in preparing an annual
budget for submission to the Town Board, which budget shall reflect
the Commission's recommendations as to maintenance or
acquisition of Town parks, open spaces, park and related facilities,
recreation programs and equipment, summer or seasonal employees,
etc. Said annual budget request shall contain estimates as to
revenues to be derived from recreation programs or activities as well
as estimated expenditures for operating the parks and recreation
system.
(ii) Deposits. All revenues and income from the operation of park and
recreation programs shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer as
general revenue of the Town.
17
(iii) Monetary Contributions. All moneys donated to the Town
specifically for park or recreation use shall be deposited Town
accounts as a nonlapsing fund or reserve for such specific use.
(4) Public Works & Town Services Committee.
(a) Composition. The Public Works & Town Services Committee shall be
comprised of 3 members appointed by the Town Chair subject to
confirmation by the Town Board.
(b) Term. The term of office of each committee member shall be three years
commencing on July 1 of each year except that, upon creation of the
Committee and initial appointment of committee members, one member
shall be appointed to a term ending June 30, 2018; one member shall be
appointed to a term ending June 30, 2019; and one member shall be
appointed to a term ending June 30, 2020.
(c) Duties. The Public Works & Town Services Committee is an advisory
committee that evaluates all aspects of Town Field Services and Operations,
including but not limited to equipment, budget, staffing, efficiencies data
review, citizen complaints, intergovernmental agreements, outsourcing and
any other connected park or field functions or operations. The Committee
shall counsel and advise the Board on all such matters and any other matters
as may be assigned to it by the Town Board in such advisory capacity.
(d) Compensation; oaths. Committee members shall receive the same per
meeting rate as members of the Plan Commission and Park Commission
receive for each meeting actually attended. Members shall take an official
oath prescribed by Wis. Stat. § 19.01, to be filed with the Town Clerk.
(e) Organization of Committee. The Town Chair shall annually in July appoint
one member as Chairperson.
(f) Record. The Committee shall keep a written record of its proceedings to
include all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
(5) Finance Committee.
(a) Composition. The Finance Committee shall be comprised of 3 members
appointed by the Town Chair subject to confirmation by the Town Board.
(b) Term. The term of office of each committee member shall be three years
except that, upon creation of the Committee and initial appointment of
committee members, one member shall be appointed to a term ending June
30, 2018; one member shall be appointed to a term ending June 30, 2019;
and one member shall be appointed to a term ending June 30, 2020.
.
(c) Duties. The Finance Committee is an advisory committee that reviews the
18
annual budget and makes recommendations to the Town Board regarding
the same and reviews and makes recommendations on the financing of
Town undertakings, on the financial affairs of the Town and the
improvement of the financial condition of the Town. The Committee
considers and recommends ways in which the Town could obtain additional
sources of revenue or additional revenue from existing sources. The
Finance Committee advises the Town Board on fiscal policies, investment
policies, and purchasing procedures. The Committee shall counsel and
advise the Board on all such matters and any other matters as may be
assigned to it by the Town Board in such advisory capacity.
(d) Compensation; oaths. Committee members shall receive the same per
meeting rate as members of the Plan Commission and Park Commission
receive for each meeting actually attended. Members shall take an official
oath prescribed by § 19.01, Wis. Stats., to be filed with the Town Clerk.
(e) Organization of Committee. The Town Chair shall annually in July appoint
one member as Chairperson.
(f) Record. The Committee shall keep a written record of its proceedings to
include all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
(6) No person not a resident of and not residing in the Town of Middleton shall be
appointed to any Town board, commission or committee. Any board, commission
or committee member who moves from the Town shall immediately be removed
from such board, commission or committee.
(7) General Provisions Regarding Meetings and Public Notice.
(a) Every Board, Committee and Commission created by or existing under the
ordinances of the Town may fix a regular date, time and place for its
meeting;
(b) All meeting notices shall be filed with the Town Clerk who shall cause the
notice to be published and/or posted in full compliance with the Open
Meeting Law Requirements.
1.07 Ethics Code
(1) Statement of Purpose.
(a) The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels
of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal
gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government.
In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established in this Chapter of
Code of Ethics for all Town of Middleton officials and employees, whether
elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of boards,
19
committees and commissions of the Town, as well as any individuals who
are candidates for elective office as soon as such individuals file
nomination papers with the Town.
(b) The purpose of this Ethics Code is to establish guidelines for ethical
standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth
those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the
Town of Middleton and by directing disclosure by such officials and
employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the
Town. The Town Board believes that a Code of Ethics for the guidance of
elected and appointed officials and employees will help them avoid
conflicts between their personal interests and their public responsibilities,
will improve standards of public service and will promote and strengthen
the faith and confidence of the citizens of this Town in their elected and
appointed officials and employees.
(c) The Town Board hereby reaffirms that each elected and appointed Town
official and employee holds his or her position as a public trust, and any
intentional effort to realize substantial personal gain through official
conduct is a violation of that trust. The provisions and purpose of this Ethics
Code and such rules and regulations as may be established are hereby
declared to be in the best interest of the Town of Middleton.
(2) Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this Chapter:
(a) Public Official. Means those persons serving in statutory elected or
appointed offices provided for in Chapter 60 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and
all members appointed to boards, committee and commissions established
or appointed by the chairperson and/or Town Board pursuant to this Code
of Ordinances, whether paid or unpaid.
(b) Public employee. Means any person excluded from the definition of a
public official who is employed by the Town.
(c) Anything of Value. Means any gift, favor, loan, service or promise of future
employment, but does not include reasonable fees and honorariums, or the
exchange of seasonal, anniversary or customary gifts among relatives and
friends.
(d) Business. Means any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, form,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual or
any other legal entity which engages in profit-making activities.
(e) Personal Interest. Means the following specific blood or marriage
relationships;
20
(i) A person's spouse, mother, father, child, brother or sister; or;
(ii) A person's relative by blood or marriage who receives, directly or
indirectly, more than 1/2 support from such person or from whom
such person receives, directly, or indirectly, more than (1/2) of his
or her support.
(f) Significant Interest. Means owning or controlling, directly or indirectly, at
least 10% or $5,000.00) of the outstanding stock or at least 10% or
$5,000.00 of any business.
(g) Financial Interest. Any interest that shall yield, directly or indirectly, a
monetary or other material benefit to the officer or employee or to any
person employing or retaining the services of the officer or employee.
(3) Statutory Standards of Conduct. There are certain provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes which should, while not set forth herein, be considered an integral part of
any Code of Ethics. Accordingly, the provisions of the following sections of the
Wisconsin Statutes, as from time to time amended, are made a part of this Code of
Ethics and shall apply to public officials and employees whenever applicable, to
wit:
(a) Sec. 946.10. Bribery of Public Officers and Employees.
(b) Sec. 946.11. Special Privileges from Public Utilities
.
(c) Sec. 946.12. Misconduct in Public Office.
(d) Sec. 946.13. Private Interest in Public Contract Prohibited.
(4) Responsibility of Public Office. Public officials and employees are agents of public
purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of this State and carry out
impartially the laws of the nation, state and Town, to observe in their official acts
the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office
regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be
their prime concern.
(5) Dedicated Service.
(a) Officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and performance
established as the standard for their positions by the appropriate authority.
(b) Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law
or ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other
21
public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or
by officially recognized confidentiality of their work.
(c) Members of the Town staff are expected to follow their appropriate
professional code of ethics. Staff members shall file a copy of such
professional ethics codes with the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk may notify
the appropriate professional ethics board of any ethics violations involving
Town employees covered by such professional standards.
(6) Fair and Equal Treatment.
(a) Use of Public Property. No official or employee shall use or permit the
unauthorized use of Town-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or
property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are
available to the public generally or are provided by Town policy for the use
of such official or employee in the conduct of official business, as
authorized by the Town Board or authorized board, commission or
committee.
(b) Use of Town Stationery. Copies of any correspondence written on Town
stationery shall be filed with the Town Clerk or Town Treasurer, or their
designee.
(c) Obligations to Citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is
available to every other citizen. No official or employee shall use or attempt
to use his or her position with the Town to secure any advantage, preference
or gain, over and above his rightful remuneration and benefits, for himself
or for a member of his or her immediate family.
(d) Political Contributions. No official shall personally solicit from any town
employee, other than an elected official, a contribution to a political
campaign committee for which the person subject to this section is a
candidate or treasurer.
(7) Conflict of Interest.
(a) Financial and Personal Interest Prohibited.
(i) No official or employee of the Town, whether paid or unpaid, shall
engage in any business or transaction or shall act in regard to
financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is
incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties in the
public interest contrary to the provisions of this Chapter or which
would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the
performance of official duties.
22
(ii) Any member of the Town Board who has a financial interest or
personal interest in any proposed legislation before the Town Board
shall disclose on the records of the Town Board the nature and extent
of such interest; such official shall not participate in debate or vote
for adoption or defeat of such legislation. If the matter before the
Board involves a member's personal interest with persons involved,
the member may participate in debate or discussion and vote on the
matter following disclosure, unless an ordinance or contract is
involved; if an ordinance or contract is involved, such official shall
not participate in debate or discussion and vote on the matter.
(iii) Any non-elected official, other than a Town employee, who has a
financial interest or personal interest in any proposed legislative
action of the Town Board or any board, commission or committee
upon which the official has any influence or input or of which the
official is a member that is to make a recommendation or decision
upon any item which is the subject of the proposed legislative action
shall disclose on the records of the Town Board or the appropriate
board, commission or committee the nature and extend of such
interest. Such official shall not participate in debate or discussion
or vote for adoption or defeat of such legislation.
(iv) Any Town employee who has a financial interest or personal interest
in any proposed legislative action of the Town Board or any board,
commission or committee upon which the employee has any
influence of input, or of which the employee is a member, that is to
make a recommendation or decision upon any item which is the
subject of the proposed legislative action shall disclose on the
records of the Town Board or the appropriate board, commission or
committee the nature and extent of such interest.
(b) Disclosure of Confidential Information. No official or employee shall,
without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information
concerning the property, government or affairs of the Town, nor shall such
information be used to advance the financial or other private interests of the
official or employee or others.
(c) Gifts and Favors.
(i) No official or employee, personally or through a member of his
immediate family, may solicit or accept, either directly or indirectly,
from any person or organization, money or anything of value if it
could be expected to influence the employee's official actions or
judgments or be considered a reward for any action or inaction on
the part of the official or employee.
23
(ii) No official or employee personally, or through a member of his
immediate family, shall accept any gift of greater value than $10.00,
whether in the form of money, service, loan, thing or promise, from
any person which may tend to impair his independence of judgment
or action in the performance of his or her duties or grant in the
discharge of his or her duties any improper favor, service or thing of
value.
(iii) It is not a conflict of interest for any public official or employee to
receive a gift or gratuity that is an unsolicited item of nominal
intrinsic value of less than $10.00, such as a meal, and that is not
intended to influence the official.
(iv) Any official or employee who receives, directly or indirectly, any
gift or gifts having an aggregate value of more than $25.00 within
any calendar year from any person who is known by said official or
employee to be interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner
whatsoever in business dealings with the Town upon which the
official or employee has any influence or input or over which the
official or employee has any jurisdiction, discretion or control shall
disclose the nature and value of such gifts to the Town Board by
January 15 next following the year in which the gift or gifts are
received.
(d) An official or employee is not to accept hospitality if, after consideration of
the surrounding circumstances, it could reasonably be concluded that such
hospitality would not be extended were it not for the fact that the guest, or
a member of the guest's immediate family, was a Town official or employee.
Participation in celebrations, grand opening, open house, informational
meetings and similar events are excluded from this prohibition. This
paragraph further shall not be construed to prevent candidates for elective
office from accepting hospitality from citizens for the purpose of supporting
the candidate's campaign.
(e) Gifts received by an official or employee or his immediate family under
unusual circumstances shall be referred to the Town Board within 10 days
of receipt for recommended disposition. Any person subject to this Chapter
who becomes aware that he is or has been offered any gift, the acceptance
of which would constitute a violation of this Subsection, shall, within 10
days, disclose the details surrounding said offer to the Town Board. Failure
to comply with this reporting requirement shall constitute an offense under
this Chapter.
(8) Representing Private Interests before Town Agencies.
24
(a) Non-elected Town officials and employees shall not appear on behalf of any
private person (other than him or herself, his or her spouse or minor
children) before any Town agency, board, commission or the Town Board
if the official or employee or any board, commission or committee of which
the official or employee is a member has any jurisdiction, discretion or
control over the matter which is the subject of such representation.
(b) Elected Town officials may appear before Town, State or County agencies
on behalf of constituents in the course of their duties as representatives of
the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations. However,
the disclosure requirements of Subsection (a) above shall be applicable to
such appearances.
(9) Ad Hoc Committee Exceptions. No violation of the conflict of interest restrictions
of this Section shall exist, however, where an individual serves on a special ad hoc
committee charged with the narrow responsibility of addressing a specific issue or
topic in which that individual, or the employer or a client of that individual, has an
interest so long as the individual discloses to the Town Board that such interest
exists.
(10) Contracts with the Town. No Town official or employee who, in his capacity as
such officer or employee, participates in the making of a contract in which he has
a private pecuniary interest, direct or indirect, or performs in regard to that contract
with some function requiring the exercise of discretion on his part shall enter into
any contract with the Town unless, within the confines of Sec. 946.13, Wis. Stats.:
(a) The contract is awarded through a process of public notice and competitive
bidding or the Town Board waives the requirement of this Section after
determining that it is in the best interest of the Town to do so.
(b) The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to the designation of a
public depository of public funds.
(11) Advisory Opinions. Any questions as to the interpretation of any provisions of this
Code of Ethics Chapter shall be referred to the Town Attorney. Such requests shall
be as detailed as possible and shall be made in writing. Advisory requests and
opinions shall be kept confidential, except when disclosure is authorized by the
requestor, in which case the request and opinion may be made public.
(12) Hiring Relatives.
(a) This Section governs the proposed hiring of individuals for ongoing fulltime
or part-time work of 40 hours or more in one 1 year as Town
Employees who are members of the immediate family of Town employees
or elected officials. "Immediate family" includes those relatives by blood
or marriage defined in Section 1.06(2)(e) as personal interests.
25
(b) Hiring an immediate family member of any current Town employee or
elected Town official is discouraged and will be considered only if that
individual has the knowledge and skills, experience or other job-related
qualifications that warrant consideration for the position. It is required that
either the current employee or the relative seeking employment will make
the personal interest relationship known to the hiring authority (department
head, board or commission, or Town Board) before a hiring decision is
made; in every case, the decision to hire an immediate family member or
former spouse will be subject to Town Board approval, with notice, before
the new employee is permitted to begin work. Marriage between 2
individuals already employed by the Town or their relatives will not be
considered a violation of this policy.
(c) This Section does not apply to non-elected officials who are asked to accept
appointment as members of a Town board, commission or committee; nonelected
officials, however, will be expected to disqualify themselves from
participation in matters under consideration which may affect the hiring,
retention, classification or compensation of their immediate family if
currently employed or being considered for employment by the Town.
(13) Sanctions. A determination that an employee's actions constitute improper conduct
under the provisions of this Chapter may constitute a cause of suspension, removal
from office or employment or other disciplinary action.
1.08 Public Records
(1) Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this Chapter:
(a) "Authority" means any of the following Town entities having custody of a
Town record: an office, elected official, agency, board, commission,
committee, council, department or public body corporate and politic created
by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally constituted
subunit of the foregoing.
(b) "Custodian" means that officer, department head, division head or employee
of the Town designated under Section 1.08(3) or otherwise responsible by
law to keep and preserve any Town records or file, deposit or keep such
records in his or her office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to
possession of such public records and who is required by this Section to
respond to requests for access to such records.
(c) "Record" means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken,
visual or electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless
of physical form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept
by an authority. "Record" includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed
26
or printed pages, maps, charts, photograph, films, recordings, tapes
(including computer tapes), and computer printouts. "Record" does not
include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like materials prepared
for the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of
a person for whom the originator is working; materials which are purely the
personal property of the custodian and have no relation to his or her office;
materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and
published materials in the possession of an authority other than a public
library which are available for sale, or which are available for inspection at
a public library.
(2) Duty to Maintain Records.
(a) Except as provided under Section 1.08(7), each officer and employee of the
Town shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his or her
predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or
kept in his or her office or which are in the lawful possession or control of
the officer or employee or his or her deputies, or to the possession or control
of which he or she or they may be lawfully entitled as such officers or
employees.
(b) Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term of
employment, or whenever the office or position of employment becomes
vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his or her successor
all records then in his or her custody and the successor shall receipt therefor
to the officer or employee, who shall file said receipt with the Town Clerk.
If a vacancy occurs before a successor is selected or qualifies, such records
shall be delivered to and receipted for by the Clerk, on behalf of the
successor, to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt.
(3) Legal Custodian(s).
(a) Each elected official is the legal custodian of his or her records and the
records of his or her office, but the official may designate an employee of
his or her staff to act as the legal custodian.
(b) Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Town Clerk or his designee shall
act as legal custodian for all Town records, the Town Board and for any
committees, commissions, boards or other authorities created by ordinance
or resolution of the Tow Board, except that the Town Treasurer shall be the
legal custodian for all records in his possession. In the event that the Town
Clerk is not available, then the Town Clerk shall designate someone to act
in its behalf as legal custodian.
(c) For every authority not specified in Subsections (a) and (b), the authority's
chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but the
27
officer may designate an employee of his or her staff to act as the legal
custodian.
(d) Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his or
her absence or the absence of his or her designee.
(e) The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and to
carry out the duties of an authority under Subch. 11 of Ch. 19, Wis. Stats.,
and this Section. The designation of a legal custodian does not affect the
powers and duties of an authority under this Section.
(4) Public Access to Records.
(a) Except as provided in Section 1.08(6), any person has a right to inspect a
record and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in Wis. Stat.
§ 19.35(1).
(b) Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular
office hours.
(c) If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are
kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon at least
forty-eight (48) hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy.
(d) A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available
to Town employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record.
(e) The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may
impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original
record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged. No original public
records of the Town shall be removed from the possession of the legal
custodian.
(f) A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and copying
records as follows:
(i) The cost of photocopying shall be 20¢ per page, plus any costs
incurred by the Town Clerk in going to a copying facility. Said cost
has been calculated not to exceed the actual, necessary and direct
cost of reproduction.
(ii) If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual
and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing
shall be charged.
28
(iii) The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in
printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and audioor
video-tapes, shall be charged.
(iv) If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also
be charged.
(v) There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost
therefor exceeds $50.00, in which case the actual cost shall be
determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester. The
Town will determine the cost of locating a record by using the
lowest hourly rate of any employee who may reasonably be able to
locate the record.
(vi) The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and
may require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if such
estimate exceeds $5.00.
(vii) Elected and appointed officials of the Town shall not be required to
pay for public records they may reasonably require for the proper
performance of their official duties.
(viii) The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge
or at a reduced charge where he or she determines that waiver or
reduction of the fee is in the public interest.
(g) Pursuant to Sec. 19.34, Wis. Stats., and the guidelines therein listed, each
authority shall adopt, prominently display and made available for inspection
and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a notice containing
a description of its organization and the established times and places at
which, the legal custodian from whom, and the methods whereby, the public
may obtain information and access to records in its custody, make requests
for records or obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof. Each authority
shall also prominently display at its offices, for the guidance of the public,
a copy of Sections 1.08(4) through 1.08(6) of this Code. This Subsection
does not apply to members of the Town Board.
(5) Access Procedures.
(a) A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal custodian.
A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested
record or the information requested. However, a request for a record
without a reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time
represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient request.
29
(b) A request may be made orally, but a request must be in writing before an
action to enforce the request is commenced under Sec. 19.37, Wis. Stats.
Except as provided below, no request may be refused because the person
making the request is unwilling to be identified or to state the purpose of
the request. No request maybe refused because the request is received by
mail, unless prepayment of a fee is required under Section 1.08(4)(f)(vi). A
requester may be required to show acceptable identification whenever the
requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever security reasons
or federal law or regulations so require.
(c) Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable
and without delay, either fill the request or notify the requester of the
authority's determination to deny the request in whole or in part and the
reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after conferring with the Town
Attorney, determines that a written request is so general as to be unduly
time consuming, the party making the request may first be required to
itemize his or her request in a manner which would permit reasonable
compliance.
(d) A request for a record may be denied as provided in Section 1.08(6). If a
request is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand
for a written statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the
requester within 5 business days or the oral denial. If a written request is
denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a written statement of
the reasons for denying the request. Every written denial of a request shall
inform the requester that, if the request for the record was made in writing,
then the determination is subject to review upon petition for a writ of
mandamus under Sec. 19.37(1), Wis. Stats., or upon application to the
attorney general or a district attorney.
(6) Limitations on Right to Access.
(a) As provided by state and federal law, certain records are exempt from
inspection under this Chapter.
(b) In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is not
specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring
with the Town Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in part, only if
he or she determines that the harm to the public interest in full access to the
request record.
(c) If a record contains information that may be made public and information
that may not be made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the
information that may be made public and delete the information that may
not be made public from the record before release. The custodian shall
confer with the Town Attorney prior to releasing any such record and shall
30
follow the guidance of the Town Attorney when separating out the exempt
material. If, in the judgment of the custodian and the Town Attorney, there
is no feasible way to separate the exempt material from the nonexempt
material without unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt
material, the entire record shall be withheld from disclosure.
(7) Destruction of Records.
(a) Town records may be destroyed only in accordance with the Wisconsin
Municipal General Records Schedule, published by the Wisconsin Public
Records Board, as the same may be amended from time to time. The Town
Chair and Town Clerk shall execute and file the Notification of General
Records Schedule Adoption (Form PBR-002) no later than December 31,
2018.
(b) Town officials and records custodians may consult other records schedules
published by the Wisconsin Public Record Board and the Public Service
Commission including, but not limited to, the Budget and Related General
Record Schedule, the Fiscal & Accounting Related Records General
Schedule and the Purchasing & Procurement General Schedule in
evaluating whether or not a record is subject to destruction.
1.09 Review of Administrative Determinations
Any person aggrieved by an administrative determination of the Town Board or a board,
commission, committee, agency, officer or employee of the Town of Middleton or agent acting on
its behalf may have such determination reviewed as provided under Chapter 68, Wis. Stats.
1.10 Elections
(1) Appointment of Election Inspectors.
(a) Appointment. There shall be 5 at-large election inspectors at each polling
place at each election. Pursuant to Sec. 7.30(1), Wis. Stats., the Town of
Middleton hereby allows for the selection of 2 or more sets of officials to
work at different times on election day and hereby permits the Town Clerk
or his/her designee to establish different working hours for different
officials assigned at the same polling place.
(b) Reduction in Number of Officials. Notwithstanding s. 1.10(a), the Town
Board may, by resolution, reduce the number of election officials and
modify or rescind any similar previous action provided that the number of
officials at any polling place is reduced to not less than 3.
(2) Polling Place. The Town Hall shall be the polling place for all electors in the Town
of Middleton.
CHAPTER 3
FINANCE AND TAXATION
3.01 Preparation and adoption of budget.
3.02 Changes in budget.
3.03 Town funds to be spent in accordance with appropriation.
3.04 Annual financial statement.
3.05 Finance book.
3.06 Financial audits.
3.07 Claims against Town.
3.08 Disbursements from treasury.
3.085 Alternative claims procedure.
3.09 Disposal of Town Property.
3.10 Public depository.
3.11 Temporary investment of funds not immediately needed.
3.12 Public contracts and competitive bidding.
3.13 Receiving money; receipt for same.
3.14 Duplicate Treasurer's bond eliminated.
3.15 Room tax.
3.16 Town Board may levy special assessments.
3.17 Resolution and report required.
3.18 Costs that may be paid by special assessment.
3.19 Exemptions; deductions.
3.20 Notice of proposed or approved project.
3.21 Board actions after hearing.
3.22 Combined assessments.
3.23 Board's power to amend, cancel or confirm special assessment.
3.24 Where cost of improvement is less than assessment.
3.25 Appealed assessments payable when due.
3.26 Special assessment a lien on property.
3.27 Special charges permissible.
3.28 General provisions.
3.29 Payment for public works; special assessments.
3.01 Preparation and adoption of budget.
(1) Fiscal year; annual budget. The Town fiscal year is the calendar year. The Town
budget shall be adopted annually.
(2) Preparation. The Town Board is responsible for preparation of the proposed budget
required under § 65.90, Wis. Stats. In preparing the budget, the Town Board may
provide for assistance by any person.
(3) Estimates. When requested by the Chairperson, Town Board or Town Clerk, each
officer, department and committee shall annually file with the Town Clerk an
itemized statement of disbursements made to carry out the powers and duties of
such officer, department or committee during the preceding fiscal year and a
detailed statement of the receipts and disbursements on account of any special fund
under the supervision of such officer, department or committee during such year,
and of the condition and management of such fund; also detailed estimates of the
same matters for the current fiscal year and for the ensuing fiscal year. Such
statements shall be presented in the form prescribed by the Town Clerk and shall
be designated as "Departmental Estimates" and shall be as nearly uniform as
possible for the main division of all departments.
(4) Form of proposed budget. The proposed budget shall contain the following
information:
(a) The actual experience of each department and activity for the expired
portion of the current year and last preceding fiscal year and the estimated
expense of conducting each department and activity of the Town for the
remainder of the current year and ensuing fiscal year, with reasons for any
proposed increase or decrease as compared with actual and estimated
expenditures for the current year.
(b) An itemization of all anticipated income of the Town from sources other
than general property taxes and bonds issued, with a comparative statement
of the amounts received by the Town from each of the same or similar
sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year.
(c) An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general property
taxes that, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the
proposed expenditures.
(d) All existing indebtedness of the Town, including the amount of interest
payable and principal to be redeemed on any outstanding general obligation
bonds of the Town and any estimated deficiency in the sinking fund of any
such bonds during the ensuing fiscal year.
(e) Such other information as may be required by the Board and by state law.
(5) Copies of budget. The Town shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the
budget thus prepared for distribution to citizens.
(6) Hearing. The Town Board shall conduct the budget hearing required under § 65.90,
Wis. Stats.
(7) Adoption. The Town Board shall adopt the Town budget. The Town Meeting may
either retain authority to approve any tax levy needed to support spending approved
by the Town Board or may delegate the authority to approve a tax levy to the Board.
(8) Amendment. The Town budget may be amended by the Town Board under §
65.90(5), Wis. Stats.
3.02 Changes in budget.
The adopted budget shall not be changed after approval of the budget except upon the
recommendation of the Chairperson and upon a 2/3 vote of the entire membership of the Town
Board. Notice of such change shall be given by publication within eight days thereafter in the
official Town newspaper.
3.03 Town funds to be spent in accordance with appropriation.
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the Town, nor shall any obligation for the
expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the adopted
budget or when changed as authorized by section 3.02 of this Code. At the close of each fiscal
year, any unencumbered balance on any appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be
subject to reappropriation, but appropriations may be made by the Board, to be paid out of the
income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will
not be completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until the
purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned.
3.04 Annual financial statement.
The Town Board annually shall prepare a statement of the financial condition of the Town and
present the statement to the Annual Town Meeting. In preparing the statement, the Town Board
may provide for assistance by any person. The statement shall include the previous year's revenues
and expenditures and the current indebtedness of the Town.
3.05 Finance book.
The Town Clerk shall maintain a finance book under § 60.33(3), Wis. Stats.
3.06 Financial audits.
The Town Board may provide for financial audits under § 66.0605, Wis. Stats.
3.07 Claims against Town.
(1) Claims for money against the Town or against officers, officials, agents or
employees of the Town arising out of acts done in their official capacity shall be
filed with the Town Clerk as provided under § 893.80(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
(2) The Town Board shall allow or disallow the claim. Notice of disallowance shall be
made as provided under § 893.80(1g), Wis. Stats.
3.08 Disbursements from treasury.
Except as provided under § 3.085, disbursements from the Town treasury shall be made under §
66.0607, Wis. Stats. Each check must also be signed by the Town Chair. In the event the Town
Chair is unavailable for any reason, any other Board member may sign checks in place of the Town
Chair. Each check representing a disbursement or transfer of Town funds must also be signed by
both the Clerk and either the Treasurer or Deputy Treasurer, unless the Town Board adopts a
resolution, which is filed with each public depository holding Town funds, requiring only two
signatures or the offices of Clerk, Treasurer and Deputy Treasurer are vacant, in which case the
Town’s Financial Consultant may sign in lieu of the Clerk, Treasurer or Deputy Treasurer. The
Financial Consultant must be an employee of the Town.”
3.085 Alternative claims procedure.
(1) Permitted payments. Payments of claims against the town may be made from the
town treasury under the procedure established in § 3.085(2) for bills or vouchers
that are of a routine nature, namely:
(a) Health Insurance premiums.
(b) Retirement to Wisconsin Retirement System.
(c) Deferred Compensation.
(d) Payroll, payroll taxes, and payroll fees.
(e) Disability Insurance.
(f) U.S. Postal Services Postage
(g) Other ACH transactions for regularly occurring monthly expenses such as
utilities and similar services.
(2) Procedure
(a) Subject to the restrictions established in § 3.085(1), the payment of a claim
against the town may be made from the Town treasury if the Town Clerk
approves in writing the claim as a proper charge against the town treasury.
A claim against the town is a proper charge against the Town treasury if the
clerk determines that all of the following conditions have been met:
(i) Funds are available under the Town budget to pay the bill or
voucher.
(ii) The item or service covered by the bill or voucher has been
authorized by the Town Board or an authorized Town official, agent,
or employee.
(iii) The item or service covered by the bill or voucher has been supplied
or rendered in conformity with the authorization.
(iv) The claim appears to be a valid claim against the town.
(b) The Town Clerk may require submission of proof to determine compliance
with the conditions under subsection (2)(a) prior to approval. (For example,
the clerk may require verification of quantity, quality, etc., by another town
official or employee.)
(c) After determining that the conditions under subsection (2)(a) have been
met, the Town Clerk shall indicate approval of the claim by placing his or
her signature on the bill or voucher. Upon approval of a bill or voucher
under this procedure, the Town Clerk shall prepare and sign a check and
have it countersigned by the Town Treasurer and the Town Chairperson,
pursuant to § 3.08. The treasurer shall then mail or deliver the completed
checks to the appropriate parties.
(d) At least monthly, the Town Clerk shall file with the Town Board a written
list of claims approved pursuant to this ordinance. The list shall include the
date paid, name of claimant, purpose, and amount.
3.09 Disposal of Surplus Town Property.
(1) Definitions.
(a) "Surplus Town Property" is that property which is owned by the Town of
Middleton and which has been determined by the Town Board or Town
Administrator to have no further usefulness to the Town. An item of
property shall be considered to have no further usefulness when:
(i) The item or its function has been totally replaced by other Town
property and no probable future function exists for it; or
(ii) The Town no longer performs the service for which the item was
purchased and no other service can reasonably be provided by the
item; or
(iii) The item is no longer able to reliably or economically perform the
work required of it.
(b) Surplus property as defined in this Section shall not include land or
buildings but shall include fixtures and such salvage as may be taken from
a building without structural damage when such fixtures and salvage are not
part of a demolition contract. Surplus Town property shall not include
property that is obtained by the Town as a result of abandonment or loss by
the property’s original owner. Surplus Town property shall not include
items of property that are traded in for newer items.
(2) Disposition of Surplus Town Property. Whenever the Town Administrator
determines that an item of property is surplus Town property, the Administrator
shall dispose of such property as it determines by one of the following four (4)
methods:
(a) Whenever the fair market value of an item is more than $500.00 and the
Town Administrator has determined, pursuant to the previous Subsection,
that the item is surplus Town property, the Town shall dispose of the
property by one of the following methods:
(i) Donation to a nonprofit organization within the Town or to a
governmental agency; or
(ii) Public auction; or
(iii) Sale by sealed bid; or
(iv) Negotiated sale.
(b) In the event of a public auction or sale by sealed bid, the item will be sold
in "as-is" condition to the person submitting the highest bid provided,
however, that a lower bid submitted by a nonprofit organization or
governmental agency may be accepted by the Town Administrator. The
Town shall determine the time in which the successful bidder must remove
the item. In the event the item is not removed within that time, the item
shall revert to the Town and the amount of the bid shall be forfeited to the
Town. In the event no bids are received, the item shall be disposed of as
directed by the Town Administrator.
(c) No public auction or awarding of bids shall occur under this Section unless
a description of the item to be sold and an advance notice of the time and
place for such auction or bid submission is first published and/or posted not
less than 2 weeks prior to the auction or bid award date. The Town
Administrator shall determine the appropriate sites for publication and/or
posting.
(d) Whenever the fair market value of an item is $500.00 or less and the Town
Administrator has determined, pursuant to the previous Section, that it is
surplus Town property, the item shall be either disposed of as set forth in
Subsection (2)(a) above or destroyed.
(3) Determination of Fair Market Values. Whenever this Section requires a
determination of the fair market value of an item of property, that determination shall
be made by the Town Administrator exercising his fiduciary responsibility to the
Town and whose decision shall be final.
(4) Authority to Dispose of Property.
(a) Only the Town Board may dispose of Town property that is not surplus
Town property.
(b) Whenever this Section provides for an auction or other disposition of any
property, the Town Administrator shall be authorized to hire an auctioneer
or take such other action as is necessary to properly dispose of the property
provided, however, that the fees of such auctioneer and all such costs, other
than those for Town labor and the use of Town property, do not exceed the
payment received by the Town from the auction or sale of the property.
3.10 Public depository.
The Town Board shall designate one or more public depositories for depositing funds of the Town.
The Treasurer and the Treasurer's surety are not liable for loss, as defined under § 34.01(2), Wis.
Stats., of money deposited in the name of the Town in a designated public depository. Interest
accruing from Town money in a public depository shall be credited to the Town.
3.11 Temporary investment of funds not immediately needed.
The Town Treasurer may invest any Town funds not immediately needed, pursuant to §§
66.0603(1m) and 219.05, Wis. Stats.
3.12 Public contracts and competitive bidding.
(1) Definitions. In this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
(a) PUBLIC CONTRACT — A contract for the construction, execution, repair,
remodeling or improvement of any public work or building or for the
furnishing of materials or supplies with an estimated cost greater than
$5,000.
(b) RESPONSIBLE BIDDER — A person who, in the judgment of the Town
Board, is financially responsible and has the capacity and competence to
faithfully and responsibly comply with the terms of the public contract.
(2) Advertisement for bids, quotations and/or proposals. The Town may not enter into
a public contract with an estimated cost of more than $5,000, but not more than
$25,000, unless the Town Board, or a Town official or employees designated by
the Town Board, gives a Class 1 notice under § 985 Wis. Stats. before execution of
that contract.
(3) Advertisement for bids. The Town may not enter into a public contract with a value
of more than $25,000 unless the Town Board, or a Town official or employee
designated by the Town Board, advertises for proposals to perform the terms of the
public contract by publishing a Class 2 notice under § 985 Wis. Stats. The Town
Board may provide for additional means of advertising for bids.
(4) Contracts to lowest responsible bidder. The Town Board shall let a public contract
for which advertising for proposals is required under Subsection C to the lowest
responsible bidder. Section 66.0901, Wis. Stats., applies to public contracts let
under this section.
(5) Contracts with governmental entities. This section does not apply to public
contracts entered into by a Town with a municipality, as defined under § 66.0301,
Wis. Stats.
(6) Exception for emergencies. Section 60.47(5), Wis. Stats., and this section are
optional with respect to public contracts for the repair and construction of public
facilities when damage or threatened damage to the facility creates an emergency,
as declared by resolution of the Town Board, that endangers the public health or
welfare of the Town. This subsection does not apply if the Town Board declares
that the emergency no longer exists.
(7) Application to work by Town. This section does not apply to any public work
performed directly by the Town.
3.13 Receiving money; receipt for same.
(1) The Town Treasurer shall not receive any money into the treasury from any source,
except on account of taxes levied and collected during the fiscal year for which he
or she may then be serving, without giving a receipt therefor in the manner specified
by the Town Board.
(2) Upon the payment of any money (except for taxes as herein provided), the
Treasurer shall make out a receipt in duplicate for the money so received. The
Treasurer shall charge the amount thereof to the treasury and credit the proper
account. The payment of the money to any receiving agent of the Town or to the
Town or to the Treasurer shall be safeguarded in such manner as the Town Board
shall direct.
3.14 Duplicate Treasurer's bond eliminated.
The Town of Middleton elects not to give the bond on the Town Treasurer provided for by §
70.67(1), Wis. Stats.
3.15 Room tax.
(1) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
(a) Gross receipts means the total amount of the rental price, with the conditions and
exceptions provided in Wis. Stat. § 77.51(4)(a), (b) and (c).
(b) Innkeeper means the owner of a lodging facility.
(c) Lodging facility means a building or group of buildings in which the public may
obtain accommodations for a consideration, including, without limitation, such
establishments as inns, motels, bed and breakfast establishments, tourist homes,
tourist rooming houses, lodging houses, rooming houses, hotels, resort lodges,
cabins, short-term rentals, and any other building or group of buildings in which
accommodations are available to the public, except accommodations rented for a
continuous period of more than one month and accommodations furnished by any
hospital, sanitarium, nursing home, or by corporations or associations organized
and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes,
provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations or associations
inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
(d) Lodging marketplace has the meaning as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0615(1)(bs).
(e) Transient means any person residing for a period of less than 29 days continuously
in a lodging facility.
(f) Treasurer means the Town Treasurer or his or her designee.
(2) Purpose. The Town of Middleton Tourism Commission is created and shall be responsible
for developing ideas for promotion of the Town of Middleton by creating marketing
projects and a marketing plan for the greater Town of Middleton area. The Commission
shall be responsible for developing rules and regulations for the evaluation of room tax
applications and other funds designated by the Town Board for marketing of the Town.
The Commission shall be responsible for coordinating tourism promotion and tourism
development for the Town. “Tourism promotion and tourism development” has the
meaning as provided in subsection (5)(b) as amended from time to time.
(3) How Constituted. The Tourism Commission shall consist of the Town Chair, the current
members of the Town Board, and one representative from the Wisconsin hotel and motel
industry that is currently doing business within the Town.
(4) Terms. The Town Chair shall serve during the duration of his or her term. The Board
representatives shall be appointed annually by the Town Chair and confirmed by the Town
Board at its first meeting of May in each year. The Town Chair shall appoint the member
of the Commission that represents the hotel and motel industry, subject to confirmation by
a majority vote of the members of the Town Board who are present when the vote is taken.
The member of the hotel and motel industry shall serve a one-year term, beginning on
January 1 of each year, and each term shall be served at the pleasure of the Town Chair,
and may be appointed for successive one-year terms. The members of the Commission
shall meet regularly, and at its first meeting of each calendar year, shall elect a chairperson,
vice chairperson and secretary.
(5) Duties.
(a) The Tourism Commission is charged with creating a marketing plan for tourism
promotion and tourism development within the Town of Middleton.
(b) The Commission shall allocate and disburse the room tax revenue that it receives
from the Town for tourism promotion and tourism development in the municipality.
For purposes of this Ordinance, “tourism promotion and development” means any
of the following that are significantly used by transient tourists and reasonably
likely to generate paid overnight stays at more than one establishment on which a
room tax may be imposed, that are owned by different persons and located within
the municipality in which a room tax is in effect; or, if the Town has only one such
establishment, reasonably likely to generate paid overnight stays in that
establishment:
(i) Marketing projects, including advertising media buys, creation and
distribution of printed or electronic promotional tourist materials or efforts
to recruit conventions, sporting events or motor coach groups.
(ii) Transient tourist informational services.
(iii) Tangible municipal development, including a convention center.
(c) The Commission shall be responsible for receiving and reviewing applications
requesting funds generated by the Town of Middleton room tax. Any person or
entity desiring room tax funds shall make application to the Commission upon
forms and procedures as established by the Commission. Upon receiving an
application, the Commission shall review the application and determine if the
application furthers the goal of tourism promotion and tourism development within
the Town.
(d) The Commission shall report annually to the Town the purposes for which the room
tax revenues were spent.
(e) The Commission may not use any room tax revenue to construct or develop a
lodging facility.
(f) The Commission shall report any delinquencies or inaccurate reporting to the Town
that is due the tax.
(6) Imposed. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0615, there is hereby imposed a tax on the privilege
and service of furnishing, at retail, rooms or lodging to transients by innkeepers, whether
or not membership is required for the use of such accommodations. The tax shall be at
the rate of 5% percent of the gross receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms or
lodging and shall be payable by innkeepers of lodging facilities in the Town.
(7) Distribution of Room Taxes Collected. At least 70% of the room tax collected by the Town
shall be forwarded to the Tourism Commission to be spent on tourism promotion and
tourism development as defined by § (5)(b).
(8) Administration.
(a) Collection of the room tax shall be administered by the Town Treasurer. Tax
imposed under this section is due 30 days at the end of each calendar quarter for
which imposed. A state sales tax return shall be filed with the Town Treasurer
along with the taxes due by those furnishing retail rooms and lodging on or before
the same date tax is due and payable.
(b) As a means of enforcing any room tax imposed by the Town the Town may
exchange audit and other information with the Wisconsin Department of Revenue
and hereby provides for all of the following:
(i) If the Town has probable cause to believe that the correct amount of room
tax has not been assessed or that the tax return is not correct, the Town may
inspect and audit the financial records of any entity or person pertaining to
the furnishing of accommodations to determine whether the correct amount
of room tax is assessed and whether any room tax return is correct.
(ii) A forfeiture of 5% of the tax is hereby imposed on any person who fails to
comply with the request to inspect and audit the person’s financial records.
(iii) The Town will determine the tax due according to its best judgment if a
person required to make a return fails, neglects or refuses to do so for the
amount, in the manner and form and within the time prescribed by the
Town.
(iv) Each person who is subject to the tax shall pay an amount of taxes that the
Town determines to be due plus interest at the rate of 1% per month on the
unpaid balance. No refund or modification of the payment determined may
be granted until the person files a correct room tax return and permits the
Town to inspect and audit its financial records.
(c) Annually, on or before May 1, on a form created and provided by the Wisconsin
Department of Revenue, the Town that imposes a room tax shall certify and report
to the Department of Revenue all of the following:
(i) The amount of room tax revenue collected, and the room tax rate imposed,
by the Town in the previous year.
(ii) A detailed accounting of the amounts of such revenue that were forwarded
in the previous year for tourism promotion and tourism development,
specifying the Commission or tourism entity that received the revenue. The
detailed accounting shall include expenditures of at least $1,000.00 made
by a Commission or tourism entity.
(iii) A list of each member of the Commission and each member of the
governing body of a tourism entity to which the municipality forwarded tax
revenue in the previous year, and the name of the business entity the
member owns, operates or in employed by, if any.
(9) Confidential Records. All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating
to such returns on file with the Town Treasurer are deemed to be confidential, except for persons
requiring or using the information in the discharge of duties imposed by law or of the duties of
their office or by order of a court. The Town may provide for the publishing of statistics classified
so as not to disclose the identity of particular returns. A person violating this section shall be
required to forfeit not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00.
3.16 Town Board may levy special assessments.
(1) The Town of Middleton by resolution of its Town Board may levy and collect
special assessments upon property in a limited and determinable area for special
benefits conferred upon such property by any municipal work or improvement and
may provide for the payment of all or any part of the cost of the work or
improvement.
(2) The amount assessed against any property for any work or improvement which does
not represent an exercise of the police power shall not exceed the value of the
benefits accruing to the property therefrom, and for those representing an exercise
of the police power, the assessment shall be upon a reasonable basis as determined
by the Town Board.
3.17 Resolution and report required.
(1) Prior to making any such special assessments, the Town Board shall declare by
preliminary resolution its intention to exercise such powers for a stated municipal
purpose. Such resolution shall describe generally the contemplated purpose, the
limits of the proposed assessment district, and the number of installments in which
the special assessments may be paid or that the number of installments will be
determined at the hearing required under § 3.20 of this Code and direct the proper
municipal officer or employee to make a report thereon. Such resolution may limit
the proportion of the cost to be assessed.
(2) The report shall consist of:
(a) Preliminary or final plans and specifications.
(b) An estimate of the entire cost of the proposed work or improvement.
(c) An estimate as to each parcel of property affected of:
(i) The assessment of benefits to be levied.
(ii) The damages to be awarded for property taken or damaged.
(iii) The net amount of such benefits over damages or the net amount of
such damages over benefits.
(d) A statement that the property against which the assessments are proposed is
benefited, where the work or improvements constitute an exercise of the
police power. In such case, the estimated required under subsection (2)(c)
shall be replaced by a schedule of the proposed assessments.
(3) A copy of the report when completed shall be filed with the Town Clerk for public
inspection.
3.18 Costs that may be paid by special assessment.
The cost of any work or improvement to be paid in whole or in part by special assessment on
property may include the direct and indirect cost thereof, the damages occasioned thereby, the
interest on bonds or notes issued in anticipation of the collection of the assessments, a reasonable
charge for the services of the administrative staff of the Town and the cost of any architectural,
engineering and legal services, and any other item of direct or indirect cost which may reasonably
be attributed to the proposed work or improvement. The amount to be assessed against all property
for any such proposed work or improvement shall be apportioned among the individual parcels in
the manner designated by the Town Board.
3.19 Exemptions; deductions.
(1) If any property deemed benefitted shall, by reason of any provision of law, be
exempt from assessment therefor, such assessment shall be computed and shall be
paid by the Town.
(2) A parcel of land against which has been levied a special assessment for the sanitary
sewer or water main laid in one of the streets upon which it abuts shall be entitled
to such deduction or exemption as the Town Board determines to be reasonable and
just under the circumstances of each case when a special assessment is levied for
the sanitary sewer or water main laid in the other street upon which such corner lot
abuts. For corner parcels with the total frontage involved, the assessable frontage
shall be the total frontage for both sides, with 25% deducted from the side yard
amount. For corner lots with only the front side (street address/number side)
involved, the assessable frontage shall be 100% of the front side.
3.20 Notice of proposed or approved project.
On the completion and filing of the report required in § 3.17(2) and (3), the Town Clerk shall give
notice stating the nature of the proposed or approved work or improvement, the general boundary
lines of the proposed assessment district, the place and time at which the report may be inspected
and the place and time at which all interested persons, their agents or attorneys may appear before
the Town Board or committee thereof and be heard concerning the matters contained in the
preliminary resolution and report. Such notice shall be given either by publication in the official
Town newspaper or posted in not less than three public places within the Town and copy of said
notice shall be mailed to each interested person whose post office address is known. The hearing
shall commence not less than 10 days and not more than 40 days after the publication or posting
of said notice.
3.21 Board actions after hearing.
(1) After the hearing, the Town Board may approve, disapprove, modify or re-refer the
report to the designated officer or employee with such directions as it deems
necessary to change the plans and specifications so as to accomplish a fair and
equitable assessment.
(2) If an assessment is made against any property and an award of compensation or
damage is made in favor of the property, the Town Board shall assess only the
difference between such assessment of benefits and the award of compensation or
damage.
(3) If the work or improvement has not been previously authorized or approved, the
Town Board shall approve the work or improvement and, by resolution, direct that
the same be done and paid for in accordance with the report finally approved. If the
work or improvement has been approved by the Town Board or work commenced
or completed prior to the filing of the report or prior to the hearing, then the Town
Board shall, by resolution, confirm the report as made or modified and provide for
payment in whole or in part by assessment.
(4) The Town Clerk shall publish the final resolutions as required in § 3.20.
(5) After the publication of the final resolution, any work or improvement provided for
and not yet authorized shall be deemed fully authorized and all awards of
compensation or damage and all assessments made shall be deemed duly and
properly made, subject to the right of appeal under § 66.0703(8) to (13), Wis. Stats.,
or any other applicable provision of law.
3.22 Combined assessments.
If more than a single improvement is undertaken, the Town Board may combine the assessments
as a single assessment on each property affected, except that the property owner may object to any
one or more of said improvements.
3.23 Board's power to amend, cancel or confirm special assessment.
If, after completion or after the receipt of bids, the actual cost of any work or improvement is found
to vary materially from the original estimate, or the assessment is void or invalid for any reason,
or if the Town Board determines to reconsider an assessment, it is empowered, after giving notice
as required in § 3.26, to amend, cancel or confirm any prior assessment, and notice of this
amending, canceling or confirming shall be given by the Town Clerk as provided in § 3.21.
3.24 Where cost of improvement is less than assessment.
If the cost of the work or improvement is less than the assessment levied, the Town Board, without
notice or hearing, shall reduce each assessment proportionately, if the assessment has been paid
either in part or in full, the Town shall refund the property owner such overpayment.
3.25 Appealed assessments payable when due.
Pursuant to § 66.0703(8) to (13), Wis. Stats., it shall be a condition to the maintenance of any
appeal that any assessment appealed shall be paid when due and payable and upon default in
payment any such appeal shall be dismissed.
3.26 Special assessment a lien on property.
Pursuant to § 66.0703(13), Wis. Stats., any special assessment levied under this article shall be a
lien on the property against which it is levied on behalf of the Town. The Town Board shall provide
for the collection of such assessments and may establish penalties for payment after the due date.
The Town Board shall provide that all assessments not paid by the date specified shall be extended
upon the tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property and all proceedings in relation to the
collection of such delinquent taxes shall apply to such assessment, except as otherwise provided
by statute.
3.27 Special charges permissible.
(1) In addition to all other methods provided by law, special charges for current
services may be imposed by the Town Board by allocating all or part of the cost of
the property served. Such may include snow and ice removal, weed elimination,
street sprinkling, oiling or tarring, repair of sidewalks or curb and gutter, garbage
and refuse disposal, sewer service and tree care or removal. The provisions for
notice of such charges shall be optional with the Town Board except that, in the
case of street, sidewalk, curb or gutter repair, a Class 1 notice, under Ch. 985, Wis.
Stats., will be published at least 20 days before the hearing or proceeding, and a
copy of such notice mailed to every interested person whose post office address is
known, at least 10 days before the hearing or proceeding. Such notice shall specify
that on a certain date a hearing will be held by the Town Board as to whether the
service in question shall be performed, and any other service included in §
66.0627(1)(c), Wis. Stats.
(2) Such special charges shall not be payable in installments. If not paid within the
period fixed by the Town Board, such delinquent charge shall become a lien as
provided in § 3.26.
(3) Section 3.17 shall not be applicable to proceedings under this section.
3.28 General provisions.
(1) If any assessment or charge levied under this article is invalid because such statutes
are found to be unconstitutional, the Town Board may thereafter reassess such
assessment or charge pursuant to the provisions of any applicable law.
(2) The Town Board may, without notice or hearing, levy and assess all or any part of
the cost of any work or improvement upon the property benefitted if notice and
hearing is waived in writing by property owners affected.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law or this article or other ordinance or
resolution, it is specifically intended and provided by this article that the Town may
levy special assessments for work or improvement against the property benefitted
either before or after the approval of the work plans and specifications, contracting
for the work or completing the work or improvement.
3.29 Payment for public works; special assessments.
The Town Board may levy and collect special assessments and charges under § 66.0703, Wis.
Stats., and this article to pay for all or part of the cost of any public work or improvement. Special
assessments may be paid under § 66.0713, Wis. Stats. Reassessments shall be made as provided
under § 66.0731, Wis. Stats.”
1
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC SAFETY
4.01 Fire Protection.
4.02 Ambulance Service.
4.03 Impeding Fire Equipment Prohibited.
4.04 Police Power of Fire Departments.
4.05 False Alarm and Interference with Fire Fighting.
4.06 Damaging Fire Hose Prohibited; Parking By Hydrants; Blocking Fire Lanes.
4.07 Firefighters May Enter Adjacent Property.
4.08 Duty of Bystanders to Assist.
4.09 Adoption of State Codes.
4.10 Application to new and existing conditions.
4.11 Fire inspection duties.
4.12 Orders to eliminate fire hazards.
4.13 Service of orders.
4.14 Investigation of fires.
4.15 False Appearance.
4.16 Fire records.
4.17 Annual report.
4.18 Exceptions.
4.19 LP gas containers and equipment.
4.20 Outdoor burning regulated.
4.21 Activities banned or regulated during emergencies.
4.22 Depositing or accumulating combustible material.
4.23 Administration and enforcement.
4.24 New materials, processes, or occupancies which may require permits.
4.25 Fireworks regulations.
4.26 Hazardous Materials
4.27 Penalty.
4.01 Fire Protection.
(1) General Authority.
(a) The Town Board shall provide for fire protection for the Town. Fire
protection for the Town, or any portion of the Town, may be provided in
any manner, including:
(i) Establishing a Town fire department.
(ii) Joining with another municipality to establish a joint fire
department.
2
(iii) Contracting with any person.
(iv) Utilizing a fire company organized under Ch. 213, Wis. Stats.
(b) The Town Board may provide for the equipping, staffing, housing, and
maintenance of fire protection services.
(2) Funding. The Town Board may:
(a) Appropriate money to pay for fire protection in the Town.
(b) Charge property owners a fee for the cost of fire calls made to their property.
(c) Levy taxes on the entire Town to pay for fire protection.
(d) Levy taxes on property served by a particular source of fire protection, to
support the source of protection.
4.02 Ambulance Service. The Town Board shall contract for or operate and maintain
ambulance services unless such services are provided by another person. The Town Board may
purchase equipment for medical and other emergency calls.
4.03 Impeding Fire Equipment Prohibited. Emergency vehicles may have red, white or a
combination of red and white lights which, when responding to an emergency, are constantly
moving. When approached (from the front or rear) by an emergency vehicle whose light and siren
are activated, the driver of every other vehicle must yield the right-of-way. In yielding the rightof-
way, drivers must move immediately to the right hand edge or curb of the roadway, parallel to
the roadway, and clear of any intersection. Drivers must immediately stop their vehicle until the
emergency vehicle or vehicles have passed, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
4.04 Police Power of Fire Departments.
(1) Police Authority at Fires.
(a) The Fire Chief and Assistant Chiefs or officers in command of a Fire
Department at any fire are hereby vested with full and complete police
authority at fires. Any officer of a Fire Department may cause the arrest of
any person failing to give the right-of-way to a Fire Department in
responding to a fire.
(2) The Fire Chief may prescribe limits in the vicinity of any fire within which
persons, except those who reside therein, firefighters and police, and those
admitted by his or her order.
(3) The Fire Chief shall have the power to cause the removal of any property
whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such property
3
from fire or to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect the adjoining
property, and during the progress of any fire he or she shall have the power
to cause the removal of all wires or other facilities and the turning off of all
electricity or other services where the same impedes the work of the Fire
Department during the progress of a fire.
(2) Firefighters to Have Powers of Traffic Officers. Members of a Fire Department,
when at the scene of a fire or other emergency, or when Fire Department vehicles
are upon the street pursuant to an emergency call, shall have the authority and duty
of traffic officers to direct traffic, as conditions require, notwithstanding any other
provision of this Chapter.
4.05 False Alarm and Interference with Fire Fighting.
(1) It shall be unlawful to do any of the following in the Town of Middleton.
(a) Give a false alarm to any public officer or employee, whether by means of
a fire alarm system or otherwise. This section is not limited to intentional
acts. It covers all occurrences where an alarm is signaled and there is no
present fire or emergency.
(b) Interfere with the proper functioning of a fire or police alarm system.
(c) Interfere with the lawful efforts of a fire department, its officers, members
or employees, to extinguish a fire.
(2) In addition to any other lawful penalty, any person who violates this section shall
be responsible for, and reimburse the Town or any other paying parties, for any cost
associated with any response by a fire or police department or agency caused by
actions in violation of this section. Should the Town pay such costs and not receive
reimbursement from the violating party within 30 days of invoice or other type of
reasonable written notice, these costs shall be collected as a special charge against
any offending property owner in accordance with § 66.60(16), Wis. Stats.
4.06 Damaging Fire Hose Prohibited; Parking By Hydrants; Blocking Fire Lanes.
(1) Driving Over Fire Hose. No person shall willfully injure in any manner any hose,
hydrant or fire apparatus belonging to a Fire Department, and no vehicle shall be
driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department when laid down on any
street, private driveway or other place, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without
the consent of the Fire Department official in command.
(2) Parking Vehicles Near Hydrants. It shall be unlawful for any person to part any
vehicle or leave any object within 10 feet of any fire hydrant at any time.
4
(3) No Parking Near Fire. It shall be unlawful for any person, in case of fire, to drive
or park any vehicle within 500 feet from the place of fire without the consent and
authority of the Fire Chief or any law enforcement officer.
4.07 Firefighters May Enter Adjacent Property.
(1) Entering Adjacent Property. It shall be lawful for any fireman while acting under
the direction of a Fire Chief or any other officer in command, to enter upon the
premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of a building or other property then on fire
for the purpose of extinguishing such fire and in case any person shall hinder, resist
or obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of his or her duty as hereinbefore
provided, the person so offending shall be deemed guilty of resisting firemen in the
discharge of their duty.
(2) Destruction of Property to Prevent the Spread of Fire. During the progress of any
fire, a Fire Chief or his or her assistant shall have the power to order the removal
or destruction of any property necessary to prevent the further spread of fire;
provided that it is inevitable that, unless such property is removed, other property
is in danger of being destroyed by fire.
(3) Disasters. The Fire Department shall have the power to enter any premise to assist
in the role of public health and safety in the coordination of all emergency functions
to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from any disasters,
including natural disasters.
4.08 Duty of Bystanders to Assist. Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject
to the orders of a Fire Chief or officer in command and may be required to render assistance in
fighting the fire or in removing or guarding property. Such officer shall have the power to cause
the arrest of any person or persons refusing to obey said orders.
4.09 Adoption of State Codes.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter the following State of
Wisconsin Administrative Codes, and the orders, rules and regulations of the
Department of Safety and Professional Services, as from time to time amended,
exclusive of any provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference and made a part of the Town of
Middleton's Fire Prevention and Safety Codes:
SPS 4 No Smoking Signage
SPS 5 Credentials
SPS 7 Explosives Materials
SPS 9 Manufacture of Fireworks
SPS 10 Flammable & Combustible Liquids
SPS 14 Fire Prevention
SPS 15 Cleaning and Dyeing
5
SPS 16 Electrical
SPS 18 Elevators
SPS 20 to 25 Uniform Dwelling
SPS 28 Smoke Detectors
SPS 30 Fire Department Health & Safety
SPS 32 Public Employee Safety and Health
SPS 40 Gas Systems
SPS 41 Boilers and Pressure Vessels
SPS 43 Anhydrous Ammonia
SPS 50-64 Commercial Buildings for Buildings Constructed Prior to 7-
1-02
SPS 61-65 Wisconsin Enrolled Building Code
SPS 66 Multifamily Dwelling
SPS 69 Barrier-Free Design
SPS 70 Historic Building
SPS 75-79 Existing Buildings
(2) NFPA Codes. The following codes of the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) and/or their successors as amended from time to time, as incorporated
herein by reference and adopted as part of this Fire Prevention Chapter.
Volume I Fire Prevention Code
Volume 13 Installation of Sprinkler Systems
Volume 13R Installation of Sprinkler in Residential Dwellings
(Multifamily)
Volume 33 Spray Application using Flammable or Combustible Liquids
Volume 58 Liquefied Petroleum Gases
Volume 70 National Electrical Code
Volume 72 National Fire Alarm Code
Volume 101 Life Safety Code
(3) ICC Codes. The following standards of the International Code Conference (ICC)
Codes and or their successors as amended from time to time, are incorporated
herein by reference and adopted as part of this Fire Protection Chapter.
(IFC) International Fire Code, including Appendix D
(4) Exceptions.
(a) The design and construction requirements of NFPA 1, 101 and the IFC
sections that apply to public buildings or places of employment are not
included in this Chapter unless specifically referenced herein.
(b) Any Permits required under NFPA 1, and the IFC are not required by this
Chapter.
6
(c) Any Certificates of Fitness required in NFPA 1, 101: and the IFC are not
required by this Chapter.
(d) NFPA 101: Chapters 4 and 5 shall be used for explanatory materials only.
(e) IFC Chapter 4 shall be used for explanatory materials only.
(5) Whenever the provisions of the aforementioned codes conflict, the stricter
interpretation shall apply.
(6) Official copies of each of said codes are now on file in the office of the Town Clerk
and the Middleton Fire Department and shall remain so filed and be, at all
reasonable times, open to inspection by any interested persons.
4.10 Application to new and existing conditions. The provisions of this chapter shall apply
equally to new and existing conditions except that existing conditions not in strict compliance with
the terms of this chapter shall be permitted to continue where the exceptions do not constitute a
distinct hazard to life or adjoining property.
4.11 Fire inspection duties.
(1) The Fire Chief and Assistant Chiefs of the Fire Department(s) serving the Town of
Middleton shall be the Fire Inspectors of the Town of Middleton and shall have the
power to appoint one (1) or more deputy Fire Inspectors and shall perform all duties
required of the Fire Inspectors by the laws and rules of the State, particularly §
101.14, Wis. Stats.
(2) While acting as Fire Inspectors pursuant to § 101.14(2), Wis. Stats., the Fire Chief,
or any officer of the Fire Department designated by the Fire Chief, shall have the
right and authority to enter any building or upon any premises in the Town of
Middleton at all reasonable hours for the purpose of making inspections or
investigations which, under the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, he/she may
deem necessary. Should the Fire Inspector find that any provisions of this Code
relating to fire hazards and prevention of fires are being violated, or that a fire
hazard exists which should be eliminated, it shall be his/her duty to give such
directions for the abatement of such conditions as he/she shall deem necessary and,
if such directions be not complied with, to report such noncompliance to the Town
Board for further action.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief or his or her designee to inspect all building
and premises at least once per calendar year pursuant to Wis. Admin. Code § SPS
14.01(11)(b)6, except the interiors of private dwelling units, or as often as may be
deemed necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any
conditions found to be contrary to the adoptions and references found in this Code
or any other applicable law. In no case shall the period between inspections exceed
fifteen (15) months.
7
(4) Written reports of inspections shall be made and kept on file in the office of the
Chief of the Fire Department in the manner and form required by the Department
of Safety and Professional Services.
4.12 Orders to eliminate fire hazards. Whenever any of the officers, members, or inspectors
of the Fire Department as mentioned in § 4.11 shall find any building or upon any premises
dangerous or hazardous conditions as follows, they shall order such dangerous conditions or
materials to be removed or remedied in such manner as may be specified in said order:
(1) Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive matter.
(2) Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for
handling or using combustible or explosive matter.
(3) Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes, shavings, or other highly
flammable materials.
(4) Accumulations of dust or waste material in heating, ventilation and air conditioning
systems or of grease in exhaust ducts.
(5) Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, door, or windows liable to
interfere with the operation of the Fire Department or egress of occupants in case
of fire.
(6) Any building or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire
escapes or other exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire
extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or from any
other cause, creates a fire hazard or a threat to life and safety.
4.13 Service of orders.
(1) The service of such orders as mentioned in § 4.12 may be made upon the owner,
occupant, or other person responsible for the conditions, either by delivering a copy
of the same personally or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person
in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by
affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the
said premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner
of premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the
said person a copy of the said order or, if the owner is absent from the jurisdiction
of the officer making the order, by mailing or emailing such copy to the owner's
last-known post office address.
(2) If buildings or other premises are owned by 1 person and occupied by another under
lease or otherwise, the orders issued in connection with the enforcing of the Chapter
shall apply to the occupant thereof, except where the rules or orders require the
8
making of such additions to or changes in the premises themselves, such as would
immediately become real estate and be the property of the owner of the premises;
in such cases the rules or orders shall affect the owner and not the occupant unless
it is otherwise agreed between the owner and the occupant.
4.14 Investigation of fires.
(1) The Chief of the Middleton Fire Department shall investigate the cause, origin, and
circumstances of every fire occurring in the Town that is of suspicious nature or
which involves loss of life or injury to persons or by which property has been
destroyed or substantially damaged. Such investigations shall be begun
immediately upon the occurrence of such fire by the fire officer in whose district
the fire occurs, and if it appears that such fire is of suspicious origin, the Chief of
the Fire Department shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall
notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such
matters and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence
and in the prosecution of the case.
(2) Appropriate law enforcement agencies, upon request of the Chief of the Fire
Department, may assist in the investigation of any fire which, in the opinion of the
Chief of the Fire Department, is of suspicious origin or involves a fatality.
4.15 False Appearance. The location of any device that has a physical appearance of a Life
Safety device or Fire Protection Equipment, which does not perform that Life Safety or Fire
Protection function, shall be disclosed by the owner of such equipment to the appropriate Fire
Department.
4.16 Fire records. The Chief of the Middleton Fire Department shall keep a record of all fires
and of all the facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the
damage caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by insurance and, if so, in what
amount. Such record shall be made daily from the reports made by the Fire Department officers
and inspectors. All such records shall be considered to be public records.
4.17 Annual report. A report of the Middleton Fire Department shall be made annually and
transmitted to the Town Board. It shall contain all proceedings under this chapter, with such
statistics as the Chief of the Fire Department may wish to include therein. The Chief of the Fire
Department shall also recommend any amendments to the Code which, in his judgment, shall be
desirable.
4.18 Exceptions. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as applying to the
transportation of any article or thing shipped in conformity with the regulations prescribed by the
Surface Transportation Board, nor as applying to the military forces of the United States.
4.19 LP gas containers and equipment.
(1) Containers having water capacities greater than 2 1/2 pound (1 kg) [nominal one
9
pound (0.5 kg)] LP gas capacity shall not be located on balconies above the first
floor that are attached to a multiple-family dwelling of three or more living units
located one above the other.
(2) Prohibition of containers mentioned above is extended to also prohibit storage on
balconies described of any associated equipment used with or in conjunction with
LP gas.
4.20 Outdoor burning regulated.
(1) General.
(a) The Fire Chief may prohibit. The Fire Chief or designee may prohibit any
or all outdoor fires when conditions make them hazardous. Burning of
buildings/structures is prohibited unless authorized by the Fire Chief and all
applicable Town and Department of Natural Resources requirements are
met.
(b) Control. A means of control sufficient to prevent the fire from spreading
from the intended area must be present from the onset of the burn. A
competent adult must be present at all times and must monitor the fire until
extinguished. For the purpose of this Chapter, “monitor” means to be
physically present at or near the fire during the duration of the fire.
(c) Weather conditions. Burning is prohibited on days when excessive wind or
when atmospheric conditions result in danger to public health or safety.
These include clean air action days.
(d) Location. Burning (except Prescribed Burns and Personal Campfires) is
prohibited: On any public right-of-way, street, road or highway, on
easements or areas dedicated for such purposes, within 35 feet of a property
line, unless written permission is obtained from the neighboring property
owner(s), within 50 feet of any structure including decks and sheds, and
within five feet of trails or trail easements.
(e) Material. Only dry vegetative materials are to be burned. Grass, green
leaves and green twigs and branches are prohibited. Trash, rubbish, garbage,
plastic, rubber, paper and cardboard are all prohibited. Entire trees are
prohibited. Any material that smokes and smolders is prohibited. Small
amounts of flammable liquids are permitted for the purpose of starting the
fire.
(f) Burn barrels. Burn barrels of any sort are prohibited in residential and
commercial zoning districts.
(g) Liability. Anyone who sets a fire and through negligence allows the fire to
10
escape shall be responsible for all costs incurred during suppression and
control of the fire as well as costs incurred repairing any damage caused by
the fire. Anyone who sets a fire and does not properly monitor it shall be
responsible for all costs incurred in suppression of the fire. If these costs are
not paid within 30 days of notice, said costs will be applied to property tax
roll for the land involved.
(h) Penalty. Violation of any of the above shall be subject to forfeiture as
prescribed in § 4.27.
(i) Loss of privileges. Any person, property owner, firm or corporation that
violates any provision of this section shall forfeit his or its burning
privileges under this section until he or it appears before the Town Board to
explain the circumstances of his or its violation. At that time, the Town
Board may continue the suspension or restore such privileges, with or
without conditions. Such matters shall be placed on the Board agenda at
least five working days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting date.
(2) Leaf burning.
(a) Materials. Only dry leaves and small sticks may be burned. Grass clippings
are prohibited. Burning wet leaves that smoke and smolder is prohibited.
(b) Weather. Leaf burning is prohibited with winds over 15 miles per hour.
(c) Days of week. Leaf burning is prohibited on Saturdays (except as noted),
Sundays, and the following holidays as observed: New Year's Day, Martin
Luther King Day, Presidents Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. Leaf burning on Saturdays is limited
to the first and third Saturdays in October, November and December.
(d) Time. Leaf burning is only permitted between 8:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. The
fire must be fully extinguished by 3:30.
(3) Brush piles.
(a) General. Tree branches and brush are picked up by the Town on a regular
basis late spring through fall. Residents are encouraged to use this service
if possible rather than burning these materials.
(b) Materials. Brush piles shall consist only of brushwood, shrubs, tree
branches with attached leaves and other nonoffensive dry yard debris. Brush
piles must be 90% or more woody material; leaf piles do not fall within this
definition. Wood shall be dry enough prior to burning to prevent it from
smoldering.
11
(c) Time. Brush burning is only permitted between 8:00 a.m. and sunset.
(d) Size. Brush piles shall be no larger than 12 by 12 feet.
(e) Weather. It is preferred that burning be done when snow cover is present or
the surrounding vegetation is green to minimize potential spread of fire.
When snow cover is present, burning brush piles is prohibited with winds
over 30 miles per hour. When snow cover is not present burning brush piles
are prohibited with winds over 15 miles per hour.
(4) Prescribed burn.
(a) Definition. A Prescribed Burn is the burning of undisturbed vegetation, such
as grasses, flowers, brush, shrubs and small trees in an open landscape.
Prescribed Burning is performed for the management and restoration of
grasslands and savannas.
(b) Limitations.
(i) If a Prescribed Burn is conducted on lands not owned by the
individual conducting the burn, or, if the area to be burned is greater
than 10,000 square feet, it should be supervised and managed by an
individual who is experienced and trained/certified in this practice.
(ii) Prescribed Burns shall not create a nuisance for neighboring
residents or public roadways. Burn areas shall have adequate
firebreaks surrounding the area to be burned. If smoke produced by
the burn should adversely affect a driver's vision on a public
roadway, the party conducting the burn will provide flagmen to
assist motorists through the hazard area.
(c) Time. Prescribed burns are only permitted between 8:00 a.m. and 30
minutes after sunset.
(d) Weather. Prescribed Burns are prohibited when the relative humidity is
below 20% or winds are above 25 miles per hour. Burns should not be
performed when wind direction is not constant, regardless of wind speed.
(e) Personnel requirements. Adequate number of people should be present to
supervise the prescribed burn. Personnel requirements for a prescribed burn
depend on several factors including i) volatility of vegetation, ii) type of
fireguards, iii) size of area, and iv) weather conditions.
(5) Personal campfires or fire pits.
12
(a) Definition. Personal Campfires or Fire Pits are small fires constructed in a
defined space for the purpose of cooking and/or heat.
(b) Size. Campfires must be 36 inches in diameter or less.
(c) Time. Campfires are prohibited from 12:00 midnight until 8:00 a.m.
(d) Location. Personal Campfires and Fire Pits are prohibited on easements or
areas dedicated for such purposes, within 10 feet of a property line, unless
written permission is obtained from the neighboring property owner(s),
within 20 feet of any structure including decks and sheds, and within 35 feet
of trails or trail easements.
(6) Group assembly bonfires campfires. Group assembly bonfires or ceremonial
campfires are large campfires that accompany group activities and are only
permitted upon grant of special permission by the Town Board.
4.21 Activities banned or regulated during emergencies.
(1) Declarations of emergency. When there occurs a lack of precipitation, there may
exist an extreme danger of fire within the Town of Middleton. This extreme danger
of fire affects the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the Town
of Middleton and constitutes a state of emergency. It is hereby found that the
regulation of fires, burning materials, and fireworks is necessary and expedient for
the health, safety, welfare and good order of the Town during said emergency.
(2) Regulation of fires, burning materials, and fireworks. Pursuant to § 323.11, Wis.
Stats., and when a burning state of emergency is declared, it may be ordered that a
person may not:
(a) Set, build, or maintain any open fire, except:
(i) Charcoal grills using charcoal briquettes, gas grills, or camp stoves
on private property; or:
(ii) Charcoal grills using charcoal briquettes, gas grills, or camp stoves
in Town parks placed at least 20 feet away from any combustible
vegetation.
(b) Throw, discard, or drop matches, cigarettes, cigars, ashes, charcoal
briquettes or other burning materials while outdoors except into a
noncombustible container that does not contain combustible materials.
(c) Light or ignite a flare, except upon a roadway in an emergency.
(d) Light, ignite, or use anything manufactured, processed, or packaged solely
13
for the purpose of exploding, emitting sparks or combustion for amusement
purposes, including fireworks, firecrackers, bottle rockets, caps, toy snakes,
sparklers, smoke bombs, or cylindrical or cone fountains that emit sparks
and smoke, except in displays authorized by the Town where adequate fire
prevention measures have been taken.
(3) Period of emergency. Pursuant to § 323.11, Wis. Stats., burning emergencies shall
become effective upon the time and date of the Town Chairperson, Fire Chief or
Dane County Executive declaring a state of emergency and shall remain in effect
until the period of emergency ceases to exist or until the ratification, alteration,
modification, or repeal of the burning state of emergency by the Town Chairperson,
Fire Chief or the Dane County Executive.
4.22 Depositing or accumulating combustible material.
(1) Hot ashes and other dangerous materials. No person shall deposit hot ashes or
cinders, or smoldering coals, or greasy or oily substances liable to spontaneous
ignition, into any combustible receptacle or place the same within 10 feet of any
combustible materials, unless resting on a noncombustible floor or on the ground
outside the building, and in every case the same must be kept at least two feet away
from any combustible wall or partition.
(2) Accumulations of waste materials. Accumulations of wastepaper, hay, grass, straw,
weeds, litter, or combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind shall not
be permitted to remain upon any roof or in any court or yard. All weeds, grass,
vines, or other growth, when the same endangers property, or is liable to be fired,
shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the property it is on.
(3) Storage of readily combustible materials. Storage of readily combustible material
in buildings shall be orderly, shall not be within two feet of the ceiling, and not so
located as to endanger exit from the building. Storage in the open shall not be more
than 20 feet in height, shall be so located with respect to adjacent buildings as not
to constitute a hazard, and shall be compact and orderly.
4.23 Administration and enforcement.
(1) Enforcement.
(a) The Fire Prevention Code Chapter shall be enforced by the Middleton Fire
Department and such Fire Inspectors in said Department as the Fire Chief
shall designate.
(b) This Chapter shall not be construed to affect the responsibility of any person
owning, operating, or installing any equipment for damage to persons or
property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Town be held as
assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection or reinspection
14
authorized herein or the permit issued as herein provided or by reason of
the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein.
(2) Modifications. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the power to modify
any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by
the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code, provided that the
spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice
done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the
decision of the chief of the Fire Department thereon shall be entered upon the
records of the Department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
(3) Appeals. Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code
have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the Town Board within 10 days
from the date of the decision of the Fire Chief. In the event of such appeal, the
Board shall set a time and place for hearing thereof and give to the appellant at least
10 days' notice thereof by mail or personally.
4.24 New materials, processes, or occupancies which may require permits. The Town
Chairperson, the Chief of the Fire Department, and the Fire Inspectors shall act as a committee to
determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials,
processes, or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in
said Code. The Chief of the Fire Department shall post such a list in a conspicuous place in his
office and in the office of the Clerk and may distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
4.25 Fireworks regulations.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to sell, expose or offer for sale, use, keep, discharge
or explode any firecrackers, blank cartridges, toy pistols or cannons, toy canes or
cannons in which explosives are used, contrivances using explosive caps or
cartridges, sparklers, display wheels, the type of balloon which requires fire
underneath to propel the same, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, aerial
salutes, American or Chinese bombs or other fireworks of like construction or any
fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other
devices commonly used and chlorates, oxalates, sulfides of lead, barium, antimony,
arsenic, mercury, nitroglycerine, phosphorous or any compound containing any of
the same or other modern explosives, within the Town of Middleton, except as
hereinafter provided.
(2) Sale of fireworks. No person may sell or possess with intent to sell fireworks,
except:
(a) A public authority.
15
(b) A fair association.
(c) An amusement park.
(d) Park board or commission.
(e) Civic organizations.
(f) An agricultural producer for the protection of crops from predatory birds or
animals.
(g) Municipality.
(h) For a purpose authorized under Chapter 167, Wis. Stats.
(3) Use permit.
(a) Permit required. No person may possess or use fireworks without a user’s
permit from the Town Chair, upon the recommendation of the Middleton
Fire Department Fire Chief.
(b) Who may obtain a permit. A permit under this section may be issued only
to the following:
(i) Any Town resident.
(ii) A public authority.
(iii) A fair association.
(iv) An amusement park.
(v) Park board or commission.
(vi) Civic organizations.
(vii) An agricultural producer for the protection of crops from predatory
birds or animals.
(c) Crop protection signs. A person issued a permit for crop protection shall
erect appropriate warning signs disclosing the use of fireworks for crop
protection.
(d) Bond or policy. The Town Board shall require an indemnity bond with
good and sufficient sureties or policy of liability insurance for the payment
16
of all claims that may arise by reason of injuries to person or property from
the handling, use or discharge of fireworks under such permit. Such bond
or policy shall be taken in the name of the Town of Middleton, and any
person injured thereby may bring an action on the bond or policy in his own
name to recover the damage the person has sustained, but aggregate liability
of the surety or insurer to all persons shall in no event exceed the amount of
such bond or policy. The bond, together with a copy of the permit, shall be
filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
(e) Required information for permit. A permit under this section shall specify
all of the following:
(i) The name and address of the permit holder.
(ii) The date on and after which fireworks may be purchased.
(iii) The kind and quantity of fireworks that may be purchased.
(iv) The date, location and time of permitted use.
(v) The fireworks storage site, if any.
(vi) Other special conditions prescribed by ordinance.
(f) Copy of permit application and permit. A copy of a permit application
under this section must filed with the Town Clerk at least 60 days before
the intended date of authorized use. A copy of the permit (if granted) shall
be given to the Fire Chief at least thirty (30) days before the date of
authorized use.
(g) Minors prohibited. A permit under this section may not be issued to a
minor.
(4) Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the use or sale of blank cartridges for circus
or theatrical purposes, or signal purposes in athletic contests or sports events, or use
by militia, police or military organizations, nor the use or sale of colored flares or
torpedoes for railway, aircraft or highway signal purposes.
(5) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any resident wholesaler, dealer
or jobber from selling fireworks other than those prohibited by Subsection (6) at
wholesale, but only when the same are shipped or delivered directly outside the
State of Wisconsin or to an organization or group granted a permit under Subsection
(2).
(6) The following provisions shall apply to places where fireworks are stored or
handled in the Town of Middleton:
17
(a) Such premises shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher approved by the
Fire Chief or Chief Engineer of the Fire Department;
(b) Smoking shall be prohibited where fireworks are stored or handled;
(c) It is hereby made the duty of every wholesaler, dealer or jobber keeping,
storing, or handling fireworks of any description within the Town of
Middleton, to notify the Fire Chief immediately of the receipt of such
fireworks, or the removal thereof from one location to another, and the
location where such fireworks are stored. No such fireworks shall be stored
in any building used for dwelling purposes or in any building situated within
500 feet of any building used for dwelling purposes, or in places of public
assemblage, or within 500 feet of any gasoline pump, gasoline filling station
or gasoline bulk station, or any building in which gasoline or volatile liquid
is sold in quantities in excess of one gallon;
(7) Under no circumstances shall any person sell, keep for sale, manufacture or bring
into the Town of Middleton for use therein any fire balloon, mortars or cannon, or
any explosive caps or cartridges, any Chinese firecrackers more than two inches in
length or more than 3/8 inch in diameter (outside measurements of container), or
any article containing a compound of mercury or yellow phosphorous.
(8) A parent or legally appointed guardian of any minor who shall knowingly permit
such minor to purchase or have in the minor's possession or to discharge any
fireworks prohibited by this section shall be deemed to have violated this section,
and such parent or guardian shall be personally liable for any damage caused by
such possession or discharge of fireworks.
(9) The authorized law enforcement officers, and the Middleton Fire District's Fire
Inspector and the Fire Inspector's designees are charged with the duty of enforcing
this section within the limits of the Town of Middleton.
(10) The prohibitions and penalties provided in the section shall not apply to toy pistols,
toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper caps manufactured in
accordance with the United States Surface Transportation Board regulations for
packing and shipping of toy paper caps are used or toy paper caps are so
manufactured, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
(11) The prohibitions and penalties provided in this section shall not apply to:
(a) Fuel or a lubricant.
(b) Firearm cartridge or shotgun shell.
(c) Flare used or possessed or sold for use as a signal in an emergency or in the
18
operations of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or motor vehicle.
(d) A match, cigarette lighters, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space heater.
(e) A cap containing not more than ¼ grain of explosive mixture, if the cap is
used or possessed or sold for use in a device which prevents direct bodily
contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion.
(f) A toy snake that contains no mercury.
(g) A model rocket engine.
(h) Tobacco and tobacco products.
(i) Sparklers on a wire or wood stick not exceeding 36 includes in length or
0.25 inches in outside diameter which does not contain magnesium, chlorate
or perchlorate.
(j) A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and which
contains less than ¼ grain of explosive mixture.
(k) A device designed to produce an audible sound but not explode, spark,
move or emit an external flame after ignition and which does not exceed
three grams in total weight.
(l) A device that emits smoke with no external flame and does not leave the
ground.
(m) A cylindrical fountain not exceeding 100 grams in total weight with an
inside tube diameter not exceeding 0.75 inches, designed to sit on the
ground and emit only sparks and smoke.
(n) A cone fountain not exceeding 75 grams in total weight, designed to sit on
the ground and emit only sparks and smoke.
(12) All fireworks permits issued shall also conform to the standards and provisions of
the National Fire Protection Administration (NFPA).
4.26 Hazardous Materials
(1) Applicability. All persons, firms or organizations using, researching or producing
hazardous materials and/or infectious agents shall notify the Middleton Fire
Department as prescribed by this chapter. The provisions of this section shall apply
to all persons, firms or organizations other than farms engaged in production
agriculture using, researching, producing or storing hazardous materials and/or
19
infectious agents on and after the effective date of this chapter.
(2) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
(a) HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Those materials that can cause death or
disabling injury from brief exposure; those materials that could cause a losttime
injury from exposure; and those materials that could cause temporary
disability or injury without permanent effects which are used, researched,
produced or stored within or on premises except those household consumer
products used at the point of consumption and not used for commercial or
experimental purposes. This definition of hazardous materials shall include
radioactive materials. "Hazardous materials" includes the list of hazardous
wastes which is promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
under Sec. 6821(b) of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act as
amended and as further set forth in Ch. 291, Wis. Stats.
(b) INFECTIOUS AGENT — A bacterial, mycoplasma, fungal, parasitic or
viral agent known to cause illness in humans which is used, researched,
produced or stored within or on premises.
(3) Information required.
(a) Any person, firm or organization using, researching, producing and/or
storing any hazardous materials shall provide in writing to the Fire
Department, the following information:
(i) Address, location of where hazardous materials are used,
researched, stored or produced;
(ii) The trade name of the hazardous material;
(iii) The chemical name and any commonly used synonym for the
hazardous material and the chemical name and any commonly used
synonym for its major components;
(iv) The exact locations on the premises where hazardous materials are
used, researched, stored and/or produced;
(v) Amounts of hazardous materials on premises per exact location;
(vi) The boiling point, vapor pressure, vapor density, solubility in water,
specific gravity, percentage volatile by volume, evaporation rate for
liquids and appearance and odor of the hazardous materials;
(vii) The flashpoint and flammable limits of the hazardous materials;
20
(viii) Any permissible exposure level, threshold limit value or other
established limit value for exposure to a hazardous materials;
(ix) The stability of the hazardous materials;
(x) Recommended fire extinguishing media, special firefighting
procedures and fire and explosion hazard information for the
hazardous materials;
(xi) Any effect of over-exposure to the hazardous materials, emergency
and first aid procedures and telephone numbers to call in an
emergency;
(xii) Any condition or material that is incompatible with the hazardous
material and must be avoided;
(xiii) Any personal protective equipment to be worn or used and special
precautions to be taken when handling or coming into contact with
the hazardous materials;
(xiv) Procedures for handling or coming into contact with the hazardous
materials.
(b) Any person, firm or organization using, researching, producing and/or
storing infectious agents and/or carrier of an infectious agent shall provide
in writing to the Fire Department the following:
(i) The name and any commonly used synonym of the infectious
agents;
(ii) Address/location where infectious agents are used, researched,
stored and/or produced;
(iii) The exact locations where infectious agents are used, researched,
stored and/or produced:
(iv) Amount of infectious agents on premises per exact locations;
(v) Any methods of route of transmission of the infectious agents;
(vi) Any symptoms of effect of infection, emergency and first aid
procedure and a telephone number to be called in an emergency;
(vii) Any personal protective equipment to be worn or used and special
precautions to be taken when handling or coming in contact with the
21
infectious agents;
(viii) Procedure for handling, clean-up and disposal of infectious agents
leaked or spilled.
(4) Prohibited discharges. No person, firm or corporation shall discharge, leak, leach,
or spill upon any public or private street, alley, parking lot, park or other public or
private property, or onto the ground, surface waters, subsurface waters, or aquifers,
or within the Town of Middleton, any explosive, flammable, or combustible solid
liquid or gas, any radioactive material at or above Nuclear Regulatory Restriction
levels, etiologic agents, or any solid, liquid, or gas having a deleterious effect on
the environment. Those areas specifically licensed for waste disposal, landfill
activities or farming activities using accepted farming practices shall be exempted
from the provisions of this section.
(5) Containment, cleanup and restoration. Any person, firm, or corporation in
violation of the above section shall, upon direction of any emergency government
officer or the Fire Department, begin immediate actions to contain, clean up, and
remove to any approved repository the offending material(s) and restore the site to
its original condition, with the offending person, firm, or corporation being
responsible for all expenses incurred. Should any person, firm, or corporation fail
to engage the necessary persons and equipment to comply or to complete the
requirements of this section, the emergency government officer or the Fire
Department may order the required actions to be taken by public or private
resources and allow the recovery of any and all costs incurred by the Town of
Middleton.
(6) Emergency services response. Any emergency services response includes, but is
not limited to, fire service, emergency medical service, and law enforcement
personnel. A person, firm, or corporation who possesses or controls a hazardous
substance shall be responsible for reimbursement to the responding agencies for
actual and necessary expenses incurred in carrying out their duties under this
ordinance. Actual and necessary expenses may include but not be limited to
replacement of equipment damaged by the hazardous material, cleaning,
decontamination, and maintenance of the equipment specific to the incident, costs
incurred in the procurement and use of specialized equipment specific to the
incident, specific laboratory expenses incurred in the recognition and identification
of hazardous substances, in the evaluation of response, decontamination, clean up,
and medical surveillance, and incurred costs in future medical surveillance of
response personnel as required by the responding agencies medical advisor.
(7) Site access. Access to any site, public or private, where a prohibited discharge is
indicated or suspected will be provided to emergency government officers and staff
and to law enforcement and fire department personnel for the purpose of evaluating
the threat to the public and monitoring containment, clean up, and restoration
activities.
22
(8) Public protection. Should any prohibited discharge occur that threatens the life,
safety, or health of the public at, near, or around the site of a prohibited discharge,
and that the situation is so critical that immediate steps must be taken to protect life
and limb, the senior law enforcement or fire official on the scene of the emergency
may order an evacuation of the area or take other appropriate steps for a period of
time until the Town Board can take appropriate action.
(9) Reimbursement for cleanup of spills. Any person who possesses or controls a
hazardous material or infectious agent which was discharged or caused the
discharge of a hazardous material or infectious agent shall reimburse the Town for
actual and necessary expenses incurred by the Town or its agent to contain, remove
or dispose of the hazardous substance or infectious agent or take any other
appropriate action which is deemed appropriate under the circumstances.
(10) Recovery of costs.
(a) Every person, firm or corporation using, storing, handling or transporting
flammable or combustible liquids, chemicals, gases or other hazardous
materials shall comply with the requirements of Chapter SPS 10, Wis. Adm.
Code, as the same is now in force and may hereafter from time to time be
amended.
(b) Every person, firm or corporation using, storing, handling or transporting
(whether by rail or on the highways) flammable or combustible liquids,
chemicals, gases or other hazardous materials shall be liable to the Town
for the actual cost of labor and materials associated with the use of any
specialized extinguishing agent, chemical, neutralizer or similar material or
equipment employed to extinguish, confine or clean up any such hazardous
material which is involved in any accidental spill or in threat of any fire or
accidental spill.
4.27 Penalty.
(1) Fireworks. Any person who shall violate any provision of § 4.25 shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in this subsection. Each violation and each day a violation
continues or occurs shall be a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude
the Town from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation
of any provision contained in this Code.
(a) First offense Any person who shall violate any provision of § 4.25 subject
to a penalty shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than $2,000,
together with the costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such
forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the County Jail or
county house of correction until said forfeiture and costs are paid, but not
exceeding 90 days.
23
(b) Subsequent offense. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of
§ 4.25 who shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the same
provision shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50 nor more
than $2,000 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution and in
default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be
imprisoned in the County Jail or county house of correction until said
forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding six months.
(2) Other violations.
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to
comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order
made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement
of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, or who shall fail to comply with such
an order as affirmed or modified by the Chief of the Fire Department or the
Town Board or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed
herein shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 25.
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of a prohibited condition.
(3) Failure to pay. Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of
prosecution upon the order of the Court for violation of any Ordinance of the Town,
the Court may, in lieu of ordering the imprisonment of the defendant, or after the
defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the property
of the defendant for said forfeiture and costs of prosecution.
1
CHAPTER 5
IMPACT FEES
5.01 Title, Purpose and Authority.
5.02 Definitions.
5.03 Applicability of Impact Fee.
5.04 Imposition of Impact Fee.
5.05 Impact Fee Schedules/Calculation.
5.06 Administration of Impact Fee.
5.07 Bonding of Excess Facility Projects.
5.08 Refunds.
5.09 Appeals.
5.10 Effect of Impact Fee on Subdivision Regulations.
5.11 Impact Fee as Additional and Supplemental Requirement.
5.12 Amendments.
5.13 Credits.
5.14 Penalty.
5.01 Title, Purpose and Authority.
(1) Title. This Chapter shall be known and cited as the "Impact Fee Ordinance."
(2) The purpose of this Chapter is to impose impact fees in order to pay for capital costs
or improvements which are necessary to accommodate new development or any
improvements made to existing development in the Town as a whole or in
designated subareas. The imposition of impact fees is intended to ensure that capital
facilities are adequate to meet the health and safety needs of the Town and that new
development pays a proportionate share of new or expanded capital facilities
required by such development.
(3) This Chapter is authorized under Wis. Stat. § 66.0617. The provisions of this
Chapter shall not be construed to limit the power of the Town to adopt such Chapter
pursuant to any other source of local authority, nor to utilize any other methods or
powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either
in substitution of or in conjunction with this Chapter.
5.02 Definitions. As applied in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall be used:
(1) BUILDING PERMIT means any permit required for new construction and
additions pursuant to Chapter 16 of the Town Code. The term "building permit," as
used herein, shall not be deemed to include permits required for remodeling,
rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure, or rebuilding a
damaged or destroyed structure, provided no increase in gross floor area or number
of dwelling units results therefrom.
2
(2) CAPITAL BUDGET means a plan for capital expenditures, including
commitments, to be incurred during the budget year from funds subject to
appropriation by the Town Board of the Town of Middleton for projects scheduled
in a given year of the capital program.
(3) CAPITAL COSTS means the capital cost to construct, expand or improve public
facilities, including the cost of land, and including legal, engineering and design
costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities, except that not more than 10
percent of capital costs may consist of legal, engineering and design costs unless
the Town can demonstrate that its legal, engineering and design costs which relate
directly to the public improvement for which the impact fees were imposed exceed
10 percent of capital costs. "Capital costs" does not include other noncapital costs
to construct, expand or improve public facilities, vehicles, or the costs of equipment
to construct, expand or improve public facilities.
(4) CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM (CIP) means a plan for capital
expenditures, including commitments, to be incurred each year over a fixed period
of years to meet capital needs arising from the long-term work program. It thus sets
forth each project or other contemplated expenditure in which the Town is to have
a part, and it specifies the full resources estimated to be available to finance the
projected expenditures.
(5) COMPREHENSIVE PLAN means the Town of Middleton Comprehensive Land
Use Plan, including any subsequent changes or amendments thereto.
(6) DEVELOPER means a person who constructs or creates a land development.
(7) DEVELOPMENT means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
property, the use of any principal structure or land, or any other activity that
requires issuance of a building permit.
(8) GROSS FLOOR AREA means the sum of the total planned floor area of all floor
levels of a building (in square feet), including cellars, basements, mezzanines,
penthouses, corridors, lobbies, stores and offices that are within the principal
outside faces of exterior walls, not including architectural setbacks or projections.
Included are all areas that have floor surfaces with clear standing head room (6 feet,
6 inches minimum) regardless of their use. Unroofed areas and unenclosed roofedover
areas, except those contained within the principle outside faces of exterior
walls, and parking garages are not included.
(9) IMPACT FEE means cash contributions, contributions of land or interest in land,
or any other items of value that are imposed on a developer by a municipality under
this chapter. Impact fee shall mean a fee to be collected after a building permit is
issued and calculated based upon the capital costs of facilities in proportion to
development creating the need for such facilities.
3
(10) MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT means local use of land involving both residential
and nonresidential development.
(11) NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT means any local use of land for primarily
industrial or commercial purposes, or which does not fall within the definition of
residential development.
(12) PUBLIC FACILITIES means any or all of the following, which are necessary to
support and are attributable to one or more designated development areas and which
are identified in the capital improvement plan to be financed by the imposition of
an impact fee:
(a) Parks, playgrounds and land for athletic fields.
(b) Highways, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 340.01(22), and other transportation
facilities.
(c) Traffic control devices.
(d) Any other necessary governmental facilities permitted under Wis. Stat. §
66.0617.
(13) RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT means local use of land for the primary purpose
of housing accommodations.
(14) RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT means one residential dwelling unit.
(15) REDEVELOPMENT means any existing building or structure that undergoes a
change of use, intensification of use, increase in size, etc.
(16) SERVICE AREA means a geographic area delineated by the Town within which
there are public facilities.
(17) SITE means a parcel, lot, or contiguous group of lots in a single ownership or under
single control, considered a unit for purposes of development.
(18) TOWN means the Town of Middleton, Wisconsin.
(19) TOWN BOARD means the Town Board of the Town of Middleton, Wisconsin.
5.03 Applicability of Impact Fee. This Chapter shall be uniformly applicable to development
which occurs within the Town as a whole or a designated development subarea. Pursuant
to Wis. Stat. § 66.0617(5), this Chapter may impose different impact fees on different types
of land development, and may impose impact fees on land development in a particular
subarea that differ from impact fees imposed on similar land development in other subareas
4
within the Town.
5.04 Imposition of Impact Fee.
(1) The impact fees set forth in section 5.05(1) and (2) of this Chapter are hereby
imposed on all residential developments and land divisions within the Town or any
residential development subarea thereof.
(2) No building permit shall be issued for a development unless the impact fees set
forth in section 5.05 are imposed and calculated pursuant to this Chapter. Fees shall
be payable upon issuance of a building permit, except as follows. If the total amount
of impact fees due for development will be more than $75,000 a developer may
defer payment of the impact fees for a period of 4 years from the date of the issuance
of the building permit or until 6 months before the Town incurs the costs to
construct, expand or improve the public facilities related to the development for
which the fee was imposed, whichever is earlier. If the developer elects to defer
payment under this paragraph, the developer shall maintain in force a bond or
irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of the unpaid fees executed in the name of
the Town. A developer may not defer payment of impact fees for projects that have
been previously approved.
5.05 Impact Fee Schedules/Calculation.
(1) Highways and Other Transportation Facilities Impact Fee.
(a) Highways and Other Transportation Facilities Impact Fee. For purposes of
transportation facilities fees imposed under this section, the area subject to
the fee shall be all the land within the Town.
(b) Residential Development. The highways and other transportation facilities
impact fee shall be $1,773 per residential dwelling unit.
(c) Impact Fee Increase. The impact fee may be increased annually based upon
the prior year's average interest rate for the Engineering News Record
Construction Cost Index, 20 City Coverage.
(2) Parks, Playgrounds, and Land for Athletic Fields Impact Fee.
(a) Parks, Playgrounds and Land for Athletic fields Impact Fee. For purposes
of the parks, playgrounds and land for athletic fields impact fee imposed
under this section, the area subject to the fee shall be all the land within the
Town used for residential development.
(b) Residential Development.
(i) The parks, playgrounds and land for athletic fields impact fee shall
5
be per residential dwelling unit or per resident at maximum
occupancy for an institutional residential development the amount
set forth in the table below.
(ii) For lands for which a dedication of land for public parks was made
as a condition of land subdivision under Chapter 15 of the Town
Code, the parks, playgrounds and lands for athletic fields impact fee
shall be reduced by the amount set forth in the table appearing
below. For every 1,500 square feet of land dedicated per residential
dwelling unit, up to a maximum credit of $605 per residential
dwelling unit.
(c) Impact Fee Increase. The impact fee, and the amount of the reduction for
dedication of land for public parks, may be increased annually based upon
the prior year's average interest rate for the Engineering News Record
Construction Cost Index, 20 City Coverage.
(3) Calculation of Impact Fee. The Town shall calculate the impact fee as follows:
(a) Highways and Other Transportation Facilities Impact Fee.
(i) Residential Development.
1. Verify the number and type of residential dwelling units.
2. Determine the applicable per unit impact fee.
3. Multiply the applicable per unit impact fee by the appropriate
number of residential dwelling units.
(ii) Mixed Use Development. Calculate the impact fee as set forth above
for residential development.
(iii) Redevelopment.
1. Calculate the total amount of the impact fee that would be
imposed on the property for the redeveloped use.
2. Calculate the total amount of the impact fee that would be
imposed on the property for its current (predevelopment) use.
3. Subtract the amount of the impact fee that would be imposed
for the current use from the amount that would be imposed for
the redeveloped use.
(b) Parks, Playgrounds and Land for Athletic Facilities Impact Fee.
6
(i) Residential Development.
1. Verify the number and type of residential dwelling units.
2. Determine the applicable per unit impact fee.
3. Multiply the applicable per unit impact fee by the appropriate
number of residential dwelling units.
(ii) Mixed Use Development. Calculate the impact fee as set forth above
for residential development only.
(iii) Redevelopment.
1. Calculate the total amount of the impact fee that would be
imposed on the property for the redeveloped use.
2. Calculate the total amount of the impact fee that would be
imposed on the property for its current (predevelopment) use.
3. Subtract the amount of the impact fee that would be imposed
for the current use from the amount that would be imposed for
the redeveloped use.
(4) Airport Road Impact Fee. Airport Road. There is imposed, within the area bounded
by Exhibit A, an Impact Fee in the amount of $1,155 for those stated improvements
as set forth in Exhibit B (Impact Fee Needs Assessment — Airport Road
Improvements Town of Middleton). Exhibit A and Exhibit B are on file with the
Town Office. The Impact Fee shall be paid to the Town for each Dwelling Unit, or
Dwelling Unit Equivalent which is constructed on the Exhibit A tract in accordance
with Town ordinances. The Impact Fee shall be payable to the Town according to
the terms of this Ordinance.
5.06 Administration of Impact Fee.
(1) Collection of Impact Fee.
(a) For all residential or mixed use developments, impact fees shall be payable
as provided in section 5.04(2).
(b) The effective date of a building permit is the date on which all impact fees
imposed under this chapter are paid in full unless the exception described
in Subsection (a) applies.
(c) For any new development for which impact fees were paid prior to final plat
7
or certified survey map approval, impact fees shall not be imposed as a
condition of issuance of a building permit.
(2) Transfer of Funds. Upon receipt of impact fees, the Town Treasurer shall be
responsible for placement of such fees into separate accounts as hereinafter
specified.
(3) Establishment and Maintenance of Accounts. The Town Treasurer shall establish a
separate interestbearing
account for fees collected for each subarea. Interest or
income earned by each account shall be credited to that account and shall be used
solely for the purposes specified for such account. The Town Treasurer shall
maintain records for each such account, as hereinafter specified.
(4) Maintenance of Records. The Town Treasurer shall maintain and keep adequate
financial records for each such account, which shall show the source and
disbursement of all revenues, which shall account for all moneys received, and
which shall ensure that the disbursement of moneys from each account shall be
used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects specified in the capital
improvements program for the particular development subarea.
(5) Annual Review and Modification. The Town may periodically review the
development potential of each subarea and the capital improvements plans and
make such modifications as are deemed necessary as a result of:
(a) Development occurring in the prior year;
(b) Public facilities actually constructed;
(c) Changing facility needs;
(d) Inflation;
(e) Revised cost estimates for public facilities;
(f) Changes in the availability of other funding sources applicable to public
facility projects; and
(g) Such other factors as may be relevant.
(6) With the exception of annual increases to account for inflation, any impact fee
modifications resulting from changes in development potential or capital
improvements programs will require a public hearing as described in section 5.12.
5.07 Bonding of Excess Facility Projects. Impact fees paid pursuant to this Chapter shall be
restricted to use solely and exclusively for direct financing of public facilities, or as a pledge
against bonds, revenue certificates, and other obligations of indebtedness for the cost of public
8
facilities as specified herein.
5.08 Refunds. The party who paid impact fees may apply for a refund of such fee, along with
any interest that has accumulated, as described in Wis. Stat. § 66.0617(9) if:
(1) Impact fees collected for purposes are not used within 8 years after they are
collected to pay the capital costs for which they were imposed, except when a
longer period for such use is allowed by Wis. Stat. § 66.0617(9), or as described
otherwise herein.
(2) The building permit for which the impact fee has been paid has lapsed for noncommencement
of construction provided that the fee shall be re-paid in the thencurrent
amount if a new building permit is issued and before the construction may
commence; or
(3) The project for which a building permit has been issued has been altered in a
manner which has resulted in a decrease in the amount of the impact fee due; or
(4) As otherwise authorized in this Chapter.
5.09 Appeals.
(1) Notice of Appeal. Any developer upon whom an impact fee has been imposed may
contest the amount, collection or use of the impact fee by filing a Notice of Appeal
to the Town Board. The Notice of Appeal shall be filed with the Town Clerk within
30 days of the date of the determination therein appealed. The Notice of Appeal
shall state in detail the relief sought by the developer and any legal or factual basis
for the relief requested; and shall include all supporting documentation upon which
the developer relies in making the appeal.
(2) Appeal Bond. If the Notice of Appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient
surety satisfactory to the Town Attorney in an amount equal to the impact fee due,
as calculated by the Town Administrator or the Administrator's designee, and all
other requirements have been satisfied, the building permit may be issued. The
filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of the impact fee due unless a bond
or other sufficient surety has been filed.
(3) Review by Town Board.
(a) Within 10 business days of the date of filing of the Notice of Appeal, the
Town Administrator shall forward a copy of the Notice of Appeal to the
appropriate department head. Within 30 business days of receipt, the
appropriate department head shall submit a written report and
recommendation to the Town Administrator. The Town Administrator shall
review this report and make a written recommendation to the Town Board.
9
(b) Within 45 days of the date of the Town Administrator's written
recommendation, the Town Board shall adopt a resolution denying,
approving, or approving in part the appeal.
(4) Review by Circuit Court. If the developer wishes to appeal the decision of the Town
Board, the developer may commence an action by certiorari in the Dane County
Circuit Court seeking review of the Town Board's decision within 30 days after the
date on which the Town Board adopted the resolution with respect to the
developer's appeal.
5.10 Effect of Impact Fee on Subdivision Regulations. This Chapter shall not affect, in any
manner, the permissible use of property, density of development, design, and improvement
standards and requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of public
improvements subject to the subdivision regulations or other regulations of the Town, which shall
be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such
development.
5.11 Impact Fee as Additional and Supplemental Requirement. Except as required by Wis.
Stat. § 66.0617(6)(d), the impact fees imposed under this chapter are additional and supplemental
to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the Town on the development of
land or the issuance of building permits.
5.12 Amendments.
(1) Public Hearing. Before enacting an ordinance that amends this Section, the Town
Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance or amendment.
(2) Notice. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0617(3), notice of the public hearing referred to
in the preceding section shall be published as a Class 1 notice under Ch. 985, Wis.
Stats., and shall specify where a copy of the proposed ordinance or amendment and
the public needs assessment may be obtained.
(3) Public Facilities Needs Assessment. Before enacting an ordinance that imposes
impact fees or amending an ordinance that imposes impact fees by revising the
amount of the fee or altering the public facilities for which impact fees may be
imposed, a needs assessment shall be prepared and made available for public
inspection and copying as required by Wis. Stat. § 66.0617(4).
5.13 Credits.
(1) A property owner may elect to construct a public facility listed in any Capital
Improvements Plan for which an impact fee has been imposed. If the property
owner elects to construct such a public facility, the property owner must enter into
an agreement with the Town prior to issuance of any building permit. In any such
agreement, the Town shall reasonably provide for credits for other past or future
monetary or nonmonetary contributions by the developer to the construction of the
10
same public facility, as follows:
(a) Present value of amounts contributed within the last 3 years for any land
dedications, physical improvements, or financial contributions made for the
construction of the public facility;
(b) Present land dedications and physical improvements made for the
construction of the public facility;
(c) Future land dedications, physical improvements made for the construction
of the public facility for a period not to exceed 3 years.
(2) In no event shall credit provided under subsection (1) be greater than the otherwise
applicable fee.
(3) No credits shall be given for the construction of local on-site facilities required by
zoning, subdivision, or other Town requirements or which are not included in the
capital improvements program.
5.14 Penalty. In addition to any other remedy which the Town may have for any violation of
any portion of this chapter, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 25 of the Town Code. Each violation, and each day a
violation continues or occurs, shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not preclude
the Town from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or abate a violation of this chapter.
1
CHAPTER 6
CITATIONS; MUNICIPAL COURT; MUNICIPAL JUDGE
6.01 Method of enforcement.
6.02 Information contained in citation.
6.03 Schedule of deposits.
6.04 Issuance of citation.
6.05 Procedure on default.
6.06 Nonexclusivity.
6.07 Municipal Court.
6.01 Method of enforcement. The Town of Middleton hereby elects to use the citation method
of enforcement of ordinances. All Town law enforcement officers and other Town personnel
charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this Code of Ordinances are hereby
authorized pursuant to § 66.0113(1)(a), Wis. Stats., to issue citations for violations of this Code of
Ordinances, including ordinances for which a statutory counterpart exists.
6.02 Information contained in citation. The form of the citation to be issued by law
enforcement officers or other designated Town officials is incorporated herein by reference and
shall contain substantially the following information:
(1) The name, address and date of birth of the defendant.
(2) The identification of any permit issued to the defendant, or license number of the
defendant, if applicable.
(3) The name and department of the issuing officer.
(4) The violation alleged, the time and place of the occurrence of the violation, a
statement that the defendant committed the violation, the ordinance violated, and a
description of the violation in language that can be readily understood.
(5) A notice to appear at a date, time and place for the court appearance, and a statement
as to whether the appearance is mandated by the judge.
(6) Provisions for amount of deposit and stipulation in lieu of a court appearance, if
applicable.
(7) Notice that the defendant may make a deposit and thereby obtain release if an arrest
has been made.
(8) Notice that the defendant may, in writing, prior to the court appearance, enter a plea
2
of not guilty.
(9) Notice that, if the defendant makes a deposit and fails to appear in court at the time
fixed in the citation, the defendant is deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest
and submits to a forfeiture, plus costs, fees and surcharges imposed under Chapter
814, not to exceed the amount of the deposit. The notice shall also state that the
court may decide to summon the defendant rather than accept the deposit and plea.
(10) Notice that if the defendant does not make a deposit and fails to appear in court at
the time fixed in the citation, the court may issue a summons or a warrant for the
defendant’s arrest or may enter a default judgment against the defendant.
(11) In an action against a corporation organized under Chapter 180 or 181, or against a
limited liability company organized under Chapter 183, a statement of corporate or
company existence and whether the corporation or company is a domestic or
foreign corporation or limited liability company.
(12) Any other pertinent information.
(13) Except for parking violations, in traffic regulation actions in municipal court, the
uniform traffic citation specified in § 345.11, Wis. Stats., shall be used in lieu of
the citation form specified in this Section.
(14) In actions for violations of local ordinances enacted in accordance with §
23.33(11)(am) or 30.77, Wis. Stats., the citation form specified in § 23.54, Wis.
Stats., shall be used in lieu of the citation form specified in this Section.
6.03 Schedule of deposits.
(1) The schedule of deposits shall be established by the Town Board for use with
citations issued under this chapter according to the penalty provision of this Code,
a copy of which is on file with the Town Clerk. In addition to the deposit amount
listed, the deposit must include a penalty assessment imposed by § 165.87, Wis.
Stats., and court costs as imposed by §§ 814.65, Wis. Stats.
(2) Deposits shall be made in cash, money order or certified check to the Town of
Madison/Middleton/Verona Joint Municipal Court Clerk for the Town of Madison,
the Town of Middleton and the Town of Verona, who shall provide a receipt
therefor.
6.04 Issuance of citation.
(1) Law enforcement officer. Any law enforcement officer of the Town, including the
Dane County Sheriff and his deputies contracted by the Town, may issue citations
authorized under this chapter.
3
(2) Town officials. The following Town officials may issue citations with respect to
those specified Ordinances that are directly related to their official responsibilities:
(a) Building Inspector.
(b) Plumbing Inspector.
(c) Electrical Inspector.
(d) HVAC Inspector.
(e) Building Inspection Coordinator.
(f) Dane County Sheriff and the Sheriff's Deputies.
(g) Town appointed Park Rangers.
(h) Any person(s) designated by the Town Board with authority as designated
by the Town Board.
(3) Delegated authority. The Town officials named in Subsection (2) above may
delegate their authority to issue citations to their subordinates, provided the Town
Board authorizes such delegation.
(4) Other officials. The following officials may also issue citations with respect to those
specified Ordinances that are directly related to their official responsibilities:
(a) Middleton Fire District's Fire Inspector.
(b) Any Assistant/Deputy Fire Inspectors delegated by the Middleton Fire
District's Fire Inspector.
6.05 Procedure on default. Section 66.0113(3), Wis. Stats., relating to a violator's options and
procedure on default is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
6.06 Nonexclusivity.
(1) Other ordinances. Adoption of this chapter does not preclude the Town Board from
adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any other law or
ordinance relating to the same or other matter.
(2) Other remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the Town
or any authorized officer from proceeding under any other ordinance or law or by
any other enforcement method to enforce any ordinance, regulation or order.
4
6.07 Municipal Court. Wisconsin Statute §755.01(4) requires that, in order for a joint
municipal court to be established, each of the governmental entities creating the court must adopt
identical ordinances. The ordinance creating the Town’s Joint Municipal Court is incorporated
into this Code and is fully set forth below:
ORDINANCE 20140616
AN ORDINANCE CREATING A JOINT MUNICIPAL COURT FOR THE
TOWNS OF MADISON, MIDDLETON AND VERONA.
WHEREAS, the Town of Madison and Town of Middleton are parties to an agreement
providing for the creation and operation of a joint municipal court serving both Towns; and
WHEREAS, said Town of Verona desires to participate in the joint municipal court; and
WHEREAS, the Towns have reached an agreement for the sharing of expenses and other
operational matters relating to the proposed joint municipal court; and
WHEREAS, § 755.01(4), Wis. Stats. requires that each municipal party to an agreement
creating a joint municipal court must enact identical ordinances providing for the election
of the municipal judge and the operation and maintenance of the joint court; and
WHEREAS, the Town Board of Supervisors has determined that the operation of a joint
municipal court serving the Towns of Madison, Middleton and Verona is in the public interest;
NOW, THEREFORE, the Town Board of the Town of Middleton, does repeal and rewrite
Section 1, Chapt er 3 Joint Municipal Court; Municipal Judge as follows:
SECTION 1-3-1
SECTION 1-3-2
SECTION 1-3-3
SECTION 1-3-4
SECTION 1-3-5
SECTION1-3-6
SECTION 1-3-7
SECTION 1-3-8
SECTION 1-3-9
SECTION 1-3-10
Creation
Jurisdiction
Municipal Judge
Election; Term
Salary
Procedure in Joint Municipal Court
Fees
Abolish of Joint Court
Contempt of Court
Clerk of Joint Municipal Court
5
SECTION 1-3-1 Creation. There is hereby established a joint municipalcourt for the Town of
Madison, Town of Middleton and Town of Verona, which shall be known as the "Town of
Madison/Middleton/Verona Joint Municipal Court."
SECTION 1-3-2 Jurisdiction. The court shall have jurisdiction over any action in which the
Town of Madison, the Town of Middleton or the Town of Verona seeks to impose a forfeiture
for violation of their respective ordinances unless an action is transferred under§ 800.035(5)(c),
Wis. Stats or § 800.05(3) Wis. Stats, to a court of record. If equitable relief is demanded the
plaintiff shall bring the action in a court of record. The Municipal Court Judge may issue civil
warrants to enforce matters that are under the jurisdiction of the municipal court, as provided in
Ch. 800. The Municipal Court Judge is authorized to issue inspection warrants under§ 66.0119,
Wis. Stats. The Municipal Judge may order a payment of restitution for violations of ordinances
that prohibit conduct is the same as or similar to conduct prohibited by statue punishable by fine
or imprisonment or both. The Municipal Judge shall use the restitution procedure under
§ 800.093, Wis. Stats.
SECTION 1-3-3 Municipal Judge. There is hereby created the office of the Municipal Judge
for the Town of Madison/Middleton/Verona Joint Municipal Court. The Town of Madison,
Middleton and Verona by their respective resolutions shall appoint a resident of one of said
municipalities to fill the current vacancy in the office of the Municipal Judge for a remainder of
the current unexpired term ending in 2015. The Municipal Judge shall have all of the powers
and duties as provided in Chapters 755 and 800, Wis. Stats.
SECTION 1-3-4 Election; Term. Except as provided in Section (c), the Municipal Judge shall
be elected by the electors of the Town of Madison, the Town of Middleton and the Town of
Verona at the spring election in the odd-numbered years for a te1m of four years commencing
on May 1st of the year of the Judge's election. The Municipal Judge shall be subject to the
Wisconsin Code of Judicial Ethics and shall file an annual financial statement.
SECTION 1-3-5 Salary. Salaries may be paid annually or in equal installments as determined
by the Town Board of the Town of Madison, but no municipal judge may be paid a salary for
that portion of any term during which po1iion the judge has not executed and filed an official
bond or oath as required by§§ 755.03 and 19.01(4)(c), Wis. Stats. The Town of Madison shall
be responsible for payment the Municipal Judge's salary and related expenses.
SECTION 1-3-6 Procedure in Joint Municipal Court.
A. The procedure in the Town of Madison/Middleton/Verona Joint Municipal Court shall
be as provided in this section and state law, including, but not by way of limitation,
Chapters 66, 755 and 800 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. The court shall be open as determined by the Municipal Judge.
C. The Municipal Judge shall keep and maintain the Municipal Judge's office and hold
court in the Town Hall of the Town of Madison. The Town of Madison shall provide
6
suitable office space for the Municipal Judge meeting the requirements of § 755.09, Wis.
Stats.
D. If the Municipal Judge is temporarily absent, sick or disabled, the provisions of §
800.06(1), Wis. Stats., shall apply, and if the Municipal Judge becomes incompetent,
unable or fails to act, or in the event of a vacancy, the provisions of § 800.06(2), Wis.
Stats., shall apply. Any substitute Municipal Judge designated or assigned hereunder shall
be compensated as authorized by the Town Board of the Town of Madison. The Municipal
Judge shall satisfy all continuing education requirements for municipal judges.
E. For non-traffic matters, the respective Town Attorney shall draft a bond schedule, which
shall become effective upon approval by the respective Town Board and the Municipal
Judge.
F. The Municipal Judge shall promptly issue decisions on all matters submitted to him or
her after all evidence and argument have been presented.
SECTION 1-3-7 Fees.
A. The Clerk of the Town of Madison/Middleton/Verona Joint Municipal
Court shall collect all forfeitures and costs in any action or proceeding before the
court. Bonds for appearance, partial payments and other funds collected by the court
shall be treated as escrow funds and deposited with the Town of Madison Treasurer.
B. The Town of Madison shall disburse the forfeiture to the appropriate municipality less
any amount due under the parties Agreement and the Town of Madison shall disburse the
fees, assessments and surcharges as provided by statue. The Town of Madison shall report
to the appropriate Town Treasurer the title of the action, the offense for which the
forfeiture was imposed and the total amount of the forfeiture, fees, penalty assessment
and costs, if any.
SECTION 1-3-8 Abolition of Joint Court. The Town Board of the Town of Madison, the Town
of Middleton or the Town of Verona may terminate the participation of that Town in the Town of
Madison/Middleton/Verona Joint Municipal Court as provided in the intergovernmental
agreement between the parties. Such termination shall not effect an abolition of the Town of
Madison/Middleton/Verona Joint Municipal Cowi unless such termination results in the
termination of the intergovernmental agreement, in which case the Town of
Madison/Middleton/Verona Joint Municipal Court shall be deemed abolished at the end of the
then-current term for which the Municipal Judge has been elected.
SECTION 1-3-9 Contempt of Court. The Municipal Judge shall have all of the contempt
powers as provided in § 800.12, Wis. Stats.
SECTION 1-3-10 Clerk of Joint Municipal Court.
A. Appointment. The Municipal Judge shall, in writing, appoint a Clerk of the Town of
Madison/Middleton/Verona Joint Municipal Court as authorized by the Town of
7
Madison Board. The Clerk's salary shall be fixed by the Town Board of the Town of
Madison and paid by the Town of Madison. The Clerk shall, before entering upon the
duties of the Clerk's office, take the oath provided by §19.01, Wis. Stats., and give such
bond as the Town Boards of the Towns of Madison, Middleton and/or Verona may
require. The oath and bond of the Clerk shall be filed with the Town Clerks of the Towns
of Madison, Middleton and Verona. The cost of such bonds shall be paid by the
respective Town.
B. Duties. The Court Clerk shall:
(1) File and review citations and complaints, assuring their correctness;
(2) Reply to departmental mail concerning routine matters as prescribed by
the Municipal Judge;
(3) Assign docket numbers to citations and complaints, type the docket sheets
and gather the material pertinent to cases;
(4) Determine and schedule court dates and facilities;
(5) Arrange for juvenile cases to be heard away from regular court;
(6) Communicate with law officers, attorneys and defendants regarding
court proceedings;
(7) Balance dockets at the conclusion of court proceedings;
(8) Prepare and mail warrants and summons;
(9) Prepare monthly report of financial activities;
(11) Assist in the collection of traffic bonds;
(12) Prepare necessary communications for jury trials and transfer to Circuit Court; and
(13) Perform such other duties as may be required by the Municipal Judge and Town
Boards of the Town of Madison, Middleton and Verona.
1
CHAPTER 7
LICENSING AND REGULATION
7.01 Licensing of Dogs; Regulation of Animals
7.02 Prohibited and Protected Animals, Fowl, Reptiles and Insects; Animal Protection.
7.03 Penalties.
7.04 Fermented Malt Beverages, Intoxicating Liquor and Wine.
7.05 Cigarette Licenses.
7.06 Direct Sellers
7.07 Dance Licenses.
7.08 Licensees to Pay Local Claims; Appellate Procedures
7.01 Licensing of Dogs; Regulation of Animals
(1) License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person in the Town of Middleton to
own, harbor or keep any dog for more than 5 months of age after July 1 of the
license year without complying with the provisions of this Chapter relating to the
listing, licensing and tagging of the same.
(2) Definitions. In this section, unless the context or subject matter otherwise require:
(a) “Animal” means mammals, reptiles and birds.
(b) “At large” means to be off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of some person either by leash or otherwise, but a dog within an
automobile of its owner, or in an automobile of any other person with the
consent of the owner of said dog, shall be deemed to be upon the owner’s
premises.
(c) “Cat” shall mean any feline, regardless of age or sex.
(d) “Cruel” means causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering or
unjustifiable injury or death.
(e) “Dog” shall mean any canine, regardless of age or sex.
(f) “Farm Animal” means any warm-blooded animal normally raised on farms
in the United States and used for food or fiber.
(g) “Law Enforcement Officer” has that meaning as appears in Sec. 967.02(5),
Wis. Stats., and includes a humane officer under Chapter 173, Wis. Stats.,
but does not include a conservation warden appointed under Sec. 23.10,
Wis. Stats.
2
(h) “Neutered” as used herein as describing a dog or cat shall mean a dog or cat
having nonfunctional reproductive organs.
(i) “Owner” shall mean any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog and the
occupant of any premises on which a dog remains or to which it customarily
returns daily for a period of 10 days; such person is presumed to be
harboring or keeping the dog within the meaning of this Section.
(j) “Pet” means an animal kept and treated as a pet.
(3) Rabies Vaccination Required for License.
(a) Rabies Vaccination. The owner of a dog shall have the dog vaccinated
against rabies by a veterinarian within 30 days after the dog reaches 4
months of age and revaccinated within 1 year after the initial vaccination.
If the owner obtains the dog or brings the dog into the Town of Middleton
after the dog has reached 4 months of age, the owner shall have the dog
vaccinated against rabies within 30 days after the dog is brought into the
Town unless the dog has been vaccinated as evidenced by a current
certificate of rabies vaccination before the date of that immunization expires
as stated on the certificate of vaccination or, if no date is specified, within
2 years after the previous vaccination. The certificate of vaccination shall
meet the requirements of Sec. 95.21(2), Wis. Stats.
(b) Issuance of Certificate of Rabies Vaccination. A veterinarian who
vaccinates a dog against rabies shall complete and issue to the owner a
certificate of rabies vaccination bearing a serial number and stating the
owner’s name and address, the name, sex, spayed or unspayed, neutered or
unneutered, breed and color of the dog, the date of the vaccination, the type
of rabies vaccination administered and the manufacturer’s serial number,
the date that the immunization expires as specified for that type of vaccine
by the Center for Disease Control of the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services and the Town.
(c) Copies of Certificate. The veterinarian shall keep a copy of each certificate
of rabies vaccination in a file maintained for this purpose until the date that
the immunization expires or until the dog is revaccinated, whichever occurs
first.
(d) Rabies Vaccination Tag. After issuing the certificate of rabies vaccination,
the veterinarian shall deliver to the owner a rabies vaccination tag of durable
material bearing the same serial number as the certificate, the year the
vaccination was given and the name, address and telephone number of the
veterinarian.
(e) Tag to be Attached. The owner shall attach the rabies vaccination tag or a
3
substitute tag to a collar and a collar with the tag attached shall be kept on
the dog at all times, but this requirement does not apply to a dog during
competition or training, to a dog while hunting, to a dog securely confined
indoors or to a dog securely confined in a fenced area. The substitute tag
shall be of a durable material and contain the same information as the rabies
vaccination tag. The requirements of this paragraph do not apply to a dog
that is not required to be vaccinated under Subsection (a).
(f) Duplicate Tag. The veterinarian may furnish a new rabies vaccination tag
with a new serial number to an owner in place of the original tag upon
presentation of the certificate of rabies vaccination. The veterinarian shall
then indicate the new tag number on the certificate and keep a record in the
file.
(g) Cost. The owner shall pay the cost of the rabies vaccination and the cost
associated with the issuance of a certificate of rabies vaccination and the
delivery of a rabies vaccination tag.
(4) Issuance of Dog Licenses.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person in the Town of Middleton to own, harbor
or keep any dog more than 5 months of age without complying with the
provisions of Sec. 174.05 through Sec. 174.10, Wisconsin Statutes, relating
to the listing, licensing and tagging of the same.
(b) The owner of any dog more than 5 months of age on January 1 of any year,
or 5 months of age within the license year, shall annually, on or before the
date the dog becomes 5 months of age, pay a license tax and obtain a license.
(c) The fee for the license shall be that established by the County. The license
year shall commence January 1 and end December 31.
(d) The Town Treasurer shall also collect an administrative fee associated with
the issuance of the dog license. The administrative fee shall be established
by the Town Board. The Board shall review, at least annually, the
administrative fee charged for the issuance of a dog license.
(e) Upon payment of the required license tax and administrative fee and upon
presentation of evidence that the dog is currently immunized against rabies,
as required by subsection (3) of this section, the Town Treasurer shall
complete and issue to the owner a license for such dog containing all
information required by state law. The Town Treasurer shall also deliver to
the owner, at the time of issuance of the license, a tag of durable material
bearing the same serial number as the license, the name of the county in
which issued and the license year.
4
(f) The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar and the collar with the
tag attached shall be kept on the dog for which the license is issued at all
times, except as provided in subsection (3)(e) of this section.
(g) The fact that a dog is without a tag attached to the dog by means of a collar
shall be presumptive evidence that the dog is unlicensed. Any Town law
enforcement or humane officer may seize, impound or restrain any dog for
which a dog license is required which is found without such tag attached.
(h) Notwithstanding the foregoing, a license fee will not be charged for any dog
specifically trained to lead blind or deaf persons or to provide support for
mobility-impaired persons and annually upon application every person
owning such a dog shall receive a free dog license from the Town.
(5) Issuance of Kennel/Multiple Dog Licenses.
(a) No person may keep or operate a kennel, whether for breeding, selling or
boarding purposes, in violation of state law or licensing requirements or the
Dane County Zoning Code. No kennel license will be issued without proof
of compliance, when required by the Town.
(b) Any person who keeps or operates a kennel may, instead of the license tax
for each dog required by this Chapter, apply for a kennel/multiple dog
license for the keeping or operating of the kennel. Such person shall pay
for the license year a license tax of $35.00 for a kennel of 12 or fewer dogs
and an additional $3.00 for each dog in excess of 12.
(c) The Town Treasurer shall also collect an administrative fee associated with
the issuance of the dog license. The administrative fee shall be established
by resolution by the Town Board. The Board shall review, at least annually,
the administrative fee charged for the issuance of a dog license.
(d) A kennel/multiple dog license may only be issued if approved by the Town
Board following a public hearing on the request. In every case involving a
hearing on the issuance of a kennel/multiple dog license, the Town Clerk
shall mail notice to the owners of record of all land within the area included
in the application and within 600 feet of any part of the building or premises
affected not less than 10 days prior to the hearing.
(e) Upon payment of the required kennel license tax and administrative fee and,
if required by the Town Board, upon presentation of evidence that all dogs
over 5 months of age are currently immunized against rabies, the Town
Treasurer shall issue the kennel license and a number of tags equal to the
number of dogs authorized to be kept in the kennel.
(f) The owner or keeper of a kennel shall keep at all times a kennel license tag
5
attached to the collar of each dog over 5 months old kept by the owner or
keeper under a kennel license but this requirement does not apply to a show
dog during competition, to a dog securely confined indoors or to a dog
securely confined in a fenced area. These tags may be transferred from one
dog to another within the kennel whenever any dog is removed from the
kennel. The rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag shall remain attached to
the dog for which it is issued at all times but this requirement does not apply
to a show dog during competition, to a dog securely confined indoors or to
a dog securely confined in a fenced area.
(g) No dog bearing a kennel tag shall be permitted to stray or to be taken
anywhere outside the limits of the kennel unless the dog is in leash or
temporarily for the purposes of hunting, breeding, trial, training or
competition.
(h) The term “kennel” means any establishment wherein or wherein 4 or more
dogs are kept. For purposes of licensing, the terms “kennel” and “multiple
dog” are synonyms.
(6) Limitation on Number of Dogs.
(a) Purpose. The keeping of a large number of dogs within the Town of
Middleton for a considerable period of time detracts from and, in many
instances, is detrimental to, healthful and comfortable life in such areas.
The keeping of a large number of dogs is, therefore, declared a public
nuisance.
(b) Definitions.
(i) Residential Lot. A residential lot means a parcel of land zoned as
residential or occupied or to be occupied by a dwelling, platted or
unplatted, and under common ownership. For the purpose of this
Section, any vacant parcel or parcels adjoining a dwelling and under
the same ownership shall constitute 1 lot.
(ii) Family. 1 or more persons.
(c) Number Limited. No family shall own, harbor or keep in its possession
more than 3 dogs on any lot without the prior approval of the Town Board,
except that a litter of pups or a portion of a litter may be kept for not more
than 12 weeks from birth. If more than 1 family resides on a residential lot,
then only a total of 3 dogs shall be allowed on the residential lot unless the
prior approval is obtained from the Town Board. Persons may own, harbor
or keep more than 3 dogs only if they have first received a kennel license.
It shall not be a defense to this section that a dog is on residential premises
for the purpose of visiting or for training purposes.
6
(7) Late Fees. The Town Treasurer shall assess and collect a late fee of $5.00 from
every owner of a dog 5 months of age or over if the owner failed to obtain a license
prior to April 1 of each year, or within 30 days of acquiring ownership of a
licensable dog or if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before the dog reached
licensable age. Said late fee shall be charged in addition to the required license fee.
(8) Restrictions on Keeping of Dogs, Cats and Other Animals. It shall be unlawful for
any person within the Town of Middleton to own, harbor or keep any dog or cat
which:
(a) Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway in
the Town.
(b) Assaults or attacks any person or destroys property.
(c) Is at large within the limits of the Town.
(d) Habitually barks or howls to the annoyance of any person or persons. (See
subsection 7.01(15).)
(e) Kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal.
(f) Is known by such person to be infected with rabies or to have been bitten
by an animal known to have been infected with rabies.
(g) In the case of a dog, is unlicensed.
(9) Vicious Dogs and Animals.
(a) No vicious dog shall be allowed off the premises of its owner unless
muzzled or on a leash in charge of the owner or a member of the owner’s
immediate family over 16 years of age.
(b) For purposes of enforcing this Section, a dog shall be deemed as being of a
vicious disposition if it, within any 12 month period:
(i) Has, without provocation, bitten or attacked any person engaged in
a lawful activity or has attempted to bite or to attack any person. A
dog may be deemed to be attempting to attack if it is restrained by a
leash, fence or other means, and it is clear from the dog’s excited
actions that only the presence of the leash, fence or other means of
restraint is preventing the dog from making an immediate attack: or,
(ii) Has, while off the property of its owner and without provocation,
killed or seriously injured another animal: or,
7
(iii) Has, without provocation, chased, confronted or approached a
person on a street, sidewalk or other public property in a menacing
fashion such as would put an average person in fear of attack: or,
(iv) Has exhibited a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, cause
injury or threaten the safety of persons or other animals without
provocation: or,
(v) Has acted in a manner that causes or should cause its owner to know
that it is potentially vicious: or,
(vi) Has been trained for dog fighting or is owned or kept for the purpose
of dog fighting.
(c) Any vicious dog that is found off the premises of its owner other than as
hereinabove provided may be seized and, upon delivery to the proper
authorities, may be killed by law enforcement or humane authorities
pursuant to Wisconsin law.
(d) No person shall harbor or permit to remain on his premises any animal that
is habitually inclined toward attacking persons or animals, destroying
property, barking excessively or making excessive noises or running after
automobiles.
(10) Animals Running at Large.
(a) No person having in his or her possession or ownership any animal or fowl
shall allow the same to run at large within the Town. The owner of any
animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall keep his or her animal tied or
enclosed in a property enclosure or as not to allow said animal to interfere
with the passing public or neighbors. Any animal running at large
unlicensed and required by state law or Town Ordinance to be licensed shall
be seized and impounded by a humane or law enforcement officer.
(b) A dog or cat shall not be considered to be running at large if it is on a leash
not to exceed 10 feet in length and under control of a person physically able
to control it.
(11) Owner’s Liability for Damage Caused by Dogs; Penalties. The provisions of Sec.
174.02, Wis. Stats., relating to the owner’s liability for damages caused by dogs
together with the penalties therein set forth are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference.
(12) Female Animals in Season. Any female animal in season shall be kept confined in
a building or secure kennel enclosure during the duration of such season.
8
(13) Dogs and Cats Restricted in Cemeteries. No dog or cat shall be permitted in any
public cemetery. Every dog specially trained to assist disabled persons shall be
exempt from this Section.
(14) Injury to Property by Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or
possessing an animal, dog or cat to permit such animal, dog or cat to go upon any
parkway or private lands or premises without the permission of the owner of such
premises and break, bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, flower bed, plant,
shrub, tree or garden in any manner whatsoever, or to defecate thereon.
(15) Barking Dogs or Crying Cats. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to
keep or harbor any dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which
habitually cries or howls to the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in the
neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. A dog or cat is considered to be in violation of
this subection when 2 formal, written complaints are filed with the Town within a
4 week period.
7.02 Prohibited and Protected Animals, Fowl, Reptiles and Insects; Animal Protection.
(1) Protected Animals.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to possess with intent
to sell or offer for sale, or buy or attempt to buy, within the Town any of the
following animals, alive or dead, or any part or product thereof: All wild
cats of the family felidae, polar bear (thalarctos maritimus), red wolf (canis
niger), vicuna (vicugna vicugna), gray or timber wolf (canis lupus), sea otter
(enhydralutris), Pacific ridley turtle (lepidochelys olivacea), Atlantic green
turtle (chelonia mydas), Mexican ridley turtle (lepidochelys kempi).
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to buy, sell or offer
for sale a native or foreign species or subspecies of mammal, bird,
amphibian or reptile, or the dead body or parts thereof, which appears on
the endangered species list designated by the United States Secretary of the
Interior and published in the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to the
Endangered Species Act of 1969 (Public law 135, 91st Congress).
(c) No person, firm or corporation shall import or cause to be imported into this
Town any part of the plumage, skin or dead body of any species of hawk,
owl or eagle. The paragraph shall not be construed to forbid or restrict the
importation or use of the plumage, skin, body or any part thereof legally
collected for use by the American Indians for ceremonial purposes or in the
preservation of their tribal customs and heritage.
9
(2) Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection (1) above shall not be deemed to prevent
the lawful importation, possession, purchase or sale of any species by any public
agency, institute of higher learning, persons holding federal permits, or by a person
holding a Scientific Collectors Permit issued by the Secretary of the Department of
natural Resources of the state, or to any person or organization licensed to present
a circus.
(3) Wild Animals; Prohibition on Keeping. Unless prior approval is received from the
Town Board, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his or
her possession or under his or her control within the Town any poisonous reptile or
any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal, insect or reptile, any vicious or
dangerous domesticated animal or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious or
dangerous propensities. Specifically, it shall be unlawful without Town Board
approval for any person to keep, maintain or have in his or her possession or under
his or her control within the Town any of the animals, reptiles or insects identified
on the list of prohibited wild animals, insects or reptiles approved from time to time
by the Town Board by resolution and maintained in the Town Office and which is
incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth herein.
(4) Exceptions; Pet Shops. The prohibitions of Subsection (3) above shall not apply
where the creatures are in the care, custody or control of: a veterinarian for
treatment; agricultural fairs; shows or projects of the 4-H Clubs; a display for
judging purposes; an itinerant or transient carnival, circus or other show; dog or cat
shows or trials; accredited public or private educational institutions; licensed pet
shops; zoological gardens; if:
(a) Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the
Town.
(b) All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition
and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors.
(c) Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape.
(d) No person lives or resides within 100 feet of the quarters in which the
animals are kept.
(5) Providing Proper Food and Drink to Confined Animals.
(a) No person owning or responsible for confining or impounding any animal
may refuse or neglect to supply the animal with a sufficient supply of food
and water as prescribed in this Section.
(b) The food shall be sufficient to maintain all animals in good health.
(c) If potable water is not accessible to the animals at all times, it shall be
10
provided daily and in sufficient quantity for the health of the animals.
(6) Providing Proper Shelter.
(a) No person owning or responsible for confining or impounding any animal
may fail to provide the animal with proper shelter as prescribed in this
Section. In the case of farm animals, nothing in this Section shall be
construed as imposing shelter requirements or standards more stringent that
normally accepted husbandry practices in the particular county where the
animal or shelter is located.
(b) Indoor Standards. Minimum indoor standards of shelter shall include:
(i) Ambient temperatures. The ambient temperature shall be
compatible with the health of the animal.
(ii) Ventilation. Indoor housing facilities shall be adequately ventilated
by natural or mechanical means to provide for the health of the
animals at all times.
(c) Outdoor Standards. Minimum outdoor standards of shelter shall include:
(i) Shelter from sunlight. When sunlight is likely to cause heat
exhaustion of an animal tied or caged outside, sufficient shade by
natural or artificial means shall be provided to protect the animal
from direct sunlight. As used in this paragraph, “caged” does not
include farm fencing used to confine farm animals.
(ii) Shelter from inclement weather.
1. Animals generally. Natural or artificial shelter appropriate
to the local climatic conditions for the species concerned
shall be provided as necessary for the health of the animal.
2. Dogs. If a dog is tied or confined unattended outdoors under
weather conditions which adversely affect the health of the
dog, a shelter of suitable size to accommodate the dog shall
be provided.
(d) Space Standards. Minimum space requirements for both indoor and
outdoor enclosures shall include:
(i) Structural strength. The housing facilities shall be structurally
sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animals from
injury and to contain the animals.
11
(ii) Space requirements. Enclosures shall be constructed and
maintained so as to provide sufficient space to allow each animal
adequate freedom of movement. Inadequate space may be indicated
by evidence of debility, stress or abnormal behavior patterns.
(e) Sanitation Standards. Minimum standards of sanitation for both indoor and
outdoor enclosures shall include periodic cleaning to remove excreta and
other waste materials, dirt and trash so as to minimize health hazards.
(6) Neglected or Abandoned Animals.
(a) No person may abandon any animal.
(b) Any law enforcement officer may remove, shelter and care for an animal
found to be cruelly exposed to the weather, starved or denied adequate
water, neglected, abandoned or otherwise treated in a cruel manner and may
deliver such animal to another person to be sheltered, cared for and given
medical attention, if necessary. In all cases the owner, if known, shall be
immediately notified and such officer, or other person, having possession
of the animal shall have a lien thereon for its care, keeping and medical
attention and the expense of notice.
(c) If the owner or custodian is unknown and cannot, with reasonable effort, be
ascertained or does not, within 5 days after notice, redeem the animal by
paying the expenses incurred, it may be treated as a stray and dealt with as
such.
(d) Whenever in the opinion of any such officer an animal is hopelessly injured
or diseased so as to be beyond the probability of recovery, it shall be lawful
for such officer to kill such animal and the owner thereof shall not recover
damages for the killing of such animal unless he or she shall prove that such
killing was unwarranted.
(e) Wis. Stat. §§ 948.16 and 948.17 are hereby adopted by reference and made
a part of this Chapter.
(7) Injured Animals. No person who owns, harbors or keeps any animal shall fail to
provide proper medical attention to such animal when and if such animal becomes
sick or injured. In the event the owner of such animal cannot be located, the Town
or any animal control agency with which the Town has an agreement or contract
shall have the authority to take custody of such animal for the purpose of providing
medical treatment, and the owner thereof shall reimburse the person or organization
for the costs of such treatment.
(8) Cruelty to Animals and Birds Prohibited.
12
(a) Acts of Cruelty prohibited. No person except a police officer or health or
humane officer in the pursuit of his or her duties shall, within the Town,
shoot or kill or commit an act of cruelty to any animal or bird or disturb any
bird’s nests or bird’s eggs.
(b) Leading Animal from Motor Vehicles. No person shall lead any animal
upon a Town road from a motor vehicle or from a trailer or semi-trailer
drawn by a motor vehicle.
(c) Use of Poisonous and Controlled Substances. No person may expose any
pet animal owned by another to any known poisonous substance or
controlled substance listed in Wis. Stat. § 161.14, whether mixed with meat
or other food or not, where it is reasonable to anticipate the substance may
be eaten by such animal or for the purpose of harming the animal. This
Subsection shall not apply to poison used on one’s own premises and
designed for the purpose of rodent and pest extermination, nor the use of a
controlled substance used in accepted veterinarian practice or in research by
persons or organizations regularly engaged in such research.
(d) Use of Certain Devises Prohibited. No person may directly or indirectly, or
by aiding, abetting or permitting the doing thereof either put, place, fasten,
use or fix upon or to any animal used or readied for use for a work purpose
or for use in an exhibition, competition, rodeo, circus or other performance
any of the following devices: A bristle bur, tack bur or like device; or a
poling device used to train a horse to jump which is charged with electricity
or to which have been affixed nails, tacks or other sharp points.
(e) Shooting at Caged or Staked Animals. No person may instigate, promote,
aid or abet as a principal, agent, employee, participant or spectator, or
participate in the earnings from or intentionally maintain or allow any place
to be used for the shooting, killing or wounding with a firearm or any deadly
weapon any animal that is tied, staked out, caged or otherwise intentionally
confined in a man-made enclosure, regardless of size.
7.03 Penalties. Any person violating Sections 7.01 or 7.02 shall be subject to a forfeiture of not
less than $50.00 and not more than $200.00. This Section shall also permit the Town
Attorney to apply to the court of competent jurisdiction for a temporary or permanent
injunction restraining any person from violating any aspect of those sections.
7.04 Fermented Malt Beverages, Intoxicating Liquor and Wine.
(1) State Statutes Adopted. The provisions of Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes,
including the definitions therein, relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be
imposed, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Chapter as if fully
set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any statute
13
incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this Chapter. Any
future amendment, versions or modifications of the statutes incorporated herein are
intended to be made a part of this Chapter in order to secure uniform statewide
regulation of alcohol beverage control.
(2) License Required. No person, firm or corporation shall vend, sell, deal or traffic in
or have in his possession with intent to vend, sell, deal or traffic in or, for the
purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away any intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverage in any quantity whatever, or cause the same to be done,
without having procured a license as provided in this Chapter nor without
complying with all the provision of this Section, and all statutes and regulation
applicable thereto, except as provided by Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) Classes of Licenses.
(a) Retail “Class A” Intoxicating Liquor License. A retail “Class A”
intoxicating liquor license, when issued by the Town Clerk under the
authority of the Town Board, shall permit its holder to sell, deal and traffic
in intoxicating liquors only in original packages or containers and to be
consumed off the premises so licensed.
(b) Retail “Class B” Intoxicating Liquor License. A retail “Class B”
intoxicating liquor license, when issued by the Town Clerk under authority
of the Town Board, shall permit its holder to sell, deal and traffic in
intoxicating liquors to be consumed by the glass only on the premises so
licensed and in the original package or container, to be consumed off the
premises, except that wine may be sold in the original package or otherwise
in any other quantity to be consumed off the premises.
(c) Establishment of “Reserve Class B” Liquor Licenses. Pursuant to Wis.
Stat. § 125.51(4)(br), the Town of Middleton has calculated the number of
“Reserve Class B” liquor licenses which are available in the Town of
Middleton.
-Maximum licenses available on December 1, 1997: 9
(One per 500 population)
-Less number of Class B licenses granted and in force
on December 1, 1997: <5>
-Number of unissued Class B licenses 4
-Less 3 unissued Class B licenses <3>
-Net unissued Class B licenses 1
14
-Net unissued Class B licenses divided by 2 .5
-Net unissued Class B licenses divided by 2 result
rounded down 0
-Net available unissued Class B licenses as of 12/1/97 3
-Additional Class B liquor licenses available after
12/1/97 as result of population adjustment 1
-Total unissued Class B liquor licenses available 4
(d) Class “A” Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer’s License. A Class “A”
retailer’s fermented malt beverage license, when issued by the Town Clerk
under the authority of the Town Board, shall entitle the holder thereof to
possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt beverages only for
consumption away from the premises where sold and in the original
packages, containers or bottles. Such license may be issued after July 1st.
The license shall expire on the following June 30th.
(e) Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage Retailer’s License.
(i) License. A Class “B” fermented malt beverage retailer’s license,
when issued by the Town Clerk under the authority of the Town
Board, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for
sale, fermented malt beverages, either to be consumed upon the
premises where sold or away from such premises. The holder may
also sell beverages containing less than 1/2% of a percent of alcohol
by volume, without obtaining a special license to sell such
beverages. Such license may be issued after July 1st. The license
shall expire on the following June 30th.
(ii) Application. Class “B” licenses may be issued to any person
qualified under Wis. Stat. § 124.04(5). Such licenses may not be
issued to any person acting as agent for or in the employ of another
except that this restriction does not apply to a hotel or restaurant
which is not a part of or located on the premises of any mercantile
establishment, or to a bona fide club, society or lodge that has been
in existence for at least 6 months before the date of application. A
Class "B” license for a hotel, restaurant, club, society or lodge may
be issued in the name of an officer who shall be personally
responsible for compliance with this Chapter.
(f) “Class C” Wine License
(i) License. A “Class C” wine license authorizes the retail sale of wine
15
by the glass or in an opened original container for consumption on
premises only. A single, open bottle of wine may be taken off
premise if ordered with a meal and re-corked prior to being taken
off premise.
(ii) Application. “Class C” licenses may be issued to any person
qualified under Wis. Stat. § 124.04(5) for a restaurant in which the
sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent of gross
receipts and which does not have a barroom or for a restaurant in
which the sale of alcohol beverages accounts for less than 50 percent
of gross receipts and which has a barroom in which wine is the only
intoxicating liquor sold. A “Class C" license may not be issued to a
foreign corporation, a foreign limited liability company or a person
acting as agent for or in the employ of another.
(g) Temporary Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage License.
(i) License. As provided in Wis. Stat. § 125.26(1) and (6), temporary
Class “B” fermented malt beverage licenses may be issued to
qualified entities. Such license is valid for dates as approved by the
Town Board.
(ii) Application. Application for such license shall be signed by the
president or corresponding officer of the society or association
making such application and shall be filed with the Town Clerk
together with the appropriate license fee for each day for which the
license is sought. Any person fronting for any group other than the
one applied for shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
forfeiture of $200.00 and will be ineligible to apply for a temporary
Class “B” license for 1 year. The license shall specify the hours and
dates of license validity. The application shall be filed a minimum
of 15 days prior to the meeting of the Town Board at which the
application will be considered for events of more than 3 consecutive
days. If the application is for a license to be used in a Town park,
the applicant shall specify the main point of sale facility.
(h) Temporary “Class B” Wine License.
(i) License. Notwithstanding Wis. Stat. § 125.68(3), temporary “Class
B” wine licenses may be issued to qualified entities No fee may be
charged to a person who, at the same time, applies for a temporary
Class “B” beer license under Wis. Stat. § 125.26(6), or the same
event. Such license is valid for dates as approved by the Town
Board.
(ii) Application. Application for such license shall be signed by the
16
president or corresponding officer of the society or association
making such application and shall be filed with the Town Clerk
together with the appropriate license fee for each day for which the
license is sought. Any person fronting for any group other than the
one applied for shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
forfeiture of $200.00 and will be ineligible to apply for a temporary
“Class B” wine license for 1 year. The license shall specify the
hours and dates of license validity. The application shall be filed a
minimum of 15 days prior to the meeting of the Town Board at
which the application will be considered for events of more than 3
consecutive days. If the application is for a license to be used in a
Town park, the applicant shall specify the main point of sale facility.
(i) Wholesaler’s License. A wholesaler’s fermented malt beverage license,
when issued by the Town Clerk under authority of the Town Board, shall
entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt
beverages only in original packages or containers to dealers, not to be
consumed in or about the premises of said wholesaler.
(j) Provisional Retailer’s License.
(i) The Town Clerk, upon authorization by the Town Board, shall issue
provisional retail licenses.
(ii) No person shall apply for or obtain a provisional retail license for
purposes of circumventing the license requirements of this section
or due to his or her own failure to timely apply for a new license or
renewal of an existing license. A provisional retail license shall only
be issued to a person who has satisfied all provisions of this chapter
and whose application for a regular retail malt beverage or liquor
license has been approved by the Town Board but who cannot obtain
such license because of failure to complete the responsible beverage
server course as required under § 125.04(5)(a)5, Wis. Stats.
(iii) Provisional retail licenses may be issued only to a person applying
for a Class “A” beer, Class “B” beer, “Class A” liquor, “Class B”
liquor or “Class C” wine license.
(iv) The license will expire 60 days after issuance or when the person
has been issued a license as listed under 2.
(v) The official who issued the provisional retail license may revoke the
license if he or she discovers the holder made a false statement on
the application.
(vi) No provisional “Class B” liquor license will be issued if the Town’s
17
quota is filled.
(vii) No person may hold more than one provisional retail license for each
type of license applied for by the holder per year.
(4) License Fees.
(a) Reserve Class B Initial Intoxicating Liquor Retailer’s License. The fee for
an initial Reserve Class B Intoxicating Liquor Retailer’s License shall be
$10,000.
(b) Establishment of Fees. The Town Board shall establish the fees for the
licenses in this section by resolution of the Town Board, provided however,
that such license fees may not exceed the maximum fee established for any
type of license by the applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. The
Town Board shall review such license fees annually.
(c) There shall be the following classes of licenses which, when issued by the
Town Clerk under the authority of the Town Board after payment of the
license fee and publication costs hereinafter specified shall permit the
holder to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquors or fermented malt
beverages as provided in this Code of Ordinances and Chapter 125, Wis.
Stats.
(i) Class “A” Fermented Malt Beverages Retailer’s License. The fee
for a license for less than 12 months shall be prorated according to
the number of months or fraction thereof for which the license is
issued.
(ii) Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage License. This license may be
issued at any time for 6 months in any calendar year, for which 50%
of the applicable license fee shall be paid, but such license shall not
be renewable during the calendar year in which issued. The fee for
a license for less than 12 months shall be prorated according to the
number of months or fraction thereof for which the license is issued.
(iii) Temporary Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage License. The fee
for this license shall be established per event.
(iv) Temporary “Class B” Wine License. The fee for this license shall
be established per event.
(v) Fermented Malt Beverage Wholesalers’ License.
(vi) “Class A” Intoxicating Liquor Retailer’s License. This license may
be issued at any time for 6 months in any calendar year, for which
18
50% of the applicable license fee shall be paid, but such license shall
not be renewable during the calendar year in which issued.
(vii) “Class B” Intoxicating Liquor Retailer’s License. This license may
be issued at any time for 6 months in any calendar year, for which
50% of the applicable license fee shall be paid, but such license shall
not be renewable during the calendar year in which issued.
(viii) Provisional Retail Licenses. This license fee shall be as provided in
s. 7.04(3)(j).
(5) Application for License.
(a) Contents. Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on the form prescribed
by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue and shall be filed with the Town
Clerk not less than 15 days prior to the granting of such license. The
premises shall be physically described to include every room and storage
space to be covered by the license, including all rooms not separated by a
solid wall or joined by connecting entrances and may include
exterior/outdoor areas.
(b) Corporations. Such application shall be filed and sworn to by the applicant
if an individual, by the president and secretary, of a corporation.
(c) Publication. The Town Clerk shall publish each application for a Class “A”,
Class “B”, “Class A”, “Class B” or “Class C” license. There is no
publication requirement for temporary Class “B” picnic beer licenses under
Wis. Stat. § 125.26 or temporary “Class B” picnic wine licenses under Wis.
Stat. § 125.51(10). The application shall be published once in the official
Town Newspaper, and the costs of publication shall be paid by the applicant
at the time of application is filed, as determined under Wis. Stat. § 985.08.
(d) Amending Application. Whenever anything occurs to change any fact set
out in the application of any licensee, such licensee shall file with the
issuing authority a notice in writing of such change within 10 days after the
occurrence thereof.
(e) License Quotas. Retail intoxicating liquor licenses issued by the Town
Board shall be limited in number to the quota prescribed by state law.
(6) Qualifications of Applicants and Premises.
(a) Residence Requirements. A retail Class “A” or Class “B” fermented malt
beverage or “Class A” or “Class B” intoxicating liquor license shall be
granted only to persons who are citizens of the United States and who have
19
been residents of the State of Wisconsin continuously for at least 90 days
prior to the date of the application.
(b) Applicant to Have Malt Beverage License. No retail “Class B” intoxicating
liquor license shall be issued to any person who does not have or to whom
is not issued a Class “B” retailer’s license to sell fermented malt beverages.
(c) Right to Premises. No applicant will be considered unless he has the right
to possession of the premises described in the application for the license
period, by lease or by deed.
(d) Corporate Restrictions.
(i) No license or permit may be issued to any corporation unless the
corporation meets the qualifications under Wis. Stat. § 125.04(a)1
and 4 and (b) unless the agent of the corporation appointed under
Wis. Stat. § 125.04(6) and the officers and directors of the
corporation meet the qualifications of Wis. Stat. § 125.04(a)1 and 3
and (b) and unless the agent of the corporation appointed under S
Wis. Stat. § 125.04(6) meets the qualification under Wis. Stat. §
125.04(a)2. The requirement that the corporation meet the
qualifications under Wis. Stat. § 125.04(a)1 and (b) does not apply
if the corporation has terminated its relationship with all of the
individuals whose actions directly contributed to the conviction.
(ii) Each corporate applicant shall file with its application for such
license a statement by its officers showing the names and addresses
of the persons who are stockholders together with the amount of
stock held by such person or persons. It shall be the duty of each
corporate applicant and licensee to file with the Town Clerk a
statement of transfers of stock within 48 hours after such transfer of
stock.
(iii) Any license issued to a corporation may be revoked in the manner
and under the procedure established in Wis. Stat. § 125.12 when
more than 50% of the stock interest, legal or beneficial, in such
corporation is held by any person or persons not eligible for a license
under this Chapter or under the state law.
(e) Sales Tax Qualification. All applicants for retail licenses shall provide
proof, as required by Wis. Stat. § 77.61 (11) that they are in good standing
for sales tax purposes (i.e., hold a seller’s permit) before they may be issued
a license.
(f) Separate License Required for Each Place of Sale. A separate license shall
be required for each stand, place, room or enclosure or for each suite of
20
rooms or enclosures which are in a direct connection or communication
where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are kept, sold or
offered for sale; and no license shall be issued to any person, firm,
partnership, corporation or association for the purpose of possession, selling
or offering for sale any intoxication liquors or fermented malt beverages in
any dwelling house, flat or residential apartment.
(7) Investigation. The Town Clerk may notify the Fire Inspector, the Building
Inspector and appropriate law enforcement agencies, of each new application, and
these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application and the
premises, together with such other investigation as shall be necessary to determine
whether the applicant and the premises sought to be licensed comply with the
regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto, including those governing
sanitation in restaurants, and whether the applicant is a proper recipient of a license.
These officials shall furnish the Town Clerk in writing, who shall forward to the
Town Board, the information derived from such investigation, accompanied by a
recommendation as to whether a license should be granted or refused. No license
shall be renewed without a re-inspection of the premises and report as originally
required.
(8) Approval of Application.
(a) No license shall be granted for operation on any premises or with any
equipment for which taxes, assessments, forfeitures or other financial
claims of the Town are delinquent and unpaid.
(b) No license shall be issued unless the premises conform to the sanitary,
safety and health requirements of the State of Wisconsin and Dane County
Public Health.
(c) Consideration for the granting or denial of a license will be based on:
(i) Arrest and conviction record of the applicant, subject to the
limitations imposed by Wis. Stat. §§ 111.321, 111.322, and 111.335;
(ii) The financial responsibility of the applicant;
(iii) The appropriateness of the location and the premises where the
licensed business is to be conducted: and
(iv) Generally, the applicant’s fitness for the trust to be reposed.
(d) An application may be denied based upon the applicant’s arrest and
conviction record if the applicant has been convicted of a felony (unless
duly pardoned) or if the applicant has habitually been a law offender. For
purposes of this licensing procedure, "habitually been a law offender" is
21
generally considered to be an arrest or conviction of a least 2 offenses that
are substantially related to the licensed activity within the 5 years
immediately preceding the license application. Because a license is a
privilege, the issuance of which is a right granted solely to the Town Board,
the Town Board reserves the right to consider the severity, and facts and
circumstances of the offense when making the determination to grant, deny
or not renew a license. A license may also be denied based on the
accumulation of demerit points under section (16)(k) of this Section.
(9) Granting or Denial of License.
(a) Opportunity shall be given by the governing body to any person to be heard
for or against the granting of any license. Upon the approval of the applicant
by the Town Board, the Town Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license,
upon payment by the applicant of the license fee to the Town.
(b) If the Town Board denies the license, the applicant shall be notified in
writing, by registered mail or personal service, of the reasons for the denial.
The notice shall also inform the applicant of the opportunity to appear
before the Town Board and to provide evidence as to why the denial should
be reversed. Such written notice shall be mailed or served upon the applicant
at least 10 days prior to the Town Board meeting at which the application
is to be reconsidered.
(10) Transfer and Lapse of License.
(a) In accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 125.04(12), a license shall
be transferable from one premises to another if such transfer is first
approved by the Town Board. An application for transfer shall be made on
a form furnished by the Town Clerk. Proceedings for such transfer shall be
had in the same form and manner as the original application. The fee for
such transfer is $10.00. Whenever a license is transferred, the Town Clerk
shall forthwith notify the Wisconsin Department of Revenue of such
transfer. In the event of the sale of a business or business premises of the
licensee, the purchaser of such business or business premises must apply to
the Town for reissuance of said license and the Town, as the licensing
authority, shall in no way be bound to reissue said license to said subsequent
purchaser.
(b) Whenever the agent of a corporation holder of a license is for any reason
replaced, the licensee shall give the Town Clerk written notice of said
replacement, the reasons therefor and the new appointment. Until the next
regular meeting or special meeting of the Town Board, the successor agent
shall have the authority to perform the functions and be charged with the
duties of the original agent. However, said license shall cease to be in effect
upon receipt by the Town Clerk of notice of disapproval of the successor
22
agent by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue or other peace officer of
the municipality in which the license was issued. The corporation’s license
shall not be in force after receipt of such notice or after a regular or special
meeting of the Town Board until the successor agent or another qualified
agent is appointed and approved by the Town.
(c) Abandonment of Premises. A licensee holding a license to sell alcohol
beverages who abandons such business shall forfeit any right or preference
he or she may have to the holding of or renewal of such license.
Abandonment shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of any alcohol
beverage license. The loss of the licensed premises for at least 6 months
shall be prima facie evidence of the abandonment, unless extended by the
Town Board. All persons issued a license to sell alcohol beverages in the
Town for which a quota exists limiting the number of such licenses that may
be issued by the Town shall cause such business described in such license
to be operated on the premises described in such license for at least 150 days
during the terms of such license, unless such license is issued for a term of
less than 180 days, in which event this subsection shall not apply.
(11) Numbering of License. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they
are issued and shall state clearly the specific premises for which granted, the date
of issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee. The Town clerk shall affix
to the license his affidavit as provided by Sec. 125.04(4) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(12) Posting Licenses; Defacement.
(a) Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
shall immediately post such license and keep the same posted while in force
in a conspicuous place in the room or place where said beverages are drawn
or removed for service or sale.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to post such license or to be permitted to
post it upon premises other than those mentioned in the application or
knowingly to deface or destroy such license.
(13) Conditions of License. All retail Class “A”, Class “B”, “Class A”, “Class B” and
“Class C” licenses granted hereunder shall be granted subject to the following
conditions, and all other conditions of this Section, and subject to all other
Ordinances and regulations of the Town applicable thereto.
(a) Consent to Entry. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents to
the entry of police or other duly authorized representatives of the Town at
all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search, and consents
to the removal from said premises of all things and articles there had in
violation of Town Ordinances or state laws, and consents to the introduction
of such things and articles in evidence in any prosecution that may be
23
brought for such offenses.
(b) Disorderly Conduct Prohibited. Each licensed premises shall, at all times,
be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or indecent
conduct shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises.
(c) Licensed Operator on Premises. There shall be upon premises operated
under a “Class B” or Class “B license, at all times, the licensee, members
of the licensee’s immediate family who have attained the legal drinking age,
and/or some person who shall have an operator’s license and who shall be
responsible for the acts of all persons serving as waiters, or in any other
manner, any fermented malt beverages to customers. No person other than
the licensee shall serve fermented malt beverages in any place operated
under a “Class B” or Class “B” license unless he possesses an operator’s
license, or there is a person with an operator’s license upon said premises at
the time of such service.
(d) Health and Sanitation Regulations. The Rules and regulations of the State
of Wisconsin governing sanitation in restaurants shall apply to all “Class B:
liquor licenses issued under this Chapter. No “Class B: license shall be
issued unless the premises to be licensed conform to such rules and
regulations.
(e) Restrictions Near Schools and Churches. No retail Class “A”, Class “B”,
“Class A” or “Class B” license shall be issued for premises, the main
entrance of which is less than 300 feet from the main entrance of any
established public school, parochial school, hospital or church. Such
distance shall be measured by the shortest route along the highway from the
closest point of the main entrance of such school, church or hospital to the
main entrance to such premises. This Subsection shall not apply to premises
licensed as such on June 30, 1947, nor shall it apply to any premises licensed
as such prior to the school building, hospital building or church building.
(f) Clubs. No club shall sell or give away any intoxicating liquors except to
bona fide members and guests invited by members.
(g) Gambling Prohibited. Except as authorized by state law, no gambling or
game of chance of any sort shall be permitted in any form upon any
premises licensed under this Chapter or the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
(h) Credit Prohibited. No retail Class “A”, Class “B”, “Class A” or “Class B”
liquor or fermented malt beverage licensee shall sell or offer for sale any
alcohol beverage to any person or persons by extending credit, except hotel
credit extended to a resident guest or a club to a bona fide member. It shall
be unlawful for such licensee or permittee to sell alcohol beverages to any
person on a passbook or store order or to receive from any person any goods,
24
ware, merchandise or other articles in exchange for alcohol beverages.
(i) Licensee or Permittee Responsible for Acts of Employees. A violation of
this Chapter by a duly authorized agent or employee of a licensee or
permittee under this Chapter shall constitute a violation by the licensee or
permittee. Whenever any licensee or permittee under this Chapter shall
violate any portion of this Chapter, proceedings for the suspension or
revocation of the license or permit of the holder thereof may be instituted in
the manner prescribed in this Chapter.
(14) Closing Hours. Closing hours shall be established in conformance with Wis. Stat.
§ 125.32(3), and further restricted as follows:
(a) Class “B” Licenses.
(i) No premises for which a retail “Class B” liquor or Class “B”
fermented malt beverage license has been issued shall be permitted
to remain open for the sale of liquor or fermented malt beverages or
for any other purpose between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
Monday through Friday, and 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Saturday and
Sunday. There shall be no closing hours on January 1st. On the date
daylight savings time begins in March, the closing hour shall be 3:30
a.m.
(ii) Hotels and restaurants, the principal business of which is the
furnishing of food or lodging to patrons, bowling alleys, indoor
horseshoe-pitching facilities, curling clubs, golf courses and golf
clubhouses may remain open for the conduct of their regular
business but shall not sell liquor or malt beverages during the
closing hours of Subsection (a)(i) above.
(b) Carryout Hours. Between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., no person may sell,
remove, carry out or permit to be removed or carried out from any premises
having a “Class A,” Class “A,” “Class B” or Class “B” license, fermented
malt beverages or intoxicating liquor in original unopened packages,
containers or bottles or for consumption away from the premises.
(c) Taste samples. Any person or business conducting taste sampling may only
offer such samples between 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(15) Restrictions on Temporary Fermented Malt Beverages or Wine Licenses. It shall
be unlawful for any person or organization on a temporary basis to sell or offer to
sell any alcohol beverage upon any Town-owned property or privately-owned
property within the Town of Middleton, except through the issuance of a
Temporary Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage License or Temporary “Class B”
Wine License issued by the Town Board in accordance with Wisconsin Statutes
25
and as set forth in this Section. A Temporary Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage
License or Temporary “Class B” Wine License authorizing the sale and
consumption of beer and/or wine on Town-owned property or privately-owned
property may be authorized by the Town Board provided the following
requirements are met:
(a) Compliance with Eligibility Standards. The organization shall meet the
eligibility requirements of a bona fide club, association, lodge or society as
set forth in Wis. Stat. § 125.26(6), and shall fully comply with the
requirements of this Section and all other provisions of this code.
(b) Posting of Signs and Licenses. All organizations issued a temporary license
shall post in a conspicuous location at the main point of sale and at all
remote points of sale a sufficient number of signs stating that no fermented
malt beverage shall be served to any under-age person with proper
identification.
(c) Fencing. If necessary due to the physical characteristics of the site, the
Town Board may require that organizations install a double fence around
the main point of sale to control ingress and egress and continually station
a licensed operator, security guard or other competent person at the entrance
for the purpose of checking age identification. Where possible, there shall
be only 1 point of ingress and egress. When required, the double fence shall
be a minimum of 4 feet high and a minimum of 6 feet between fences.
(d) Underage Persons Prohibited. No underage persons as defined by the
Wisconsin Statutes except licensed operators shall be allowed to assist in
the sale of fermented malt beverages or wine at any point of sale, nor shall
they be allowed to loiter or linger in the area of any point of sale.
(e) Licensed Operators Requirement. A licensed operator shall be stationed at
all points of sales at all times.
(f) Waiver. The Town Board may waive or modify the requirements of this
Section due to the physical characteristics of the licensed site.
(g) Insurance. The applicant for a temporary fermented malt beverage or wine
license may be required to indemnify, defend and hold the Town and its
employees and agents harmless against all claims, death of any person or
any damage to property caused by or resulting from the activities for which
the permit is granted. As evidence of the applicant’s ability to perform the
conditions of the license, the applicant may be required to furnish a
Certificate of Comprehensive General Liability insurance with the Town of
Middleton. The applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond
prior to being granted the license.
26
(16) Revocation and Suspension of Licenses; Non-Renewal.
(a) The following provisions shall apply to the revocation, suspension,
abandonment or nonrenewal of any license issued pursuant to this section,
notwithstanding any other provision of Chapter 125, Wis. Stats., except
those providing for revocation or suspension of any license by the court.
(b) Complaint. Any resident of the Town may file a sworn written complaint
with the Town Clerk alleging 1 or more of the following about any person
or other entity licensed pursuant to this section. The Town Board, if it
becomes aware of a violation, may refer the matter for investigation by a
special investigator who may initiate a complaint. Complaints may be filed
on the following grounds, and others:
(i) The person has violated any provision of this section or Chapter 125
of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(ii) The person keeps or maintains a disorderly or riotous, indecent or
improper house.
(iii) The person has sold or given away any intoxicant to any underage
person, or to intoxicated persons.
(iv) The person has failed to maintain the premises according to
standards prescribed for sanitation by the Dane County Department
of Public Health, or in whose premises persons are permitted to
loiter for purposes of prostitution.
(v) The person has not observed and obeyed any lawful order of the
Town Board or Sheriff's Department.
(vi) The person does not possess the qualifications required under this
chapter to hold the license.
(vii) The person has been convicted of manufacturing or delivering a
controlled substance under Wis. Stat. § 961.41(1) of possessing,
with intent to manufacture or deliver, a controlled substance under
Wis. Stat. § 961.41(1m); or of possessing, with intent to
manufacture or deliver, or of manufacturing or delivering a
controlled substance under a substantially similar federal law or a
substantially similar law of another state.
(viii) The person knowingly allows another person, who is on the
premises for which the license under this section is issued, to
possess, with the intent to manufacture or deliver, or to manufacture
or deliver a controlled substance.
27
(c) No violations under Subsection (b) may be considered under this subsection
unless the licensee or permittee has committed another violation within 1
year preceding the violation. If a licensee or permittee has committed 2 or
more violations within 1 year, all violations committed within 1 year of a
previous violation may be considered under this subsection.
(d) Summons. Upon the filing of the complaint, the Board shall issue a
summons, signed by the Clerk and directed to any peace officer in the
municipality. The summons shall command the licensee complained of to
appear before the Town Board on a day and time and at a place named in
the summons, not less than 3 days and not more than 10 days from the date
of issuance, and show cause why the license should not be revoked or
suspended. The summons and a copy of the complaint shall be served on
the licensee at least 3 days before the time at which the licensee is
commanded to appear. Service shall be in the manner provided under Ch.
801, Wis. Stats., for service in civil actions in circuit court.
(e) Procedure on hearing.
(i) If the licensee does not appear as required by the summons, the
allegations of the complaint shall be taken as true and if the Board
finds the allegations sufficient, the license shall be revoked. The
Clerk shall give notice of the revocation to the person whose license
is revoked.
(ii) The Town Board shall serve as the hearing agency for the Board.
The Town Board shall retain an attorney to act as the hearing
examiner and rule on objections, admissibility and legal issues. The
chair of the Board, or the chair's designee shall conduct the hearing,
administer oaths to all witnesses and may issue subpoenas. So far as
practicable, the rules of evidence provided in Wis. Stat. § 227.45,
shall be followed. The complainant shall have the burden of proving
the charges by a preponderance of the evidence.
(iii) If the licensee appears as required by the summons and denies the
complaint, both the complainant and the licensee may produce
witnesses, cross-examine witnesses and be represented by counsel.
(iv) The Board shall engage a court reporter to keep a transcript of the
proceedings. The licensee shall be provided a written transcript of
the hearing at his or her expense. The Clerk shall mark and receive
all exhibits admitted into the record.
(v) Within 20 days of the completion of the hearing, the Board shall
adopt findings of fact, conclusions of law and a disposition stating
28
the action, if any, that the Town will take with respect to the license.
The Board shall provide the complainant and the licensee with a
copy of the report.
(vi) If the Town Board, after considering the Board's report and any
arguments presented by the complainant or the licensee, finds the
complaint to be true, or if there is no objection to the complaint
recommending suspension or revocation, the license shall be
suspended for not less than 3 days nor more than 90 days or revoked,
except that, if a complaint under Subsection (b)(vii) is found to be
true with respect to a license issued under Wis. Stat. § 125.51(4)(v),
the license shall be revoked.
(vii) The decision of the Town Board shall be a final determination for
purposes of judicial review. If the complaint is found to be true, the
licensee shall pay to the Town the actual cost of the proceedings.
(viii) The Town Clerk shall give notice of each suspension or revocation
to the person whose license is suspended or revoked. If the Board
finds the complaint untrue, the proceeding shall be dismissed
without cost to the accused. If the Board finds the complaint to be
malicious and without probable cause, the costs shall be paid by the
complainant. The Board or Board may require the complainant to
provide security for such costs before issuing the summons under
this section.
(f) Effect of revocation. When a license is revoked under this subsection, the
revocation shall be recorded by the Town Clerk and no other license issued
under this section shall be granted to such licensee or for such premises for
a period of 12 months from the date of the revocation.
(g) Judicial review. The action of the Board in granting or failing to grant,
suspending or revoking any license, or the failure of the Board to revoke or
suspend any license for good cause, may be reviewed by the circuit court
for Dane County, upon application by any applicant, licensee or resident of
the Town. The procedure on review shall be the same as in civil actions
instituted in the circuit court. The person desiring review shall file
pleadings, which shall be served on the Board in the manner provided in
Chapter 801, Wis. Stats., for service in civil actions and a copy of the
pleadings shall be served on the applicant or licensee. The Board, applicant
or licensee shall have 20 days to file an answer to the complaint. Following
filing of the answer, the matter shall be deemed at issue and hearing may be
had within 5 days, upon due notice served upon the opposing party. The
hearing shall be before the court without a jury. Subpoenas for witnesses
may be issued and their attendance compelled. The decision of the court
shall be filed within 10 days after the hearing and a copy of the decision
29
shall be transmitted to each of the parties. The decision shall be binding
unless it is appealed to the court of appeals.
(h) Nonrenewal of license. The Town Attorney may, after investigation,
commence an action before the Town Board to hear evidence and make a
recommendation to the Board that a license issued pursuant to this section
not be renewed. Alternatively, the Town Board may recommend that a
nonrenewal be investigated by an outside counsel. The Chairperson shall,
in writing, notify the licensee of the consideration of nonrenewal. Such
notification shall be in the form of and shall serve as the summons and
complaint and shall include a statement of the reasons for the consideration
of the nonrenewal of the license in the same specificity required for a
summons and complaint for revocation or suspension. If the license is
recommended for nonrenewal, costs may be assessed against the licensee
and any renewal application fee shall be forfeited. In all other respects, the
provisions of Subsection (b) and (c) shall apply. The commencement of this
action shall stay action by the Board on the licensee's application until the
Board makes its recommendation, notwithstanding this section. The Town
Attorney shall prosecute the action. The Town Board shall be advised by
separate counsel in its deliberations on the matter if the Town Attorney has
initiated the action.
(i) Other provisions. Any license issued pursuant to this section shall be subject
to such further regulations and restrictions as may be imposed by the Board
by amendment to this section or by the enactment of new ordinances. If any
licensee shall fail or neglect to meet the requirements imposed by such new
restrictions and regulations her/his license may be revoked in accordance
with this section. In case of revocation of any license for any violation of
any provision of this section in accordance with this section or by the court
or for any reasonable cause except the imposition of new restrictions, no
refund shall be made of any part of the license fee.
(j) If a business which receives a license hereunder is not opened within fifteen
(15) days after issuance of the license, or the delayed effective date provided
in the license, the license shall be deemed abandoned. A licensee holding a
license to sell alcohol beverages who abandons such business shall forfeit
any right or preference he may have to the holding of or renewal of such
license. Abandonment shall be sufficient grounds for non-renewal or
revocation of any alcohol beverage license. Eviction or foreclosure of the
licensee from the licensed premises, or closing of the business for 30 days
or more, shall be prima facie evidence of abandonment, unless the Town
Board grants permission for a temporary closing. All persons issued a
license to sell alcohol beverages in the Town for which a quota exists
limiting the number of such licenses that may be issued by the Town shall
cause such business described in such license to be operated on the premises
described in such license for at least 150 days during the terms of such
30
license, unless such license is issued for a term of less than 180 days, in
which event this subsection shall not apply. In the event that a licensee
declares bankruptcy, the licensee shall notify the Town Clerk, and the
Bankruptcy Trustee shall be required to apply for transfer of the license.
(i) Search warrants.
(i) When complaint shall be made to the judge of the Circuit Court that
intoxicating liquor is being sold or kept for sale in any particular
building or premises in the Town in violation of this section, said
judge, if s/he be satisfied that there is reasonable cause for such
belief, shall issue her/his warrant to search for such intoxicating
liquor.
(ii) Such warrants shall be directed to any peace officer in the Town or
the Sheriff's Department commanding such officer to search the
building or premises designated and described therein, and to bring
before the said judge of the Circuit Court any such intoxicating
liquor and other evidence of violations found being kept, sold, or
kept for sale in violation of the provisions of this section, and the
person in whose possession the same are found.
(iii) When any officer, in the execution of a search warrant, shall seize
any intoxicating liquor or other evidence for which a search is
authorized by this subsection, all such property or things shall be
safely kept by the direction of the court so long as shall be necessary
for the purpose of being produced as evidence on any trial and as
soon as may be afterward returned to the owner, destroyed, or
otherwise disposed of as the judge of said court may direct.
(j) Exceptions.
(i) No license shall be required for the use of intoxicating liquor in
hospitals or in bona fide institutions for the aged and infirm where
such liquor is used for medicinal, mechanical, or scientific purposes
only, or for one licensed to practice surgery or medicine in using
alcohol in any form in the bona fide treatment of the sick or in using
or prescribing such alcohol for such bona fide treatment.
(ii) No provision of this section shall apply to alcohol intended for use
and used in the manufacture and sale of any of the following when
unfit for beverage purposes, namely:
a. Denatured alcohol produced and used pursuant to acts of
Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder;
31
b. Patent, proprietary, medicinal, pharmaceutical, antiseptic,
and toilet preparations;
c. Flavoring extracts, syrups, and food products;
d. Scientific chemical, mechanical and industrial products.
(iii) Any person who shall knowingly sell any of the products
enumerated in the preceding subsection for intoxicating beverage
purposes, or who shall sell any of the same under circumstances
from which he might reasonably deduce the intention of the
purchaser to use them for such purposes, shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.
(iv) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any person from
manufacturing wine or beer of any alcoholic content at his home or
place of residence to be consumed by himself, his family, and guests
without compensation.
(k) Point values for alcohol beverage violations and revocations and
suspensions.
(i) The purpose of this subsection is to administratively interpret those
portions of this section relating to establishing an alcohol beverage
demerit point system to assist in determining which license holder
should be subject to suspension or revocation procedures.
(ii) Point schedule. The scale of demerit points is listed according to the
type of alcohol beverage violation. This demerit point system is used
to identify habitually troublesome license holders who have
repeatedly violated state statutes and Town ordinances, for the
purpose of recommending suspension or revocation of their alcohol
beverage licenses.
Type of Violation Point Value
EEOC or ERD finding of public accommodation
discrimination 50
Other violation for public accommodation violation 50
Failure to comply with a lawful order of the EEOC or ERD 50
Federal or state public accommodation discrimination 100
Nonalcohol night — minors on licensed premises 50
Traffic to underaged person 75
Traffic to intoxicated person 75
Underaged person on premises 35
No-alcohol night violations 25
Failure to be licensed 100
32
Failure to maintain control of premises resulting in injury 100
Failure to maintain control of premises resulting in police
or sheriff call 50
False statement on application 60
Transfer of license without permission 100
Corporation and agent responsibility violations 50
Failure to post license 25
Failure to maintain residence — Class A 50
Conducting unlawful alcohol or other business in Wisconsin 50
Search of licensed premises 100
No licensed bartender 25
Licensed premises to be sanitary 25
Sell or dispense after hours 50
Open after hours 50
No carryout after hours 25
On-premises consumption — Class A 50
After-hours consumption — Class B 50
Intoxicated employee 50
Place-to-place deliveries 50
Leaving with open container 25
Sell or serve on public street 25
Gambling constituting criminal violation of Ch. 945 25
Unlawful quantities on containers 25
Wholesalers restrictions 50
Sale or dispensing in building — off premises 25
Brand disclosure on tap 25
Adult entertainment without permit 50
Nude or seminude entertainer or employee visible outside 50
Noise violation — first in 12 months 35
Noise violation — subsequent in 12 months 75
Allowing people to congregate outside premises 50
Any other nonenumerated ordinance violations 25
(iii) Violations, how calculated. In determining the accumulated demerit
points against a license within 12 months, the Town shall use the
date each violation was committed as the basis for the
determination.
(iv) Suspension or revocation of license.
a. The Town Board requests that the Sheriff's Department and
other police agencies furnish a copy of all incident reports
involving licensees to the Town Administrator for
monitoring the performance of licensees.
b. The Board shall call before it for purposes of a revocation or
suspension hearing all licensees who have accumulated 100
points in a 12 month period as a result of court imposed
33
convictions or who have had referred to it reports from the
Town Administrator or Town Clerk which, if believed,
would result in 100 demerit points in 12 months.
c. Formal expression of concern. In those instances in which a
licensee has accumulated less than 100 demerit points as
determined by the Town Attorney, and additional violations
on one date would result in the accumulation of at least 100
points but not more than 200 points, the Board may elect to
call before it the licensee for purposes of a formal expression
of concern. Formal expression of concern shall not apply to
cases of failure to comply with an order pursuant to these
ordinances. If the licensee appears, no discussion of the
alleged facts underlying the assessment of demerit points
shall be permitted unless the licensee requests such
discussion. Such discussions may occur only if the licensee
is advised that any statements made by the licensee and/or
her/his representatives regarding the alleged facts may be
considered by the Board in any subsequent
suspension/revocation hearing which may result from the
alleged violations which are the subject of the formal
expression of concern. If the licensee appears, no points shall
be assessed for the alleged violations which triggered the
formal expression of concern. If the licensee fails to appear
after service of the notice to appear, the matter shall be
scheduled for a suspension/revocation hearing. Service of
the notice to appear shall be by first class mail sent to the
agent, if the licensee is a corporation or a limited liability
company, to the licensee if an individual, or to any partner if
the licensee is a partnership. If the notice is returned by the
Post Office as undeliverable, the notice may be left with any
employee found on the licensed establishment at least 24
hours before the date and time of the scheduled appearance
before the Board. A formal expression of concern in lieu of
the assessment of demerit points may only occur once within
a 1 year period. This amendment shall apply only to
violations that would trigger a formal expression of concern
which occur after this section is adopted.
d. If the demerit point accumulation, calculated from the date
of violation, meets or exceeds 100 points in a 12 month
period, the license shall be suspended for not less than 3 days
nor more than 90. If the demerit points meet or exceed 125
points in any 12 month period, the license shall be revoked,
and no other license shall be granted to such licensee for a
period of 12 months from the date of revocation. If the
licensee is a corporation or limited liability company, the
34
agent and shareholders or members of such corporation or
limited liability company are also debarred from obtaining a
license during the period of revocation. The procedure to be
used for suspension or revocation shall be that found in this
section.
(l) Other provisions. Any license issued pursuant to this section shall be subject
to such further regulations and restrictions as may be imposed by the Town
Board of the Town of Middleton by amendment to this section or by the
enactment of new ordinances. If any licensee shall fail or neglect to meet
the requirements imposed by such new restrictions and regulations her/his
license may be revoked in accordance with this section. In case of
revocation of any license or any violation of any provision of this section in
accordance with this section or by the court or for any reasonable cause
except the imposition of new restrictions, no refund shall be made of any
part of the license fee.
(17) Operator’s Licenses.
(a) Operator’s Licenses; Class “A” or Class “B” Premises. Except as provided
under Wis. Stat. § 125.32(3)(b) and Wis. Stat. § 125.07(3)(a)10, no
premises operated under a Class “A” or Class “B” license or permit may
be open for business unless there is upon the premises the licensee or
permittee, the agent named in the license or permit if the licensee or
permittee is a corporation, or some person who has an operator’s license
and who is responsible for the acts of all persons serving any fermented malt
beverages to customers. An operator’s license issued in respect to a vessel
under Wis. Stat. § 125.27(2) is valid outside the municipality that issues it.
For the purpose of this Section, any person holding a manager’s license
under Wis. Stat. § 125.18 or any member of the licensee’s or permittee’s
immediate family who has attained the age of 18, shall be considered the
holder of an operator’s license. No person including a member of the
licensee’s or permittee’s immediate family, other that the licensee,
permittee or agent, may serve fermented malt beverages in any place
operated under a Class “A” or Class “B” license or permit unless he or she
has an operator’s license or is at least 18 years of age and is under the
immediate supervision of the licensee, permittee, agent or a person holding
an operator’s license, who is on the premises at the time of the service.
(b) Use by Another Prohibited. No person may allow another to use his or her
Class “A” or Class “B” license or permit to sell alcohol beverages. The
license or permit of a person who violates this subsection above shall be
revoked.
(c) Applications. The Town Board may issue an operator’s license, which
license shall be granted only upon application in writing on forms to be
obtained from the Town Clerk only to persons 18 years of age or older.
35
Operator’s licenses shall be operative only within the limits of the Town.
All applications are subject to an investigation by law enforcement
authorities and/or other appropriate authority to determine whether the
applicant and /or premises to be licensed complies with all regulations,
ordinances and laws applicable thereto. The investigating authorities shall
conduct an investigation of the applicant including, but not limited to,
requesting information from the State, surrounding municipalities, and/or
any community where the applicant has previously resided concerning the
applicant’s arrest and conviction record. Based upon such investigation, the
investigating authorities shall recommend, in writing, to the Town Board
approval or denial of the application. If the investigating authorities
recommend denial, the law enforcement authorities shall provide, in
writing, the reasons for such recommendation.
(d) Duration. Operators’ licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter
shall be valid for a period of 2 years and shall expire on the 30th day of June
every other year.
(e) Fees. The Town Board shall establish the fees for operators’ licenses by
resolution of the Town Board, provided however, that such license fees may
not exceed the maximum fee established for any type of license by the
applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. The Town Board shall
review such license fees annually.
(f) Provisional License. The Town Clerk may issue provisional operator’s
licenses in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 125.17(5). The provisional
operator’s license shall expire 60 days after its issuance or when an
operator’s license is issued to the holder, whichever is sooner. The Town
Clerk may, upon receiving an application for a temporary provisional
license, issue such a license without requiring the successful completion of
the approved program as described herein. However, such temporary
license shall be used only for the purpose of allowing such applicant the
privilege of being licensed as a beverage operator pending his successful
completion of the approved program. A provisional license may not be
issued to any person who has been denied an operator’s license by the Town
Board or who has had his operator’s license revoked or suspended within
the preceding 12 months. The Town Clerk shall provide an appropriate
application from to be completed in full by the applicant. The Town Clerk
may revoke the provisional license issued if he discovers that the holder of
the license made a false statement on the application.
(18) Issuance or Denial of Operator’s Licenses; Revocation.
(a) After the Town Board approves the granting of an operator’s license, the
Town Clerk shall issue the license. Such licenses shall be issued and
numbered in the order they are granted and shall give the applicant’s name
36
and address and the date of the expiration of such license.
(b) If the application is denied by the Town Board, the Town Clerk shall, in
writing, inform the applicant of the denial, the reasons therefore, and of the
opportunity to request a reconsideration of the application by the Town
Board in a closed session. Such notice must be sent by registered mail to,
or served upon, the applicant at least 10 days prior to the Board’s
reconsideration of the matter. At such reconsideration hearing, the applicant
may present evidence and testimony as to why the license should be granted.
(c) If, upon reconsideration, the Board again denies the application, the town
Clerk shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons therefore. An
applicant who is denied any license upon reconsideration of the matter, may
apply to Circuit Court pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 125.12(2)(d) for review.
(d) Consideration for the granting or denial of a license will be based on:
(i) Arrest and conviction record of the applicant, subject to the
limitations imposed by Wis. Stat. §§ 111.321, 111.322, and 111.334;
(ii) The financial responsibility of the applicant;
(iii) The appropriateness of the location and the premises where the
licensed business is to be conducted; and
(iv) Generally, the applicant’s fitness for the trust to be reposed.
(e) If a licensee is convicted of an offense substantially related to the licensed
activity, the town Board may act to revoke or suspend the license. Violation
of any of the terms or provisions of the State law or of this Chapter relating
to operator’s licenses by any person holding such operator’s license shall be
cause for revocation of the license.
(f) An application may be denied based upon the applicant’s arrest and
conviction record if the applicant has been convicted of a felony (unless
duly pardoned) or if the applicant has habitually been a law offender. For
purposes of this licensing procedure, “habitually been a law offender” is
generally considered to be an arrest or conviction of at least 2 offenses that
are substantially related to the licensed activity within the 5 years
immediately preceding the license application. Because a license is a
privilege, the issuance of which is a right granted solely to the Town Board,
the Town Board reserves the right to consider the severity, and facts and
circumstances of the offense when making the determination to grant, deny
or not renew a license. Further, the Town Board, at its discretion, may,
based upon an arrest or conviction record of 2 or more offenses which are
substantially related to the licensed activity within the 5 years immediately
37
preceding, act to suspend such license for a period of 1 year or more.
(19) Training Course. Except as provided in Subsection (b) below, the Town Board may
not issue an operator’s license unless the applicant has successfully completed a
responsible beverage server training course unless the applicant fulfills one of the
following requirements:
(a) The person is renewing an operator’s license.
(b) Within the past 2 years, the person held a Class “A”, Class “B”, “Class A”
or “Class B” license or permit or a manager’s or operator’s license.
(c) Within the past 2 years, the person has completed such a training course.
(20) The Town Clerk may issue a provisional operator’s license to a person who is
enrolled in a training course under Subsection (19).
(21) Display of License. Each license issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall
be posted on the premises whenever the operator dispenses beverages or be in his
possession, or carry a license card.
(22) Penalties.
(a) Forfeitures for violations of Wis. Stat. §§ 125.07(1)-(5) and 125.09(2),
adopted by reference in the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Middleton,
shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for
violations of the comparable State Statutes, including any variations or
increases for subsequent offenses.
(b) Any person who shall violate any provision of this section of the Code of
Ordinances of the Town of Middleton, except as otherwise provided in
Subsection (a) herein or who shall conduct any activity or make any sale for
which a license is required without a license, shall be subject to a forfeiture
as provided in the general penalty section of this Code of the Town of
Middleton.
(c) Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing court to
exercise additional authorities granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
7.05 Cigarette Licenses.
(1) License Required. No person, firm or corporation shall, in any manner, directly or
indirectly, upon any premises, or by any device, sell, exchange, barter, dispose of
or give away, or keep for sale, any cigarette, cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers,
or any substitute therefor, without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided
38
(2) Application for License. Every person, firm or corporation desiring a license under
this Section shall file with the Town Clerk a written application therefor, stating the
name of the person and the place for which such license is desired. Each license
shall be filed by the Town Clerk and shall name the licensee and the place wherein
he is authorized to conduct such business, and the same shall not be delivered until
the applicant shall pay to the Town Clerk a license fee.
(3) Establishment of Fees. The Town Board shall establish the fees for the licenses in
this section by resolution of the Town Board, provided however, that such license
fees may not exceed the maximum fee established for any type of license by the
applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes. The Town Board shall review such
license fees annually.
(4) Issuance and Term of License. Licenses for the sale, exchange, barter, disposition
of, or giving away or keeping for sale of cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers or
any substitute therefor shall be issued by the Town Clerk. Each license shall be
issued on the first day of July in each year, or thereafter whenever applied for, and
shall continue in force from date of issuance until the succeeding June 30th unless
sooner revoked for any violation of this Section.
7.06 Direct Sellers
(1) Registration Required. It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to engage in direct
sales within the Town of Middleton without being registered for that purpose as
provided herein.
(2) Definitions. In this Section:
(a) Direct Seller means any individual who, for him/herself, or for a
partnership, association or corporation, sells goods, or takes sales orders for
the later delivery of goods, at any location other than the permanent business
place or residence of said individual, partnership, association or
corporation, and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and
transient merchants. The sales of goods include donations required by the
direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.
(b) Permanent Merchant means a direct seller who, for at least 1 year prior to
the consideration of the application of this section to said merchant:
(i) Has continuously operated an established place of business in this
Town; or
(ii) Has continuously resided in this Town and now does business from
his/her residence.
(c) Goods shall include personal property of any kind and shall include goods
39
provided incidental to services offered or sold.
(d) Charitable Organization shall include any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, or
one purporting to be such, and religious organizations, including Boy
Scouts, Girl Scouts, 4-H Clubs and school organizations.
(e) Clerk shall mean the Town of Middleton Clerk.
(f) Person shall mean all humans of any age or sex, partnerships, corporations,
associations, groups, organizations and any other description of a collection
of human beings working in concert or for the same purpose or objective.
(3) Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this Section:
(a) Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to
regular customers on established routes;
(b) Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods;
(c) Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown;
(d) Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from
the established place of business for goods regularly offered for sale by such
merchant within this county and who delivers such goods in their regular
course of business;
(e) Any person who has an established place of business within the School
District where the goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis,
and in which the buyer has initiated contract with, and specifically requested
a home visit by, said person;
(f) Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had,
a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with
the prospective customer;
(g) Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale
or offering for sale of goods;
(h) Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and
any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law;
(i) Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in
direct sales for or on behalf of said organization, provided that there is
submitted to the Town Clerk proof that such charitable organization is
registered under Wis. Stat.§ 440.41 or which is exempt from the statute’s
40
registration requirements, shall be required to register under this Section;
(j) Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom
complaint has been made to the Town Clerk that such person is a transient
merchant, provided that there is submitted to the Town Clerk proof that such
person has leased or at least 1 year prior to the date complaint was made.
(k) Any person selling or offering for sale goods or services to persons or a
group invited for such purpose to the residence of another person.
(4) Registration.
(a) Applicants for registration must complete and return to the Town Clerk a
registration form furnished by the Town Clerk which shall require the
following information:
(i) Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary
address, if any;
(ii) Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and date of birth;
(iii) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is
employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold;
(iv) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will
be conducted, if any;
(v) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
goods offered and any services offered;
(vi) Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable;
(vii) Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by
applicant in the conduct of his/her business;
(viii) Last cities, villages and towns, not to exceed 3, where applicant
conducted similar business just prior to making this registration.
(ix) Place where applicant can be contacted for at least 7 days after
leaving this Town;
(x) Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime
or ordinance violation related to applicant’s transient merchant
business within the last 5 years, the nature of the offence and the
place of conviction.
41
(b) Documentation. Applicants shall present to the Town Clerk for
examination:
(i) A driver’s license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required;
(ii) A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of
weights and measures where applicant’s business requires use of
weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities;
(iii) A state health officer’s certificate where applicant’s business
involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be
certified under state law; such certificate to state that applicant is
apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not
more than 90 days prior to the date the application for license is
made.
(c) Registration Fee.
(i) At the time the registration is returned, a fee shall be paid to the
Town Clerk to cover the cost of processing said registration. Each
and every member of a group must file a separate registration form.
The fee for a direct seller’s, solicitor’s or canvasser’s license shall
be: $5.00 per day; $20.00 per week; $50.00 per month; $200.00 per
year. Annual licenses issued on or after July 1 shall be issued for
1/2 the required fee. Transient merchants/direct sellers may employ
2 assistants without payment of an additional license fee, but such
persons must comply with the other provision of this Section.
(ii) The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the Town Clerk his
agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against
the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the
applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the
applicant, in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort,
be served personally.
(iii) Upon payment of said fee and the signing of said statement, the
Town Clerk shall register the applicant as a direct seller and date the
entry. Said registration shall be valid for a period of 1 year from the
date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal as provided in Section
(5)(b) below.
(5) Investigation.
(a) Upon receipt of each application, the Town Clerk shall make and complete
42
an investigation of the statements made in such registration.
(b) The Town Clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined,
pursuant to the investigation above, that: the application contains any
material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a
material nature have been received against the applicant by authorities in
the last cities, villages and towns, not exceeding 3, in which the applicant
conducted similar business; the applicant was convicted of a crime,
statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last 5 years, the nature
of which is directly related to the applicant’s fitness to engage in direct
selling; or the applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of
Section (4)(b) above.
(6) Appeal. Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal
procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Town Board or, if not has
been adopted, under the provisions of Wis. Stat.§§ 68.07 through 68.16.
(7) Regulation of Direct Sellers.
(a) Prohibited Practices.
(i) A direct seller shall be prohibited from: calling at any dwelling or
other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. except by
appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is
displayed bearing the works “No Peddlers,” “No Solicitors” or
words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling
place; or remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by
the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such
premises.
(ii) A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or
misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character
of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his visit, his identity or
the identity of the organization he represents. A charitable
organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what portion of
the sale price of goods being offered will actually be used for the
charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Said
portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the
goods.
(iii) No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by
pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all
traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
(iv) No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any sound
amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is
43
capable of being plainly heard outside a 100 foot radius of the
source.
(v) No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or
around the area in which he is conducting business.
(b) Disclosure Requirements.
(i) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to
a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his or
her name, the name of the company or organization he is affiliated
with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he offers to sell.
(ii) If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller or any sales order for
the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have
the right to cancel said transaction if it involves the extension of
credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25.00, in accordance
with the procedure as set forth in Wis. Stat. § 423.203; the seller
shall give the buyer 2 copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact.
Such notice shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stat. §§
423.203(1)(a)(b) and (c), (2) and (3).
(iii) If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods,
he or she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with
a written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the
amount paid in advance, whether full, partial or no advance payment
is made, the name, address and telephone number of the seller, the
delivery or performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty
is provided and, if so, the terms thereof.
(8) Revocation of Registration. Registration may be revoked by the Town Clerk if the
registrant made any material omission or materially inaccurate statement in the
application for registration, made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading
statement or representation in the course of engaging in direct sales, violated any
provision of this Chapter or was convicted of any crime or ordinance or statutory
violation which is directly related to the registrant’s fitness to engage in direct
selling. The registrant may appeal such revocation pursuant to Section 7.06(6).
7.07 Dance Licenses. No person shall conduct a dance to which the public is admitted, or
conduct, establish or manage any public dance hall or pavilion within the Town of Middleton,
without first securing an annual dance license from the Town Board. Such licenses shall annually
expire on June 30th. The Town Board shall establish the fees for the licenses in this section by
resolution of the Town Board, provided however, that such license fees may not exceed the
maximum fee established for any type of license by the applicable provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes. The Town Board shall review such license fees annually.
44
7.08 Licensees to Pay Local Claims; Appellate Procedures
(1) Nonpayment of Taxes or Forfeitures. The Town shall no issue or renew any license
to transact any business within the Town of Middleton:
(a) For any purposes for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the Town
are delinquent and unpaid.
(b) For any person who is delinquent in payment:
(i) Of any taxes, assessments or other claims owed the Town; or
(ii) Of any forfeiture resulting from a violation of any Town Ordinance.
(2) Applicability. This Section shall apply to licenses issued pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter except for dog licenses.
(3) Denial of Renewal. An application for renewal of a license subject to this Chapter
shall be denied pursuant to the provisions of Subsection (1) only following notice
and opportunity for hearing as provided by Subsection (4) below.
(4) Hearing. Prior to any denial of an application for a license, the applicant shall be
given notice and opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided:
(a) With respect to alcohol licenses, notice and opportunity for hearing shall be
as provided by Wis. Stat. § 125.12 and this Chapter.
(b) With respect to licenses other than those described in Subsection (4)(a)
herein, the procedures in Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall be used,
where applicable.
(5) Other Grounds for Hearing. When an individual, business or corporation wishes to
appeal the Town Clerk’s decision not issue a license or permit under this Chapter,
the applicant may file a request in writing with the Town Clerk that the matter be
referred to the Town Board. All parties may be represented by counsel. The Board
shall consider all relevant information and shall render a decision that shall be
binding.
1
CHAPTER 8
PUBLIC WORKS
8.01 Driveways and driveway culverts.
8.02 Streets and Sidewalks.
8.03 Sewers
8.01 Driveways and driveway culverts.
(1) Driveway permits; culvert requirements
(a) Purpose. For the safety of the general public, the Town of Middleton shall
determine the location, size, construction and number of access points to
public roadways within the Town limits. It is the Town's intent to provide
safe access to properties abutting public roadways suitable for the property
to be developed to its highest and best use, provided that access is not
deficient or dangerous to the general public.
(b) Driveway culvert requirements. No person shall construct any driveway or
private road in a public right-of-way of the Town of Middleton without
installing a culvert in full compliance with this section. Included within the
scope of this requirement are commercial driveways.
(c) Driveway permit required; application; fee.
(i) Permit requirement. No person shall locate, establish, or construct a
private driveway, road, or other access from a private property line
to the traveled portion of any public Town road without first filing
an application and obtaining a driveway permit from the Town of
Middleton.
(ii) Application. Application for such permit may be made to the Town
Office or Building Inspector. The request for such permit shall be in
writing signed by the owner of the real estate affected and the
owner’s agent and shall include design specifications and a drawing
depicting the location and orientation of the proposed culvert in
relationship to the real estate involved and the adjacent road, street,
or highway.
(iii) Review. The Town Building Inspector or his or her representative
shall review all applications using this chapter and the data and
findings from the Driveway Inspection Report available from the
Town in issuing driveway and culvert permits.
2
(iv) Fee. At the time of making application for a driveway permit, the
applicant shall pay an application fee pursuant to Town fee
schedule.
(d) Application provisions. All driveway permit applications shall contain the
applicant's statement that:
(i) The applicant represents all parties in interest, and that such
proposed driveway is for the bona fide purpose of securing access
to the applicant’s property and not for the purpose of parking or
servicing vehicles, advertising, storage or merchandising of goods
within the dedicated portion of the Town road or street, or for any
other purpose.
(ii) The Town, notwithstanding the construction of such driveway,
reserves the right to make any changes, additions, repairs or
relocations within the dedicated portion of the Town Road or street
at any time, including relocation, reconstruction, widening and
maintaining the street, without compensating the owner of such
private driveway for the damages or destruction of such private
roadway.
(iii) The permittee and/or permittee’s successors or assigns, agree to
indemnify and hold harmless the Town of Middleton, its officials,
officers, agents or employees, against any claim or any cause of
action for personal injury or property damage sustained by reason of
the exercise of such permit.
(iv) The Town does not assume any responsibility for the removal or
clearance of snow, ice or sleet or the opening of any windrows of
such material upon such portion of such driveway within the
dedicated portion of the Town road or street.
(e) Appeal. Persons may request a variance from this chapter by filing a written
appeals request with the Town, who shall direct the appeal to the Town's
designee. The designee may waive some or all of the requirements of this
chapter upon finding that a variance is warranted.
(2) Driveway and culvert location, design and construction requirements.
(a) General requirements. The location, design and construction of driveways
shall be in accordance with the following:
(i) General design. Private driveways shall be of such width and so
3
located that all of such driveways and their appurtenances are within
the limits of the frontage abutting the street of the property served.
Driveways shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from any
street intersection area and shall not encroach upon or occupy areas
of the street right-of-way required for effective traffic control or for
street signs or signals. A driveway shall be so located and
constructed that vehicles approaching or using it shall have adequate
sight distance along the street. In the absence of a variance under
section 8.01(2)(a)(x) or 8.01(4), the maximum grade for the first 20
feet of driveway measured from the street pavement edge shall be
4%. The maximum grade beyond the first 20 feet shall be 10%. In
addition, driveways that are longer than one hundred (100) feet shall
conform to the Town of Middleton Shared and Long Driveway
Requirements under section 8.01(4). Driveway approaches shall be
at least 10 feet apart except by special permission from the Town
Board, and driveways shall in all cases be placed wherever possible,
so as not to interfere with utilities in place. Concrete, asphalt,
timbers, or stone (12 inch diameter maximum) shall not be placed at
culvert endwalls or on any downslope or foreslope created by the
driveway construction within the public road right-of-way unless
such materials are placed to conform to allowable slopes from the
driveway edge to the grade at the culvert end and do not create any
vertical surfaces. Culvert lengths shall be such as to provide for a
maximum slope of 4:1 (four feet horizontal to one foot vertical) from
the driveway edge to the culvert end when the posted speed limit is
less than 45 mph. When posted speeds are equal to or greater than
45 mph, culvert lengths shall be such as to provide for a maximum
slope of 6:1 (6 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical) from the driveway
edge to the culvert end. In general, culverts serving only one
property shall not exceed 50 feet in length unless approved by the
Town Engineer.
(ii) Town right to modify. At the discretion of the Town, the Town can
replace any portion of a private drive, located within the Town's
right-of-way, with materials as determined by the Town. The cost
for such modifications shall be borne by the Town. When approved
by the Town Board or its designee, the property owner may install
alternative materials at the property owner's cost.
(iii) Number. The number of driveways to serve an individual residential
or commercial property fronting on a street shall be 1 with only 1
direct ingress and egress access point to the abutting street
pavement. For clarity, looped, semi-circle or other types of
driveways which provide multiple points of ingress and egress onto
the abutting street pavement are not allowed. Exceptions can be
4
made where deemed necessary and feasible by the Town Board for
reasonable and adequate service to the property, considering the
safety, convenience and utility of the street. The purpose of the
culvert is to maintain drainage under a driveway built for traversing
in and out of said property. Each lot, property or parcel may have
only one culvert (or “culverts” if laid parallel to each other) placed.
The Town Board can make exceptions for agricultural fields.
(iv) Drainage. The surface of the driveway connecting with street cross
sections shall slope downward and away from the edge of road
pavement as specified in the Driveway Permit and Inspection Report
to preclude ordinary surface water drainage flowing onto the street
roadbed. No driveway apron shall extend out into the street further
than the road edge or face of the curb, and under no circumstances
shall such driveway apron extend into the gutter area where there is
curbing. All driveway entrances and approaches shall be so
constructed that they shall not interfere with the drainage of streets,
side ditches, or roadside areas or with any existing structure on the
right-of-way. All driveways and parking lots shall be graded in such
way that no stormwater directly discharges onto the roadway. All
driveways shall slope down, away from the roadway, for a minimum
of five feet measured from the edge of the roadway and shall be
pitched such that the lowest point of the driveway within the first 10
feet is a minimum of three inches lower in elevation than the lowest
elevation along the line formed by the driveway abutting the
roadway.
(v) Ramps. As new driveways are sometimes installed prior to the
installation of the final course of asphalt on the roadway, provisions
must be made in these cases to prevent damage to the Town's snow
removal equipment. Ramps or other means of transitioning the blade
from shoulder to driveway shall be installed to prevent such damage.
If damage were to occur regardless of devices installed to prevent it,
the owner of the driveway shall still be responsible for repair of the
Town's equipment. In addition, the Town shall not be responsible
for damage to driveways caused by snow removal equipment.
(vi) Concrete control joints. Concrete driveways shall have one control
joint above the culvert (or 10 feet to 12 feet from the edge of the
road should no culvert exist) and 1 at 4 feet to 6 feet from the edge
of the road. These shall be used to cut the concrete and change pitch
of the driveway if and when the roadbed is reconstructed.
5
(vii) Vision corners. New driveways and/or existing driveways that the
Town Board has determined need to be modified as a condition of a
Land Division approval, shall be placed or modified to provide
proper vision at the intersection with the public roadway. The
requirements for the vision corner will include a vision triangle and
sight distance components as detailed in section 8.01(4).
(viii) Restricted areas. The restricted areas between successive driveways
may be filled in and graded only when the following requirements
are complied with:
1. The filling or draining shall be to grades approved by the
Town Engineer and, except where highway drainage is by
means of curb and gutter, water drainage of the area shall be
directed away from the street roadbed in a suitable manner.
2. Culvert extensions under the restricted area shall be of the
same size and of equivalent acceptable material as the
culvert under the driveway. Intermediate catch basins are
required where the total culvert length is greater than 50 feet
and/or where a bend or curve in the pipe is required.
Exceptions to culvert length can be made at the sole
discretion of the Town Building Inspector or Town
Engineer.
3. Where no street side ditch separates the restricted area from
the street roadbed, permanent provision may be required to
separate the area from the street roadbed to prevent its use
for driveway or parking purposes by construction of a
border, curb, rail or posts as may be required by the Town
Board.
(ix) Relocation of utilities. Any costs of relocating utilities shall be the
responsibility of the property owner with approval of the Town
Board and the utility necessary before any utility may be relocated
and the driveway installed.
(x) Variances. Any of the requirements of this chapter may be varied by
the Town Board in such instances where the peculiar nature of the
property or the design of the street may make the rigid adherence to
the above requirements impossible or impractical. The
requirements for a culvert may only be waived if it is found that the
unique physical characteristics of the location in question render a
culvert unnecessary. The Town Engineer may be asked to render an
opinion on the request. Applicants seeking a variance to this
6
ordinance shall send a written request to the Town Clerk expressing
what variance is requested and the reasons for the variance. The
Town Engineer will either act on the variance request or refer it to
the Town Board and place it on the Town Board meeting agenda.
(b) Special requirements for commercial and industrial driveways. The
following regulations are applicable to driveways serving commercial or
industrial establishments:
(i) Width of drive. No part of a private driveway located within the
dedicated area of a public street shall, except as hereinafter
provided, have a width greater than 30 feet measured at right angles
to the center line of said driveway, except as increased by
permissible radii. In instances where the nature of the commercial
or industrial activity or the physical characteristics of the land would
require a driveway of greater width than herein specified, the Town
Board, at its discretion, may permit a driveway of additional width.
(ii) Angular placement of driveway. The angle between the center line
of the driveway and the curbline or road edge shall not be less than
70°.
(c) Special requirement for residential driveways. The following regulations
are applicable to driveways serving residential property:
(i) Width. Unless special permission is first received from the Town
Board, or committee thereof, a residential driveway shall be no
greater than 28 feet wide at the curbline or pavement edge and 22
feet wide at the road right-of-way.
(ii) Angular placement. The center line of the drive may be parallel to a
property line that intersects with the street right-of-way; however,
in all situations, the angle between the centerline of the driveway
and the centerline of the street shall not be less than 70°.
(d) Special requirements for existing driveways located within proposed Land
Divisions. The following regulations are applicable to existing driveways
located within proposed Land Divisions:
(i) Location. Existing driveways that take access from a collector or
arterial street prior to the Land Division, shall be relocated onto a
proposed local street within the Land Division, except where no new
local streets are included as part of the Land Division or where such
requirements are waived by the Town Board.
7
(ii) Shared and Long Driveways. Existing driveways shall be modified as
necessary to conform to the Town of Middleton Shared and Long
Driveway Requirements under s. 8.01(4).
(e) Special Requirements for shared driveways. Shared driveways shall
conform to the Town of Middleton Shared and Long Driveway
Requirement under s. 8.01(4).
(f) Prohibited driveways.
(i) No person, firm or corporation shall place, construct, locate in, or
cause to be placed, constructed or located in, any obstruction or
structure within the limits of any public road, highway or street in
the Town of Middleton except as permitted by this section. As used
herein the word "structure" includes private driveways, a portion of
which extends into any public road, highway or street, and which is
in nonconformance with this chapter.
(ii) No driveway shall be closer than 25 feet to the extended street rightof-
way line at an intersection. At street intersections a driveway
shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from the street
intersection area and shall not occupy areas of the roadway deemed
necessary by the Town for effective traffic control or for highway
signs or signals.
(iii) The grade of that portion of any private driveway located within the
limits of any public road, highway or street shall meet the grade of
the existing public roadway at its edge and not cause an obstruction
to the maintenance or clearing of such public roadway.
(g) Culvert construction standards. [Amended 7-20-2020 by Ord. No.
20200720-1; Amended 5-3-2021 by Ord. No. 20210503-1]
(i) Size. Culverts shall be installed prior to construction work being
commenced on the property served. No pipe smaller than 15 inches
in diameter (or equivalent elliptical or arch pipe) will be allowed
unless specifically permitted by the Town Engineer. All culverts
shall be constructed of corrugated steel pipe (aluminized type 2) or
reinforced concrete, and shall be of new manufacture, unless
specifically permitted by the Town Engineer. At a minimum,
driveway culverts shall be designed to convey the 10-year, 24-hour
storm event. Driveway culverts shall be designed to convey the 50-
year, 24-hour storm event if they are located in Major
Drainageways. Driveways (culverts and driveway overflow) shall
be designed to safely convey the 100-year, 24-hour storm event if
8
they are located in Major Drainageways.
(ii) Steel Pipe Material. Aluminized steel Type 2 material shall conform
to the applicable standards of AASHTO M274 or ASTM. The
minimum wall thickness for the steel pipe culverts shall be in
accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer for the cover
and loadings anticipated.
(iii) Concrete Pipe Thickness. The class of reinforced concrete pipe
shall be in accordance with the following:
Height of Cover (in feet) Class of Pipe
0 to 2 IV
Greater than 2 III
(iv) Drainage. The culverts shall be placed in the ditchline at elevations
that will assure proper drainage.
(v) Endwalls. Culverts shall be provided with a precast concrete or
prefabricated metal apron endwalls. Riprap shall be placed at
downstream ends of driveway culverts when required by the Town
Engineer.
(vi) Backfill material. Material used for backfill shall be of a quality
acceptable to the Town Engineer and shall be free from frozen
lumps, wood, or other extraneous or perishable materials. The
minimum cover, measured from the top of the pipe to the top of the
subgrade, shall be 6 inches unless this requirement is waived by the
Town Engineer.
(vii) Erosion control. Erosion control measures shall be implemented as
necessary to control erosion, or as directed by the Town Engineer.
(viii) Cost. The property owner shall install the culvert and be responsible
for the cost thereof.
(i) Enforcement. All costs incurred by the Town relating to the enforcement of
this chapter or in making the determinations or inspections necessary
hereunder shall be paid by the property owner, including, but not limited to,
Town administrative costs and engineers' and attorneys' fees. Such costs
shall be payable from the permit fee established in § 8.01(1)(c)(iv) above.
If a property owner refuses to comply with the chapter, the Town may install
the culverts and charge back the cost or additional cost thereof
as a special charge pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
9
(3) Driveway and culvert maintenance. [Amended 7-20-2020 by Ord. No. 20200720-1]
(a) Driveway maintenance. Private driveway maintenance (including the
portion of driveway inside the Town right-of-way) shall be the
responsibility of the property owner. Maintenance shall include asphalt,
brick, concrete, or gravel repair, including replacement, in kind, and to the
same grade, width, configuration, etc. A permit will not be required for
maintenance activities on private drives including the portion of the
driveway located in the Town road right-of-way.
(b) Driveway reconstruction/alteration. Private driveway reconstruction
(including the portion of driveway inside the Town right-of-way) shall be
the responsibility of the property owner. Reconstruction shall mean
alteration of the driveway surface materials, width of driveway, grade of
driveway, or configuration of driveway. All driveway
reconstruction/alterations are subject to the provisions of this chapter, and,
as such, a permit is required as detailed in § 8.01(1)(c). At the discretion of
the Town Engineer, any such driveways shall then be subject to current
driveway design criteria as detailed in § 8.01(2).
(c) Culvert maintenance and replacement. All private driveway culverts shall
be maintained in working order by the property owner. Maintenance shall
include periodic cleaning, as necessary, to maintain open culvert crosssection,
and replacement, as necessary, to maintain culvert functionality. If
the property owner neglects the maintenance and/or necessary replacement
of the culvert, and said culvert is a hindrance to the conveyance of water
runoff within the public road right-of-way, the Town shall give a 30-day
notice of necessary work to correct deficiencies to the property owner. If
the necessary work, as determined by the Town, is not completed within the
30-day notice period, the Town will complete the work and assess the
property owner for the cost of said work.
(d) Culvert alteration. Culvert alterations shall be the responsibility of the
property owner, if permitted. Alteration of a driveway culvert shall mean
change of culvert elevation, size, length, location, or endwall configuration.
Any such alterations are subject to the provisions of this chapter, and, as
such, a permit is required as detailed in § 8.01(1)(c). At the discretion of the
Town Engineer, any such culvert alteration is subject to current driveway
culvert design criteria as per Town ordinances.
(e) Culvert and driveway modifications due to Town activities:
[Amended 5-3-2021 by Ord. No. 20210503-1]
(i) In the event the Town of Middleton, in the course of reconstructing
street pavements, causes driveways or culverts to be disturbed
10
and/or culverts to be necessary (by creating a ditch), the
modifications to the driveway or culverts and/or addition of culverts
shall be the responsibility of the Town of Middleton. However,
regardless of current driveway materials (asphalt, brick, concrete or
crushed stone), the Town will replace said materials with crushed
stone if currently crushed stone, and asphalt if it is currently asphalt
or any other material. Where practicable, the Town will obtain
pricing for replacement of the driveway with the same material as
currently constructed. Should the property owner elect, the driveway
will be replaced with the same material as currently constructed and
the property owner shall be responsible for the differential cost of
replacing it with asphalt versus the current material. Current Town
ordinances allow for one driveway per parcel. For parcels with
multiple existing driveways, the Town will follow the replacement
standards above for the costs associated with one driveway. Should
the owner of a residential property elect to maintain the second
driveway, all replacement costs shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Should the owner of a commercial property elect to maintain
the second driveway, all replacement costs may be the responsibility
of the owner at the discretion of the Town.
(ii) Town reconstruction projects must often strike a balance between
meeting the requirements of this section and minimizing impacts to
private property. As such, the driveways resulting from such
projects may not meet all requirements of driveway design criteria
as detailed in § 8.01(2).
(iii) After the driveway and culverts have been modified, however, the
property owner shall become responsible for future driveway
maintenance, driveway reconstruction/alterations, and culvert
maintenance and replacement per Subsections (a) through (d).
(f) Culverts and driveway modifications due to Land Development Activities.
(i) In the event a Land Divider is required to modify an existing street
outside of the proposed Land Division (for example, the removal of
a temporary cul de sac adjacent to the proposed Land Division), the
Land Divider shall extend any affected driveways to the new/revised
street pavement location. The driveway extension shall be in kind
with the existing driveway (e.g., if the driveway to be extended is
asphalt, the extension shall be asphalt; if the driveway to be extended
is concrete, the extension shall be concrete).
(ii) Any existing culvert under a driveway affected by (i) above shall be
removed and replaced with a new culvert, as necessary, at the Land
11
Divider’s expense.
(iii) All areas disturbed by this construction shall be restored as lawns
with proper drainage as approved by the Town Engineer.
(g) Damage to driveway due to Town activities. The Town of Middleton will
not be responsible for any damage to driveways due to snowplowing or
other normal maintenance, including crack filling, seal coating, etc.
Damage to driveways during construction projects, as in subs. (e) above,
shall be the responsibility of the Town of Middleton.
(4) Shared and long driveways. [Amended 7-20-2020 by Ord. No. 20200720-1]
(a) Purpose. This section applies to new driveways constructed in the Town of
Middleton or existing driveways that have a change of use. It shall also
apply to existing driveways that are reconstructed or altered as described in
§8.01(3)(b). However, the Town recommends that any existing driveway
located in the Town that does not meet the standards of this policy, be
modified as much as possible to provide a higher level of access for safety
vehicles. Specifically, this would apply to property owners who seek
approval from the Town Board for a land division, a conditional use permit,
a site plan approval or a rezone. The Town, as one of their conditions of
approval for one of these requests by a property owner, may recommend
that Town staff and the Middleton Fire District make safety improvement
suggestions that would make the driveway conform more closely to the
intent of this policy.
(b) The following requirements shall be followed for shared and long
driveways in excess of 100 feet in the Town of Middleton as measured from
the edge of street pavement to the face of the residential or commercial
structure. The face of the residential or commercial structure is also known
as the driveway termination point.
(i) Materials
1. The travel lane must have a depth of at least 6 inches of 2
inch sized crushed stone on the roadbed, covered with an
additional 2 ½ inches of 3/4 inch gravel or hard-surface such
as asphalt or concrete.
2. Any portion of a driveway travel lane located in a right-ofway
shall be constructed in accordance with the Town
Driveway ordinance and in compliance with any other Town
policies.
(ii) Grade
12
1. The grade shall be no greater than 4% for the first 20 feet
measured from the street pavement edge and 10% for the
balance of the driveway. This will include areas both inside
of and outside of the public right-of-way. The Town may
approve a variance as discussed in section (xiii), below.
2. The maximum slope for areas adjacent to the driveway
resulting from driveway construction should be no more than
1 foot of vertical rise in each 4 feet within public right-ofways
when the posted speed limit is less than 45 mph. When
posted speeds exceed 45 mph, the maximum slope resulting
from driveway construction should be no more than 1 foot
of vertical rise in each 6 feet within public right-of-ways.
(iii) Turning Radii
Curves in the driveway shall have an inside radius of no less than 25
feet and an outside radius of no less than 45 feet as required for
vehicles of 45 feet in length, which would have similar
characteristics to fire vehicles serving the Town of Middleton.
(iv) Travel Lane [Amended 5-3-2021 by Ord. No. 20210503-1]
1. The width of the pavement shall be a minimum of 12 feet.
The width of a crushed stone driveway shall be a minimum
of 14 feet. A 12-foot width requirement shall apply to gravel
driveways that existed on or before April 15, 2021.
2. For driveways over 300 feet long, there shall be at least one
section that is 50 feet in length and 20 feet in width to allow
vehicles to pass one another. One additional passing area
shall be provided for each additional 300 foot length of
driveway.
(v) Turnarounds
1. All driveways over 150 feet in length shall additionally
demonstrate that a Fire Engine can safely reverse direction
within 100 feet from the termination point. The intent of this
turnaround is to serve as a point of staging set-up for
emergency service apparatus.
2. In addition, all driveways in excess of 300 feet in length shall
provide a second turnaround and demonstrate that a Fire
13
Engine can safely reverse direction within 200 feet from the
driveway termination point.
3. All turnarounds shall be constructed to one of the following
standards:
a. A cul-de-sac with a minimum diameter of 70 feet.
b. A 45 degree wye with a minimum length of 60 feet
per side and minimum width of 20 feet.
c. A 90 degree tee with a 28 foot radius, minimum
length of 60 feet per side, and a minimum width of
20 feet.
d. Refer to Appendix A for exhibits of these standards.
(vi) Clear Zone
1. A volume of 13.5 feet in height, 3 feet in width, on each side
of the travel lane, and the entire length of driveway shall be
cleared and continuously maintained in order to permit the
safe passage of emergency vehicles. In cases where such
clearing would be environmentally damaging, the Town of
Middleton may approve a smaller clearance volume
provided that it will not prevent or interfere with emergency
service or create a safety hazard.
(vii) Driveway Vision Corner
1. Driveway vision corners shall include the Sight Distance and
Vision Triangle components described in sections (viii) and
(ix). The combined clear sight windows must be
unobstructed so that operators of vehicles approaching the
driveway or stopped at the driveway may safely carry out
whatever maneuvers are required to negotiate the driveway
intersection.
2. Driveways are most often subject to the vision corner
requirements (site distance and vision triangle) indicated on
a Final Plat, Certified Survey Map (CSM) or other Land
Division document. All shared and long driveways shall
meet the requirements as indicated on these Land Division
documents. When these requirements are not identified on
a Land Division document, the Town Engineer shall use the
14
requirements indicated in Sections (b)(viii) and (b)(ix) to
determine if an adequate Driveway Vision Corner is
provided.
(viii) Sight Distance
1. Sight distance at the intersection of the driveway and street
should be higher for higher speed limits. The distance shall
be measured by using an eye height of 3.5 feet and an object
height of 3.5 feet, with the eye located 14.5 feet off the edge
of the main travel lane at the driveway entrance and the
object located on the street centerline (in both directions
from the proposed driveway.) 350 feet is adequate for
speeds less than 35 mph. However, the required sight
distance will be increased for higher speeds as provided in
section (b)(viii)2.
2. Posted Speed Minimum Required Sight Distance
35 mph or less..............350 feet
40 mph ........................400 feet
45 mph ........................450 feet
50 mph ........................500 feet
55 mph ........................525 feet
3. Verification of Site Distance
a. The Town Engineer may make a site visit to confirm
the proposed driveway location(s) meet the sight
distance requirements in subs. (b)(viii)2., above.
b. If after a site visit the Town Engineer cannot
positively determine the required site distance in
subs. (b)(viii)2., above has been provided, the
applicant may be required to provide to-scale plans
of the proposed driveway locations. Such plans shall
include the horizontal location of the adjacent
roadway extending to a point a minimum of 100 feet
beyond the minimum site distance required in subs.
(b)(viii)2., above. Town Engineer may also require
the applicant to provide a plan depicting the vertical
profile of the adjacent roadway extending to a point
a minimum of 100 feet beyond the minimum site
distance required in subs. (b)(viii)2., above.
(ix) Vision Triangle
15
1. In addition to the sight distance requirement for driveways,
all driveways shall provide a vision triangle. The vision
triangle is an additional clear sight window that provides an
opportunity for speed adjustment or evasive maneuver by a
vehicle on the Town road when a vehicle on a driveway
enters the roadway. New driveways shall be placed to
provide proper vision at the intersection with the public
roadway.
2. Vision corners shall be designed to provide an area clear of
obstructions (vegetation, retaining walls, etc. over 2.5 feet in
height) that have the following general dimensions:
a. Local Roads: 75 feet
b. Collectors and Arterials: 100 feet
3. The Building Inspector or his or her designee can, at their
discretion, allow exceptions to the following or require
larger vision corners for unusual situations. The dimensions
given in subs. (ix)2., are measured in three directions from
the intersection of the driveway and street centerline. The
vision corner is established by connecting the three points
(see diagram below).
(x) The following requirements shall be followed for all shared
residential and commercial driveways in the Town of Middleton: [Amended 5-3-
2021 by Ord. No. 20210503-1]
16
1. The width of the pavement shall be a minimum of 12 feet.
The width of a crushed stone shall be a minimum of 14 feet.
A 12-foot width requirement shall apply to gravel driveways
that existed on or before April 15, 2021.
2. For shared driveways that access more than 2 lots, the width
of the driveway at the right-of-way shall be 22 feet and will
increase to 28 feet wide at the pavement edge of the
roadway. The driveway shall be constructed of asphalt
inside the right-of-way.
3. The Town of Middleton shall not be party to shared
driveway agreements for items outside of the dedicated
right-of-way. However, the Town shall be party to those
portions within the right-of-way. If the Town identifies
deficiencies for the portion within the right-of-way, the
Town Clerk shall notify the property owners in writing,
describe the deficient conditions, state the steps necessary to
correct the conditions and establish a timeframe for
correcting the deficiency. In the event the deficiencies are
not corrected within the timeframe specified the Town will
make such corrections necessary to ensure compliance with
the aforementioned requirements. The costs of such
corrective measures shall be assessed to the owners of the
properties party to the shared driveway agreement.
4. Shared driveway agreements shall be recorded with the Dane
County Register of Deeds for every shared driveway. Such
agreements shall detail rights and responsibilities of each
benefiting property, including the sharing of expenses for
initial installation and/or maintenance, snow removal,
vegetation management, etc.
(xi) Process for approving shared and long residential and commercial
driveways. [Amended 5-3-2021 by Ord. No. 20210503-1]
Upon receipt of a driveway permit application and permit fee, the
Town staff will forward a copy to the Town Engineer. The Town
Engineer shall submit a written approval, conditional approval, or
denial of the application to the Applicant. The Town of Middleton
or its designee shall issue a driveway permit only after all conditions
placed on the applicant by the Town Engineer are met.
17
(xii) [Repealed 5-3-2021 by Ord. No. 20210503-1]
(xiii) Variance Disclaimers [Amended 7-20-2020 by Ord. No. 20200720-1]
1. Applicants are required to discuss their proposals with Town
Staff and the Middleton Fire District if any requirements
contained herein cannot be met. Town Staff, the Town
Engineer, and the Middleton Fire District will provide
guidance to help Applicant meet these requirements or
minimize the variance from them.
2. Applicant acknowledges that, regardless of the driveway
slope, width, configuration, etc., there may be times when
emergency vehicles may be unable to serve a particular site
due to rain, snow, ice, tree limbs, etc.
3. Specific requests for a variance to the maximum driveway
grades shall be reviewed under the following guidelines:
a. The Town can approve a variance on maximum slope
to 12% if the Town determines the proposed grade is
necessary. At 12%, there is a reasonable expectation
that the driveway will be safe and accessible to
emergency vehicles.
b. The Town can approve a variance on maximum slope
greater than 12% if the Fire District determines the
proposed grade is acceptable and provided the
Applicant/Owner holds the Town and Fire District
harmless from any problems associated with a
steeper driveway which inherently creates greater
risk that emergency vehicles may not be able to serve
the site from time to time.
Appendix ‘A’ follows
18
19
(5) High Intensity Driveways. [Added 7-6-2020 by Ord. No. 20200706-1]
(a) Definition. A driveway with frequent driveway use during hours of
operation, which includes land uses with extreme peaking patterns,
including, but not limited to, schools, worship assemblies, and employee
parking lots where more than one exiting vehicle at a time occurs. A
driveway is considered high intensity if it serves:
(i) Nonresidential developments that provide an assembly area for
more than 250 persons; or
(ii) Combinations of residential and nonresidential uses expected to
generate 500 vehicle trips or more per day, or 100 or more peakhour
trips per day. Trips are those occurring during peak-hours on
the adjacent roads. Trip generation shall be measured based on the
current edition of the Institute for Transportation Engineers (ITE)
Trip Generation Manual; or
(iii) A parking lot of more than 40 parking spaces; or
(iv) A facility or development which is served by shuttle buses more than 10
days per year; or
(v) In the case where the use of a property is not known, trip generation
calculations shall assume the permitted use that generates the highest
number of peak hour trips or a likely mix of uses as identified by the
applicant and accepted as appropriate by the Town Engineer.
(b) Approval of Access Points.
(i) All new access points to local roads from high intensity driveways and / or
any access points involving a change in use or an increased intensity of an
existing use that create a high intensity driveway shall require a permit from
the Town. Direct access to a local road shall only be permitted if the other
access scenarios such as local street access, frontage roads, shared
driveways and other forms of access control are unacceptable, unsafe or
inappropriate as determined by the Town Board.
(ii) In the event an existing high intensity driveway generates a 10% increase
or more in vehicle trips per day or peak-hour trips per day, the property
owner shall be required to apply for a permit modification. The property
owner may be required by the Town Board, on the recommendation of the
Town Engineer, to comply with some or all of the requirements of this
section with respect to such increased use.
20
(c) Number of Driveways.
(i) Only one access shall be permitted for any property.
(ii) An additional access or accesses shall be permitted if the applicant
demonstrates that an additional access or additional accesses are necessary
to accommodate traffic to and from the site and it can be achieved in a safe
and efficient manner.
(iii) The Town may restrict access to right turn only ingress and egress or to
another road if safe and efficient movements cannot be accommodated.
(iv) For a property that abuts two or more roads, the Town may restrict access
to only that road that can more safely and efficiently accommodate traffic.
(v) If the Town or the property owner anticipates that a property may be
subdivided and that the subdivision may result in an unacceptable number
or arrangement of driveways, or both, the Town shall require the property
owner to enter into an access covenant to restrict future access.
(d) Traffic Impact Analysis. A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) shall be required:
(i) For any development as described in s. (5)(a) above; or
(ii) When, in the opinion of the Town Board upon recommendation by the
Town Engineer, a traffic impact study is needed for any other development.
(e) Levels of Traffic Impact Analysis Required.
(i) Abbreviated TIA. An abbreviated TIA is required for smaller scale projects
that are not anticipated to have a significant impact on the overall
transportation system but will have impacts at the site access. An
abbreviated TIA may be permitted in cases where the proposed
development will create no more than 750 vehicle trips or more per day or
more than 250 peak-hour trips per day. The specific requirements for an
abbreviated TIA shall be determined by the Town Board upon
recommendation by the Town Engineer.
(ii) Full TIA. A full Traffic Impact Analysis evaluates impacts at site access
points and appropriate nearby intersections. The study parameters include
an analysis of the project’s access point(s), an analysis of all roads serving
the project, an analysis of all intersections up to the first collector street or
the first street or road of higher functional classification, and the
21
intersections of these roads with arterial streets or roads. This includes those
intersections that the Town Engineer determines are necessary to provide
for an adequate review of the proposed project’s impacts.
(iii) Phased Development. If a development is phased, the sequence and timing
of a development shall be incorporated into the traffic impact study. An
overall traffic impact study may be required with additional traffic impact
studies for a specific phase. Completing a traffic impact study for one phase
of development does not preclude the need to complete additional traffic
impact studies upon submission of development plans for the subject
property(s) and/or requests for the issuance of permits for construction.
(iv) Waiver of a Traffic Impact Study. A property owner or their representative
who demonstrates that a development will not have a significant impact on
the transportation system may request a waiver of a traffic impact study. A
request to waive a traffic impact study shall be made by a property owner
or their representative in writing to the Town Engineer. Sufficient
documentation shall be included that supports the waiver request. The
Town Board, upon the advice of the Town Engineer, in its exclusive
discretion, may approve such waiver.
(f) Format of TIA. Full TIAs shall conform to the requirements of the most recent
Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic Impact Analysis Guidelines, as the
same may be amended from time to time.
(g) Submittal of TIA. TIAs must be submitted to the Town Engineer at least 21
calendar days prior to the date of the Town Board meeting at which the driveway
permit will be considered.
(h) Additional Requirements.
(i) A report from local fire protection and EMS service providers confirming
that the planned driveway will provide adequate access for emergency
services shall be provided upon request of the Town Board or the Town
Engineer.
(ii) A report from any other public or private organization which, in the
judgment of the Town Board upon the advice of the Town Engineer, will
experience a significant impact on its operations or facilities by reason of
the construction of the driveway shall be provided to the Town Board.
(h) Approval of TIA and Issuance of Permit. The Town Board, upon recommendation
of the Town Engineer, will review the TIA and other documents submitted and may
approve the proposed driveway, approve the proposed driveway with modifications
or reject the proposed driveway based on the information contained in the TIA. If
22
the driveway is approved, a permit specifying the terms and conditions of the
approval shall be issued in recordable format and shall be recorded with the Office
of the Register of Deeds for Dane County, Wisconsin, at the property owner’s
expense.
(j) The requirements of this subsection (5) are in addition to and not in lieu of the other
requirements in section 8.01 of this Code. Where the requirements of this
subsection (5) are more restrictive or provide greater protection to the public than
other requirements of section 8.01, the provisions of this subsection shall control.
23
8.02 Streets and Sidewalks.
(1) Construction of Town Highways and Roads
(a) Application to lay out and construct highway. An application to lay out and
construct a new Town highway other than pursuant to a new subdivision or
plat may be filed by six or more resident freeholders of the Town pursuant
to § 82.10, et. seq., Wis. Stats. New streets and roads in subdivisions and
plats shall be constructed pursuant to Chapter 15, Land Division and
Subdivision, and this Section where it is not in conflict with Chapter 15.
(b) Restrictions on laying out highways.
(i) No Town highway shall be laid out through or upon any cemetery
without the consent of those having the control of the cemetery.
(ii) No Town highway shall be laid through or upon a structure, yard or
enclosure used for educational or charitable purposes.
(iii) No Supervisor shall act in laying out any highway in which he or
she may be personally interested.
(iv) When the laying out of a highway would require the construction of
a bridge costing more than $1,000, exclusive of donations, the order
of the Supervisors laying out such highway shall not be effective
unless approved by the electors of the Town, and an estimate by the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation shall be conclusive of the
cost of such bridge for the purposes of this section.
(v) Without the consent of the owner, no Town highway shall be laid
out through or upon any garden or orchard or any building or fixture
used for trade or manufacture or any other building or fixture or the
yard or enclosure necessary to the use thereof, when the damage
thereby caused thereto, exclusive of the damage to the land, exceeds
$300.
(c) Procedure after application is filed. On application made pursuant to §
8.02(1)(a), the Town Board shall proceed to consider the application in the
manner as required by § 82.10, et. seq., Wis. Stats.
(d) Appeals.
(i) Appeal from highway order. An appeal from any highway order
shall be pursuant to § 82.15, Wis. Stats.
24
(ii) Appeal from award of damages. An appeal from any award of
damages by owner shall be pursuant to § 80.24, Wis. Stats.
(e) Payment of construction expenses. All expenses involved in the
preparation, construction and dedication involved in highway construction
under this Section shall be borne by the applicant(s). For highways to be
constructed outside of a subdivision or plat, the Town Board may require
that the applicant(s) enter into a Development Agreement with the Town at
any time during the preparation, design or construction of the highway.
(f) Preliminary inspection. Prior to the design, preparation and construction of
any roadway to be dedicated to the Town of Middleton, the applicant shall
notify the Town Chairperson or Town Clerk. An on-site meeting will then
be arranged to be attended by the Town Board or Designee, the Town
Engineer and the Applicant. Sufficient plans must be provided to the Town
prior to the meeting that allows the Town Engineer to evaluate the design.
The plans shall conform to the requirements of this Chapter and the Town’s
“Design Requirements for Public Improvements”.
(g) Financial Guarantees.
(i) The applicant(s) shall install highway and drainage improvements
according to the requirements of these ordinances and any
Development Agreement between the Town and the applicant(s).
The applicant shall provide cash or an irrevocable Letter of Credit
or Bond which would enable the Town to finish the improvements
in case of default by the applicant(s). Performance bonds and letters
of credit are to be provided in the form available from and approved
by the Town.
(ii) The cash, Letter of Credit or Bond shall be equal to 120% of the
Town Engineer's estimated cost of the required improvements. The
cash, Letter of Credit or Bond is required to run until one year
beyond initial acceptance of the improvements. If outstanding items
are not completed in that time frame as determined by the Town
Board or Town Engineer, the Town will request an extension to the
cash, Letter of Credit or Bond, or if necessary, the Town may draw
on the cash, Letter of Credit or Bond to complete the work. The
cash, Letter of Credit or Bond amount shall be confirmed and
replaced as necessary a minimum of once every two years to ensure
that it covers current construction costs. Replacement Letters of
Credit or Bonds shall be delivered to the Town 14 days prior to the
expiration of the existing Letter of Credit or Bond.
25
(h) Roadway specifications.
(i) General requirements.
1. Construction standards. All roadway construction and
materials used shall be performed in accordance with the
construction methods as listed in the appropriate current
sections of the "State of Wisconsin Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Highway and
Structure Construction," and its supplements, or in
accordance with Town-approved plans, profiles and cross
sections and specifications, if such specifications are
requested by the Town Board or Town Engineer. This
includes adherence to the requirements of the “Town of
Middleton Design Requirements for Public Infrastructure,”
which shall take precedence over the Wisconsin Department
of Transportation Standard Specifications. No construction
shall be started until such plans, profiles and cross sections
have been approved by the Town Engineer or Town Board.
2. Traffic Control During Construction. Traffic control plans
shall be approved by the Town Engineer prior to
construction. Traffic control shall adhere to Manual for
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). The exact
number, location and spacing of all signs and devices may
be adjusted to fit field conditions as approved by the
Engineer. Signs shall be installed no sooner than seven (7)
days prior to the start of construction.
3. Project costs. All roadway surveys, dedications, plans and
specifications and construction will be at the expense of the
applicant or applicants. This includes any expense incurred
by the Town in the preparation of plans and review and
inspection of plans and construction.
4. Material slips. Copies of material slips for all materials
furnished for the road construction projects shall, upon the
request of the Town Board, be delivered to the Town before
the Town approves the final construction.
5. Required inspections.
a. The contractor shall provide the Town as directed by
the Town Board, 2 full business days’ notice prior to
the start of construction and when each stage of
construction is ready for inspection. Any deficiencies
26
found by the Town or Town Engineer shall be
corrected before proceeding to the next phase of
construction. Inspections will be required at the
following stages:
• After installation of erosion control
measures;
• After the completion of grading;
• During roll test of street subgrade;
• During the installation of culverts;
• During the placement of aggregate base
course;
• During paving;
• After completion of all work.
b. Any deficiencies found by the Town or Town
Engineer shall be corrected before proceeding to the
next phase of construction.
c. The inspections and the reports and findings issued
after the inspections are not intended as, nor are they
to be construed as, a guarantee. In order to so advise
the owners and other interested persons, the
following disclaimer shall be applicable to all
inspections: "These findings of inspections
contained herein are intended to report conditions of
noncompliance with standards that are readily
apparent at the time of the inspection."
6. Test of materials. The Town reserves the right to obtain a
sample of the roadway base material prior to placement on
the roadway for purpose of determining whether the material
meets gradation and soundness requirements.
7. Pavement samples. Samples of material may be required to
be taken by the Town during pavement construction
operations for purposes of determining that the material
meets specifications.
8. Other inspection and testing. The Town may conduct other
testing during construction according to the Town’s “Public
Infrastructure Inspection and Testing Policy.” All costs
incurred by the Town to complete this work shall be borne
by the Applicant.
27
9. Town Board approval. The finished roadway must meet the
approval of the Town Board, upon the recommendation of
the Town Engineer, since the Town will include this road
work in their annual request for highway aid.
(ii) Construction standards. All streets and highways constructed in the
Town shall fully comply with the following construction standards,
with construction at the applicant's expense:
1. Topsoil removal. All topsoil shall be first removed. In
addition, all subsoils which have a high shrink-swell
potential, low-bearing capacity when wet or are highly
elastic shall be removed and used outside of the right-ofway.
Where both subsoil and substratum have a high shrinkswell
potential and low bearing capacity when wet, an
underdrain system shall be installed to keep the water level
five feet below the pavement surface.
2. Minimum right-of-way width. A minimum road right-ofway
width of 66 feet is required, except that if the road ends
in a cul-de-sac or dead end a one-hundred-twenty-foot
turnaround diameter is required.
3. Roadway alignment details. Roadway alignment shall be in
the center of the road right-of-way.
4. Roadway grading; ditches. Roads shall be graded to their full
width in accordance with approved plans, plus an additional
distance necessary to establish proper ditch slopes. The
roadway shall be compacted and graded to subgrade using,
where necessary, approved fill material in accordance with
Wisconsin Department of Transportation standards.
Roadside ditches shall be minimum of 32 inches below the
finished roadway center line elevation, or as approved by the
Town Board, upon the Town Engineer's recommendation.
Debris may not be buried in the designated road right-ofway.
Roadway ditches shall have a normal slope ratio of 4:1
from the edge of the shoulder to the bottom of the ditch and
3:1 on the back slope. A flat ditch bottom with a minimum
width of 2 feet shall be provided.
5. Roadway grades. Roads shall have a maximum grade of 10%
unless a different maximum grade is recommended by the
Town Engineer and approved by the Town Board. In no
instance, however, shall the maximum grade exceed 12%.
28
For local streets, no street shall have a grade in excess of 4%
within 75 feet of an intersection. Longer areas of 4% or less
grade may be required as determined by the Town Engineer
for collector or arterial streets or local streets where special
conditions exist.
6. Roadway width. Roadway subgrade shall be a minimum of
38 feet wide with 28 feet of full depth aggregate base course
(12” thick) for all Town roads. The minimum widths shall
be increased to 34 feet for the subgrade and 31 feet for full
depth base course where one multi-modal lane adjacent to
the travel lane is required. Where multi-modal lanes are
required, the minimum widths shall be 44 feet for the
subgrade and 34 feet for full depth base course. Roadway
widths shall also adhere to the requirements of the “Town
Road Standards” noted in Sec. 86.50, Wis. Stats., or the
Town Subdivision Ordinance, the more restrictive of which
shall apply. Crushed stone shoulder match slopes shall be
4:1 and shall extend a minimum of 5 feet from the edge of
the shoulder unless field conditions do not allow and
permission is given by the Town or Town Engineer.
7. Roadway base thickness.
a. Residential and rural roads and streets shall have a
minimum roadway base thickness of 12 inches of
compacted in-place crushed aggregate base course.
The top 4 inches shall consist of 1 1/4 inch gradation
aggregate and the lower 8 inches shall consist of
3inch gradation crushed aggregate. Gradations shall
meet the requirements of the State of Wisconsin
Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Highway and Streets
Construction.
b. On commercial, arterial or other heavy-use roads, a
base course of 12 inches compacted or thicker, as
determined by the Town Engineer or Town Board.
shall be constructed upon an inspected and approved
subgrade. If the base course is12 inches thick, it
should be constructed using the same gradations as
residential and rural roads. If the base course is
thicker than 12 inches, the gradations shall be as
determined by the Town Board or Town Engineer.
29
c. In any case, the Town Board shall have the sole
discretion in determining the use and construction
classification to be adhered to.
d. In all cases, the base course shall be compacted to the
extent necessary to produce a condition so there will
be no appreciable displacement of material laterally
and longitudinally under traffic and shall conform to
line, grades and shape shown on the approved plans,
profiles and cross sections.
8. Pavement width.
a. Roads shall have a minimum pavement width of 22
feet or wider when required by the "Town Road
Standards" as noted in § 82.50, Wis. Stats., or by
Chapter 15 of this Code, if applicable, the more
restrictive shall apply. The minimum width shall be
27 feet if one multi-modal lane (for bikes, etc.)
adjacent to vehicle travel lanes is required by the
Town Board, or 32 feet if two multi-modal lanes are
required. The pavement radii on permanent cul-desac
shall be 45 feet or wider, except that the
pavement radii on a temporary cul-de-sac shall be a
minimum of 36 feet. The pavement radii entering the
cul-de-sac shall be 50 feet.
b. The maximum length of permanent dead end lengths
shall be no longer than 1,000 feet unless the Town
Engineer determines that the additional length does
not substantially increase the difficultly of providing
emergency services to residents living on said road.
c. Temporary dead-ends have no length limit as long as
it is in the Town's power to remove the dead-end by
drawing on the applicant's letter of credit (where
applicable) and completing additional street
construction.
30
d. Temporary dead-ends can be tee turnarounds if 4 lots
or less are served by the dead-end and the dead-end
is less than 500 feet long measured from the last
intersection to the end of a lot being improved. The
tee turnaround shall be 60 feet wide measured
perpendicularly to the centerline of the traveled road;
it shall be centered on the traveled road centerline
and shall be 24 feet wide, measured parallel to the
traveled road centerline.
e. If only two corner lots are served by a temporary
dead-end, and the dead end is less than 250 feet long,
no cul-de-sac or tee turnaround will be required.
f. In order for an improved lot to be eligible to receive
a building permit, the streets must be constructed
across its entire lot frontage. For corner lots, streets
must be improved for the entire frontage length on
both streets.
9. Pavement thickness. Roads shall have a minimum of 4
inches of hot mix asphaltic pavement, placed in two layers,
a lower layer of 2 1/4 inches thickness and an upper layer 1
3/4 inches thickness. For roads built by private parties as part
of a Developer Agreement, the surface layer of asphalt
should not be placed until one year after the lower course
and the developer is responsible for repairing the lower
course and obtaining the permission of the Town Engineer
before applying the upper course of pavement. The upper
layer of pavement shall be placed no later than 3 years after
the lower layer of pavement is placed. In the case of
commercial, arterial or other heavy-use roads, the Town
Board may, as an alternative to the above standards, have the
Town Engineer provide specifications for paving such roads
with a greater thickness after researching the site(s) and
conducting a soil analysis. In any case, the Town Board shall
have the sole discretion in determining the use and
construction classification to be adhered to. After lower
layer pavement construction and again after upper layer
pavement placement, shoulder width shouldering shall be
brought even to grade with the finished pavement surface.
10. Pavement Specifications. All pavement materials and
construction shall conform to Wisconsin Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Highway and
31
Structure Construction and shall be in conformance with the
Town of Middleton Design Requirements for Public
Improvements. In the event of a discrepancy between these
two documents, the Town of Middleton Design
Requirements for Public Improvements shall take
precedence.
11. Shoulder width. A shoulder a minimum of 3 feet wide on
each side of the road is required and wider when required by
the "Town Road Standards" as noted in § 82.50, Wis. Stats.
The shoulder shall extend 1 foot beyond paved multi-modal
lanes (for bikes, etc.) adjacent to vehicle travel lanes when
required by the Town Board.
12. Shoulder thickness. Road shoulders shall have a minimum
thickness of 4 inches of compacted in-place 3/4 inch crushed
state-approved aggregate base course, over a minimum of12
inches of compacted in-place crushed state-approved
aggregate base course. Alternate shoulder material may be
required if recommended by the Town Engineer and
approved by the Town Board. The shoulder thickness shall
match the grade of the pavement. If the upper course of
asphalt is not placed within two days of placement of the
lower course, an interim shoulder with a thickness equal to
the thickness of the lower course of asphalt shall be placed.
13. Roadway culverts and bridges; surface drainage. Roadway
culverts and bridges shall be constructed as directed by the
Town Board and sized utilizing the TR 55 Standards or other
hydraulic calculation methods listed in Chapter 13 of the
manual entitled "Drainage" of the "Facilities Development
Manual" of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation,
current edition. The developer shall provide adequate
facilities to provide surface water drainage as well as free
flow outlets for subsurface drain tile where they are required.
Where drainage facilities will aid in road construction and
the stabilization of the road's subgrade, drainage facilities
shall be installed before road construction is started. All
roadway culverts shall be marked with flexible marker posts
at each end. These shall be installed by the subdivider to the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation Specifications.
The Town may elect to install the flexible marker posts and
charge back the material and costs to the subdivider, as
detailed in the Developer or Site Plan Agreement.
32
14. Driveway culverts. Driveway culverts shall be installed as
prescribed in § 8.01(2).
15. Topsoil, grass, seed, fertilizer, and mulch. All disturbed
areas (ditches, backslopes) within the road right-of-way not
provided with pavement and shouldering material shall be
restored utilizing six inches of topsoil and good-quality seed,
fertilizer, and mulch, in accordance with the seeding
requirements prescribed in Wisconsin Department of
Transportation standards. Ditches along the roadway shall be
protected by necessary erosion control materials such as
erosion control mats, silt socks, stone weepers, sod, rip rap,
etc., as prescribed by the engineering design for the ditches
as approved by the Town Engineer.
16. Signs. All roads constructed in the Town of Middleton shall
have all street and regulatory signs installed by the
subdivider, as determined by the Town Board or its
designee, prior to acceptance of the road and issuance of
building permits. Sign materials and placement shall
conform to the current edition of the Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). The Town may elect to
install required signage and charge back the material and
labor costs to the subdivider, as detailed in the Developer or
Site Plan Agreement.
17. Extra pavement at intersections. The minimum pavement
radii between intersecting streets shall be 40 feet for
minor/local roads.
18. Radii of curvatures. When a continuous street center line
deflects at any one point by more than 3 degrees, a circular
curve shall be introduced per the following:
a. Rural Collector and Arterial streets shall have a
minimum centerline radius dependent on the speed
limit for the street, as determined by the Town
Engineer. The minimum centerline radius for
collector and arterial roads (less than or equal to 35
mph) without a median shall be as follows:
33
b. Rural Collector and Arterial streets with an
anticipated speed limit over 35 miles per hour or
which are designed with a median or which have
more than 4 traffic lanes shall have a centerline
radius as established by the design criteria for rural
collectors and rural arterials as provided in the latest
addition of “A Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets” by the American Association
of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO). The design speed shall generally be 5
miles per hour over the anticipated speed limit to
provide a reasonable margin of safety.
c. Local streets shall have a minimum centerline radius
of 150 feet.
d. Where the above centerline radius is not considered
feasible because of existing features or other factors,
the Town Board may, after considering the
recommendations of the Town Engineer, permit the
use of a shorter centerline radius.
e. A tangent at least 150 feet in length shall be provided
between reverse curves on arterial and collector
streets, and 100 feet in length between reverse curves
on local streets. However, on local streets where
there is a cul-de-sac or loop street pattern and low
density development assuring a low volume of traffic
and adequate vision clearance, the Town Board may
Speed Limit
Centerline Radius
Two-Lane Roadway
25 mph 200 feet
30 mph 335 feet
35 mph 510 feet
34
alter the requirements.
19. Vertical curves. The rate of the vertical curvature (k factor)
is the length of the curve divided by the algebraic difference
of the intersecting tangent grades. All minor road center lines
shall have a minimum "k factor" of 29 for crest curves and
37 for sag curves. Minimum "k factor" for collector and
arterial roads shall be as recommended by the Town
Engineer.
20. Existing trees. All existing trees shall be removed from street
right-of-ways unless requirement is waived by Town after
reviewing clear zone and intersection sight distance (ISD)
considerations. Trees shall also be removed from drainage,
Public Recreational Trail and utility easement areas when
directed by the Town Board.
(iii) Statutory requirements. The laying out of highways and roads shall
be as provided in Chs. 82 and 86, Wis. Stats., except that, in the case
of subdivisions and certified surveys, the provision of § 236.29(2),
Wis. Stats., shall apply.
(iv) Proximity to other roads. No road applied for running parallel with
existing public roads can be closer than 300 feet measured from the
right-of-way line of the major road.
(v) Easements. The applicant shall provide the Town with a deed to the
road and easements for all drainage facilities not within the road
right-of-way. Where required, the applicant shall also furnish to the
Town any special deed or easement, such as, but not limited to, sight
easements, slope easements, pedestrian ways, sewer easements and
such.
(i) Final inspection. Upon completion of the proposed highway, the Town
Engineer will proceed to make final inspection, accepting or rejecting the
road. After all of the provisions of this Section have been complied with,
the roadway or easement will be inspected by the Town officials and, at that
time, proof will be made by the presenting of waivers of liens of receipted
bills from contractors, engineers and surveyors for all work that has been
done and has been paid for or arrangements have been made for the payment
through written instrument by the subdivider or Applicant, if located outside
a subdivision or plat. If the road is rejected, corrections shall be made as
recommended by Town Board, upon the Town Engineer's recommendation,
before final inspection can then be made again. If final acceptance is then
made, the owner or owners shall turn over to the Town the deed of all land
35
necessary for the road as previously mentioned.
(2) Road Excavations; Trees.
(a) Findings and Purpose.
(i) To provide for the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens and to
ensure the integrity and safety of its streets and the appropriate use
of the Rights-of-Way, the Town strives to anticipate and minimize
the number of obstructions and excavations taking place in the
public Rights-of-Way. The taxpayers of the Town bear the financial
burden for the upkeep of the Rights-of-Way and a primary cause for
the early and excess deterioration the public Rights-of-Way is the
frequent excavation by Persons who place facilities therein. The
Town finds that there has been an increase in the use of the public
Rights-of-Way and, as a result, increased costs to the taxpayers of
the Town and that these costs are likely to continue into the
foreseeable future.
(ii) The Town finds that excavation and occupancy of the public Rightsof-
Way causes direct and indirect costs to be borne by the Town and
its taxpayers, including but not limited to:
1. Administrative costs associated with public Right-of-Way
projects, such as registration, permitting, inspection and
supervision.
2. Management costs associated with ongoing management
activities necessitated by public Right-of-Way users.
3. Repair costs to the roadway due to excavation into the public
Right-of-Way.
4. Degradation costs (i.e., depreciation caused to the roadway
in terms of decreased useful life, due to excavations into the
public Rights-of-Way).
(iii) In response to the foregoing facts, the Town hereby enacts this
Section relating to administration of and permits to excavate,
obstruct, and/or occupy the public Rights-of-Way, together with an
ordinance making necessary revisions to other Town of Middleton
Municipal Code provisions. This Section imposes reasonable
regulations on the placement and maintenance of facilities currently
within Town Rights-of-Way or to be placed therein at some future
time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
36
federal agencies.
(iv) The purpose of this Section is to provide the Town a legal
framework within which to regulate and manage the public Rightsof-
Way and to provide for recovery of the costs of regulation. This
ordinance provides for the health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the Town as they use the Rights-of-Way, as well as to ensure the
structural integrity of the Rights-of-Way.
(v) Under this Section, all Persons who excavate, obstruct and/or
occupy the public Rights-of-Way will reimburse the Town’s
administrative, ongoing management and degradation costs. Rightof-
Way users will bear a fair share of the financial responsibility for
the integrity of the public Rights-of-Way.
(b) Definitions. The following definitions apply in this Section. References
hereafter to “Subsections” are, unless otherwise specified, references to
subsections in this Section. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or
not capitalized.
(i) “Administrator” means the Town Administrator or his or her
designee.
(ii) “Applicant” means any person requesting permission to excavate,
obstruct and/or occupy a Right-of-Way.
(iii) “Town” means the Town of Middleton, Wisconsin, a Wisconsin
municipal corporation.
(iv) “Company” means a company as defined in §182.017(1g)(b), Wis.
Stats.
(v) “Degradation” means the accelerated deterioration of the Right-of-
Way, caused by an excavation of the Right-of-Way and resulting in
the need to reconstruct the Right-ofWay
earlier than would be
required if the excavation had not occurred.
(vi) “Board” means the Town Board.
(vii) “Emergency” means a condition that poses a clear and immediate
danger to life or health or of a significant loss of property or that
requires immediate repair or replacement to restore service to a
customer.
(viii) “Excavate” means to dig into or in any way remove or physically
37
disturb or penetrate any part of a Right-of-Way.
(ix) “Excavation Permit” or “Permit” means an Excavation and
Facilities Placement Permit issued under this Section.
(x) “Facilities” includes any pipe, pipeline, pole, structure, wire, cable,
duct, conduit, fiber optics or radio signal transmission equipment,
and associated plant and equipment, whether underground or above
ground, that has been placed or proposed to be placed in the Rightof-
Way and that is owned and/or operated by a company or public
utility to provide utility service but does not include wireless
telecommunication facilities as defined in § 8.04 of this Code.
(xi) “In,” when used in conjunction with “Right-of-Way,” means over,
above, in, within, on, or under a Right-of-Way.
(xii) “Local Representative” means a local person or designee of such
person, authorized by a Registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that Registrant regarding all matters within the scope
of this Section.
(xiii) “Obstruct” means to place any object in a Right-of-Way so as to
hinder free and open passage over, under, on, or in that or any part
of the Right-of-Way.
(xiv) “Occupy” means to locate and operate Facilities above, on, in, or
below the Right-of-Way.
(xv) “Permittee” means any person to whom a permit to excavate or
occupy a Right-of-Way has been granted by the Town under this
Section.
(xvi) “Person” means a corporation, or company, association, firm,
partnership, limited liability company, limited liability partnership,
and individuals and their lessors, transferees and receivers.
“Person” does not include the Town of Middleton or any of its
employees, departments or contractors.
(xvii) “PSCW” means the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin.
(xviii) “Public Utility” has the meaning provided in §196.01(5), Wis. Stats.
(xix) “Registrant” means any Person who has registered with the Town
(1) to have its facilities located in any Right-of-Way or (2) to use or
seek to occupy or use the Right-of-Way or any facilities in the Right38
of-Way.
(xx) “Repair” means to perform construction work necessary to make the
Right-of-Way useable for travel, according to Town specifications,
or to restore facilities to an operable condition.
(xxi) “Repair Bond” means a performance bond, a letter of credit, or cash
deposit posted to ensure the availability of sufficient funds to assure
that Right-of-Way excavation repair work is completed in both a
timely and quality manner, per Town specifications.
(xxii) “Right-of-Way” means the surface of, and the space above and
below, not to exceed the current usual and customary height and/or
depth of existing utilities, any Town street, road, alley, highway,
public way or sidewalk held by the Town or over which the Town
exercises any rights of management and control.
(xxiii) “Right-of-Way User” means a person owning or controlling
facilities in the Right-of-Way used to provide a utility service or
seeking to own or control such facilities.
(xxiv) “Service” or “Utility Service” means water, sewer, storm water, gas,
electric, wireless communications, telecommunications service or
other similar service provided by a Public Utility or a Company
subject to § 182.017, Wis. Stats.
(xxv) “Supplementary Application” means an application made to
excavate or obstruct more of the Right-of-Way than allowed in, or
to extend, a permit that has already been issued for the same project.
(xxvi) “Unusable Facilities” means facilities in the Right-of-Way that have
remained unused for one (1) year and for which the Registrant is
unable to provide proof that it has either a plan to begin using them
within the next twenty-four (24) months or a potential purchaser for
the facilities.
(c) Administration. The Administrator is responsible for the administration of
the Rights-of-Way and the permits and ordinances related thereto.
(d) Registration for Right-of-Way Occupancy.
(i) Registration. Any person who occupies or seeks to occupy the
Right-of-Way for the purpose of providing a utility service to the
public, including by lease, sublease or assignment, shall register
with the Administrator and pay the fee established pursuant to §
39
8.02(2)(f). Registration will consist of providing application
information on a form prescribed by the Administrator and paying a
registration fee.
(ii) Applicability. This section shall not apply to those persons who do
not own or control any facilities located in (or proposed to be located
in) the Right-of-Way.
(iii) Registration Prior to Work. No person may construct, install, repair,
remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities
or any part thereof in any Right-of-Way without first registering
with the Administrator.
(iv) Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend
the provisions of any Town ordinance requiring persons to plant or
maintain the area of the Right-of-Way between their property and
the street curb, construct sidewalks, install street signs, or perform
other similar activities. Persons performing such activities shall not
be required to obtain any permits under this Section.
(e) Registration Information.
(i) Information Required. The information provided to the
Administrator at the time of registration shall include, but not be
limited to:
1. Each Registrant’s name, Diggers Hotline registration
certificate number, street address, e-mail address, and
telephone and facsimile numbers.
2. The name, street address, e-mail address, and telephone and
facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times.
Current information regarding how to contact the local
representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration.
3. All Right-of-Way users shall demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Administrator the financial capability to cover any
liability that might arise out of their presence in the Rightof-
Way. If the person is a corporation, a LLC or LLP, a copy
of any certificate required to be filed under Wisconsin
Statutes as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State
shall be provided at the time of registration.
40
4. A copy of the person’s certificate of authority from the
PSCW or other applicable state or federal agency, where the
person is lawfully required to have such a certificate.
5. Satisfactory written evidence that the Registrant has in force
and will maintain during the time registration is in effect
occurrence form of insurance in the following amounts and
coverages: (i) comprehensive general liability insurance and
completed operations insurance, which insurance shall
include all work provided for by the permit, whether such
work be done by the permittee or by any subcontractor or by
anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them or by
anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable, with a
minimum combined single limit of $2,000,000 for bodily
injury and property damage per occurrence; (ii) business
automobile liability insurance with a minimum combined
single limit of $2,000,000 for each accident for bodily injury
and property damage; and (iii) umbrella liability insurance
in excess of the preceding requirements for at least
$5,000,000 for each occurrence.
6. Execution of an indemnification agreement in a form
prescribed by the Administrator, which is consistent with,
and shall not exceed the obligations provided in, §
8.02(2)(v).
(ii) Notice of Changes. The Registrant shall keep all the information
listed above current at all times by providing to the Administrator
information as to changes within fifteen (15) business days
following the date on which the Registrant has knowledge of any
change.
(iii) Reporting Obligations. It is in the best interests of all affected
parties to attempt to coordinate construction in the public Right-of-
Way whenever it is reasonably possible. Therefore, periodic
reporting by the Registrant of known construction plans will be
useful to achieve this objective.
1. Every Registrant shall, at the time of registration and no later
than January 1 of each year, file a construction and major
maintenance plan with the Administrator. The Administrator
shall make available within a reasonable time upon request
the Town’s construction and major maintenance plan. The
Registrant’s plan shall be submitted on a form prescribed by
the Administrator and shall contain the information
41
determined by the Administrator to be necessary to facilitate
the coordination and reduction in the frequency of right-ofway
excavations. The plan shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following information:
a. The locations and the estimated beginning and
ending dates of all projects planned to be commenced
during the calendar year; and
b. The tentative locations and estimated beginning and
ending dates for all projects contemplated for the
following 2 calendar years.
2. By February 15 of each year, the Administrator will have
available for inspection in his or her office a composite list
of all projects of which the Administrator has been informed
in the annual plans. All Registrants are responsible for
keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list.
3. Thereafter, by March 1, each Registrant may change any
project in its list and must notify the Administrator of all
such changes in the list. The Administrator will make all
such changes available for inspection in his or her office.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Registrant may at any time
join in a project of another Registrant listed by the other
Registrant or undertake any maintenance or construction
project not listed in the Registrant’s plan.
(f) Registration Fee and Renewal.
(i) Annual Registration Fee. The Board may establish by resolution a
Registration Fee in an amount sufficient to recover the costs
incurred by the Town for processing Registrants. This fee shall be
computed as the average of labor costs, indirect costs, and other
costs associated with registration. The fee, if required, shall be
indicated on the Town Fee Schedule and shall be paid to the Town
Clerk, who shall issue a receipt therefor.
(ii) Fee Computation. The Board may by resolution recalculate and
establish a new Registration Fee each year.
(iii) Renewal. Each Registrant shall annually renew its registration
unless the Registrant has discontinued its use and has removed its
facilities from the Right-of-Way.
42
(g) Excavation and Facilities Placement Permit Requirement.
(i) Excavation and Facilities Placement Permit Required. Except as
otherwise provided in this Section or elsewhere in the Town of
Middleton Town Code, no person shall excavate any Right-of-Way
or locate any facilities in a Right-of-Way without first having
obtained an Excavation and Facilities Placement Permit from the
Administrator, nor shall any person remove, replace, repair,
enhance, upgrade, or modify existing facilities in a Right-of-Way
without first having obtained a permit where excavation work is
necessary.
(ii) Supplementary Application. No person shall excavate the Right-of-
Way or maintain an excavation in the Right-of-Way beyond the date
or area specified in the permit unless such person makes a
supplementary application for another permit before the expiration
of the initial permit, pursuant to § 8.02(2)(n), and a new permit or
permit extension is granted.
(iii) Display. A copy of any permit issued under this Section shall be
present at the indicated work site at all times until the notice of
completion is provided to the Administrator pursuant to § 8.02(2)(k)
and the permit and all construction plans shall be available for
inspection by the Administrator upon request.
(h) Permit Application, Review and Approval.
(i) Application Information. Application for a permit shall be made to
the Administrator. A permit application shall contain, and will not
be considered complete until it contains, the following information:
1. The applicant shall provide evidence that the applicant has
registered with the Administrator under § 8.02(2)(d).
2. The applicant shall include traffic control plans and a
construction plan for the proposed project showing:
a. Its location, the location of any affected Right-of-
Way, public utility easements, and the location of all
existing and proposed facilities within the project
area;
b. Installation details including specified depth, method
of excavation, open cut or augering;
43
c. Other details as may be requested by the
Administrator.
3. The applicant shall provide a description of the proposed
use(s) of the facilities to be installed in the Right-of-Way.
4. If the proposed project involves the installation of a new or
extension of an existing pole in the Right-of-Way, an
applicant that is not the incumbent electric public utility
must submit all of the following:
a. Scaled drawings of the proposed pole and all
proposed attachments and related facilities;
b. Except in the case of a pole extension, evidence
sufficient to demonstrate that the applicant is
prohibited from using an existing pole (either owned
by the applicant or a third party) because such use is
technically infeasible, economically prohibitive, or
prohibited by law;
c. If the pole exceeds a height of 50 feet, the applicant
shall also provide the following information:
i. A description of ice–build-up mitigation
techniques to be used where the pole is
located adjacent to a sidewalk or other
pedestrian walkway;
ii. Evidence sufficient to demonstrate that the
greater height is required to accomplish the
applicant’s purposes; and
iii. Evidence sufficient to demonstrate that the
pole, due to its height and size, poses no
greater danger to the health, safety, and
welfare of the public than existing poles in
nearby Right-of-Way; and
d. A structural analysis stamped by a professional
engineer licensed in Wisconsin.
5. The applicant shall provide evidence that the applicant has
paid all money due to the Town for any and all of the
44
following:
a. Applicable permit fees and costs as set forth below;
b. Unpaid fees or costs due for prior excavations; and
c. Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the Town
because of the applicant’s prior excavations of the
Rights-of-Way or any emergency actions taken by
the Town.
6. The applicant shall submit a statement on forms provided by
the Administrator that the applicant will comply with this
Section and all other local, state and federal laws, codes,
rules, and regulations, including but not limited to safety,
building, and traffic control codes and the Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
7. The applicant shall submit satisfactory written evidence that
the applicant has in force and will maintain in effect, until
the notice of completion is provided to the Administrator
pursuant to § 8.02(2)(k), occurrence form of insurance in the
following amounts and coverages: (i) comprehensive
general liability insurance and completed operations
insurance, which insurance shall include all work provided
for by the permit, whether such work be done by the
permittee or by any subcontractor or by anyone directly or
indirectly employed by any of them or by anyone for whose
acts any of them may be liable, with a minimum combined
single limit of $2,000,000 for bodily injury and property
damage per occurrence; (ii) business automobile liability
insurance with a minimum combined single limit of
$2,000,000 for each accident for bodily injury and property
damage; and (iii) umbrella liability insurance in excess of the
preceding requirements for at least $5,000,000 for each
occurrence.
8. The applicant shall provide evidence that it has posted a
repair bond as required by § 8.02(2)(j).
9. The applicant shall provide any other information as
requested by the Administrator.
(ii) Review and Approval. The Administrator shall issue or refuse to
issue a permit within 60 days of receiving a complete application,
45
unless the Administrator and the applicant agree to a longer review
period. The permit may be granted subject to conditions, including
but not limited to the applicant’s attendance at any pre-construction
meeting the Town may convene to discuss a current or proposed
Town right-of-way project that may conflict with the applicant’s
proposed work.
(iii) Dispute not cause for denial. The Administrator shall not deny an
applicant a permit because of a dispute between the Town and the
applicant related to subsections (i)5.b. and (i)5.c. if:
1. The dispute has been adjudicated in favor of the applicant;
or
2. The dispute is the subject of an appeal filed by the applicant
and no decision in the matter has yet been rendered.
(i) Permit Fee.
(i) Fee Calculation. The Board shall establish by resolution the
Excavation and Facilities Placement Permit Fee in an amount
sufficient to recover the costs incurred by the Town for each of the
following categories:
1. Administrative. The general formula for computing the
administrative fee shall be the average per-permit costs for
labor plus indirect and other costs.
2. Repair. No repair fee shall be collected by the Town.
However, the Permittee shall be required to repair the public
Right-of-Way to Town specifications, subject to inspection
and acceptance by the Administrator, as per § 8.02(2)(k), and
to pay a degradation fee.
3. Degradation. The general formula for computing the
degradation fee for projects involving excavation shall be the
cost per square yard for street, overlay, and seal coat
multiplied by the appropriate depreciation rate for that street
multiplied by the area of the patch. The area of the patch
shall generally be square and calculated by adding two feet
to each side of the anticipated street cut and then, at the
option of the Administrator, extending to the full pavement
lane width. Depreciation schedules shall be provided by
type of street. The total permit fee shall be calculated as
follows: Administrative Cost + Degradation Fee (if project
46
involves excavation).
(ii) Payment of Permit Fees. The fee shall be paid to the Town Clerk,
who shall issue a receipt therefor. No permit shall be issued without
payment of applicable fees or receipt of a waiver under subsection
(v).
(iii) Fee Computation. The Board may, by resolution, recalculate and
establish a new fee structure each year.
(iv) Non-Refundable. Permit fees paid for a permit that the
Administrator has revoked for cause as stated in § 8.02(2)(p) are not
refundable.
(v) Fee Waiver. The Administrator may waive the permit fee when 1.
the permit is obtained for work performed at the Town’s request, 2.
the work is being performed in order to accommodate a Town
project, 3. the applicant derives no substantial benefit from the work,
and 4. the work is not otherwise required by this Section.
(j) Right-of-Way Work and Repair.
(i) Time Limitation. The work to be done under the permit and the
repair of the Right-of-Way as required herein must be completed
within the dates specified on the permit. The completion dates may
be increased by as many days as the Permittee was unable to work
in the Right-of-Way due to circumstances beyond the Permittee’s
control or when work was prohibited as unreasonable under §
8.02(2)(o). The Town may extend the time limitation for good
cause.
(ii) Notice. It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the Town
Clerk, or the Administrator when requested by the Town, and all
private individuals, firms and corporations affected by the work to
be done at least 24 hours before such work is to commence. The
Town Clerk or the Administrator, when requested by the Town,
shall also be notified at least four hours prior to backfilling and/or
restoring the surface.
(iii) Removal of Paving. In any openings or excavation, all paving
materials shall be removed with the least possible loss of or injury
to surfacing materials and together with the excavated materials
from the opening shall be placed so as to cause the least practicable
inconvenience to the public and permit free flow of water along
drainage ways.
47
(iv) Protection of public. This subsection applies to applicants as well
as Town employees and contractors performing work under contract
with the Town.
1. Traffic Control During Construction. Traffic control plans
shall be approved by the Administrator prior to construction.
Traffic control shall adhere to the Manual for Uniform
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). The exact number,
location and spacing of all signs and devices may be adjusted
to fit field conditions as approved by the Town Engineer.
Signs shall be installed no sooner than seven (7) days prior
to the start of construction.
2. Every opening and excavation shall be enclosed with
sufficient barriers. Sufficient warning lights shall be kept on
from sunset to sunrise. Such lights shall be spaced so as to
give adequate warning of the existence of the opening and of
piled excavated materials. No open flame warning pots shall
be used. Except by special permission from the Town, no
trench shall be excavated more than 250 feet in advance of
pipe or conduit laying nor left unfilled more than 500 feet
where pipe or conduit has been laid.
3. All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public
effectively from accidents or damage to persons or property
through the period of the work. Each person making such
opening shall be held liable for all damages, including costs
incurred by the Town in defending any action brought
against it for damages, as well as cost of any appeal, that may
result from the neglect by such person or his employees of
any necessary precaution against injury or damage to
persons, vehicles or property or any kind.
(v) Repair. In addition to repairing its own work, the Permittee must
repair the general area of the work and the surrounding areas,
including the paving and its foundations, to Town specifications.
The Permittee shall perform all repairs according to Town
specifications and/or in accordance with the conditions specified in
the permit. The Administrator shall have the authority to prescribe
the manner and extent of the repair and may do so in written
procedures of general application or on a case-by-case basis. The
Administrator shall inspect the area of the work and accept the work
when it determines that proper repair has been made per Town
specifications.
48
1. Reconstruction shall be in accordance with the current crosssection
or according to Town specifications, whichever is
stricter.
2. The paving materials, sand, gravel and earth or other
material moved or penetrated and all surface monuments or
hubs must be removed and replaced as nearly as possible in
their original condition or position and the same relation to
the remainder as before. Any excavated material that, in the
opinion of the Board is not suitable for refilling shall be
replaced with approved backfill material. All rubbish shall
be immediately removed. In refilling the opening, the earth
must be laid in layers not more than 6 inches in depth and
each layer mechanically rammed or tamped to prevent aftersettling.
Any trench excavation shall follow OSHA
guidelines for sheathing and bracing. No timber, bracing,
lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench.
Trenches shall be compacted to 95% Modified Procter, with
test results from a certified soil tester filed with the Town
Engineer.
(vi) A Permittee may request to have the Town repair the Right-of-Way.
1. Town Repair. If the Permittee requests to have the Town
repair the Right-of-Way, the Town may accept or reject the
request in its sole discretion. If the Town accepts, the
Permittee shall be billed for the Town’s costs and shall pay
the amount thereof within thirty (30) days of billing.
2. Permittee Repair. If the Permittee chooses to repair the
Right-of-Way, it shall, at the time of application for a permit,
post a repair bond in an amount not less than $5,000
determined by the Administrator to be sufficient to cover the
cost of repairing the Right-of-Way to Town specifications.
If 36 months after completion of the repair of the Right-of-
Way, the Administrator determines that the Right-of-Way
has been properly repaired, the surety on the repair bond
shall be released. When a permit is requested for purposes
of installing additional facilities and the existing repair bond
is insufficient for the additional facilities, the posting of an
additional or larger repair bond for the additional facilities
may be required by the Administrator.
(vii) Guarantees. The Permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain
49
it for thirty-six (36) months following its completion, except for
organic material, which shall be maintained for 24 months. During
either period, the Permittee shall, upon notification from the
Administrator, correct all repair work to the extent necessary, using
the method required by the Administrator. The work shall be
completed within 10 calendar days of receipt of the notice from the
Administrator, not including days during which work cannot be
done due to circumstances beyond the Permittee’s control or when
work was prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under §
8.02(2)(o), unless the Administrator deems a longer period of time
to be reasonably necessary to complete the repair work. The
Administrator may grant additional time to complete said work
(viii) Failure to Repair. If the Permittee fails to repair the Right-of-Way
in accordance with Town specifications or fails to satisfactorily and
timely complete all repair work required by the Administrator, the
Town at its option may do such work. In that event, the Permittee
shall pay to the Town, within 30 days of billing therefor, the cost of
repairing the Right-of-Way. If the Permittee fails to pay as required,
the Town may exercise its rights under the repair bond.
(k) Inspection.
(i) Standards. The Permittee shall perform all work and install all
facilities in the Right-of-Way according to Town specifications
and/or in accordance with the conditions specified in the permit.
(ii) Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit issued
hereunder is completed, the Permittee shall notify the Administrator.
Unless the Permittee is exempt from § 8.02(2)(h) requirements, the
Permittee shall certify, on forms provided by the Administrator,
either that the work was completed in conformance with the plans
and drawings approved by the Administrator when issuing the
permit or shall submit as-built plans and drawings and list the ways
in which the as-built plans and drawings differ from the approved
plans and drawings.
(iii) Site Inspection. The Permittee shall make the work site available to
the Administrator and to all others as authorized by law for
inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon
completion of the work.
(iv) Authority of Administrator. At the time of inspection, the
Administrator may order the immediate cessation of any work that
poses a threat to the life, health, safety, or well-being of the public.
50
The Administrator may issue an order to the Registrant for any work
that does not conform to the applicable standards, conditions, or
codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will
be cause for revocation of the permit. Within10 days after issuance
of the order, the Registrant shall present proof to the Administrator
that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been
presented within the required time, the Administrator may revoke
the permit pursuant to § 8.02(2)(p).
(l) Utility Wires and Poles.
(i) No pole or other facility to be located in the Right-of-Way shall be
taller than 50 feet unless this requirement is waived by the
Administrator for good cause shown, upon consideration of such
factors as whether the greater height is necessary and convenient to
the provision of utility service to the public and/or will avoid the
need for an additional site; whether the proposed facility will be
located in a commercial, industrial, or non-residential area; whether
greater separation is required to avoid interference with other
equipment on the pole or facility; and whether nearby buildings are
taller than 50 feet.
(ii) No existing pole or other facility in the Right-of-Way shall be
modified to increase its height by more than 5 feet or such that its
total height exceeds 50 feet, unless this requirement is waived by the
Administrator for good cause shown, upon consideration of such
factors as whether the greater height is necessary and convenient to
the provision of utility service to the public and/or will avoid the
need for an additional site; whether the proposed facility will be
located in a commercial, industrial, or non-residential area; whether
greater separation is required to avoid interference with other
equipment on the pole or facility; and whether nearby buildings are
taller than 50 feet.
(iii) Where allowed by the Administrator, poles and other facilities in the
Right-of-Way over 50 feet in height shall be located so that all
residential, commercial, retail or other occupied buildings are
outside the fall zone radius of the pole or facility.
(iv) Rigid non-breakaway poles and other utility structures shall be
located a minimum of 10 feet away from roadway curbs or shoulders
and behind existing or future sidewalks.
(m) Joint Applications.
51
(i) Joint Application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to
excavate the Right-of-Way at the same place and time.
(ii) Joint Projects with Town. Registrants who join in a scheduled
excavation performed by the Town, whether or not the Registrant
has submitted a joint or single application, are not required to pay
the degradation portion of the permit fee.
(iii) Shared Fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
excavation, which the Town does not perform, may share in the
payment of the permit fee. Registrants must agree among
themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on
their applications.
(n) Supplementary Applications.
(i) Limitations on Area. A permit is valid only for the area of the Rightof-
Way specified in the permit. No Permittee may perform any
work or excavate outside the area specified in the permit, except as
provided herein. Any Permittee who determines that an area larger
than that specified in the permit must be excavated or a facility must
be installed in a location other than that specified in the permit shall,
before working in that larger area or installing a facility in that
location, apply for and obtain a new permit or permit extension and
pay any additional fees required by the Administrator.
(ii) Limitation on Dates. A permit authorizes excavation or other work
only for the dates specified in the permit. No Permittee may begin
its work before the permit start date or, except as otherwise provided
herein, continue working after the end date. If a Permittee does not
finish the work by the permit end date or any extension thereof as
provided in this Section, the Permittee must apply for a new permit
for the additional time it needs and receive the new permit or an
extension of the old permit before working after the original end
date.
(iii) Fees for Supplementary Applications. A Permittee shall pay
administration costs for any additional permits. A Permittee is not
required to pay an additional degradation fee for the same
excavation where such fee has already been paid on the original
permit.
(o) Other Obligations.
(i) Compliance with Other Laws. Obtaining a permit to excavate
52
and/or locate facilities in the Right-of-Way does not relieve a
Permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses,
and authority and to pay all fees required by any other Town, county,
state, or federal rules, laws, or regulations. A Permittee shall comply
with all requirements of local, state, and federal laws. A Permittee
shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and
established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work
done in the Right-of-Way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who
does the work.
(ii) Prohibited Work. Except in an emergency or with the approval of
the Administrator, no Right-of-Way excavation may be done when
the ground is frozen or when conditions are unreasonable for such
work.
(iii) Excavation in New Right-of-Way Limited. Whenever the Board
determines to provide for the permanent improvement or repaving
of any Right-of-Way, such determination shall be made not less than
30 days before the work of improvement or repaving shall begin.
Immediately after such determination by the Board, the
Administrator shall notify in writing each person, utility, Town
department or other agency owning or controlling any sewer, water
main, conduit or other utility in or under said Right-of-Way or any
real property abutting said Right-of-Way, that all such excavation
work in such Right-of-Way must be completed within 90 days.
After such permanent improvement or repaving, no permit shall be
issued to excavate such Right-of-Way for a period of five years after
the date of improvement or repaving unless, in the opinion of the
Board, an emergency exists which makes it absolutely essential that
the permit be issued.
(iv) Maintenance of Facilities. All facilities located in the Right-of-Way
shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe condition and in
good order and repair. Registrants shall at all times employ ordinary
care and use commonly accepted methods and devices for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage,
injury or nuisance to the public.
(p) Revocations, Suspensions, and Refusals to Issue or Extend Permits.
(i) Grounds. The Administrator may refuse to issue a permit or may
revoke, suspend or refuse to extend an existing permit if it finds any
of the grounds stated below. The Administrator’s decision shall be
in writing and shall state the reasons for the action taken.
53
1. The applicant or Permittee is required by § 8.02(2)(d) to be
registered and has not done so or the permit application is
otherwise incomplete;
2. The applicant or Permittee is seeking to perform work not
included in its construction and major maintenance plan
required under § 8.02(2)(e), which work was reasonably
foreseeable by the applicant or Permittee at the time the plan
was filed;
3. The applicant or Permittee is seeking to perform work that
does not meet the standards set forth in one or more
provisions of this Section;
4. Issuance of a permit for the requested date would interfere
with an exhibition, celebration, festival, or other Townsponsored
or approved event;
5. Misrepresentation of any fact by the applicant or Permittee;
6. Failure of the applicant or Permittee to maintain required
bonds or insurance;
7. Failure of the applicant or Permittee to complete work in a
timely manner;
8. The proposed activity is contrary to the public health, safety
or welfare;
9. The extent to which space is available in the Right-of-Way
for which the permit is sought;
10. The competing demands for the particular space in the
Right-of-Way;
11. The availability of other usable locations in the Right-of-
Way or in other Rights-of-Way for the facilities of the
Permittee or applicant;
12. If the Permittee or applicant proposes to install a new pole in
the Right-of-Way, the availability of other existing poles or
towers owned by the Permittee or applicant or by a third
party;
13. The applicability of ordinances or other regulations of the
54
Right-of-Way that affect location of facilities in the Rightof-
Way;
14. The condition and age of the Right-of-Way and whether and
when it is scheduled for total or partial reconstruction; or
15. The applicant or Permittee is otherwise not in full
compliance with the requirements of this Section or state or
federal law.
(ii) Discretionary Issuance. Notwithstanding § 8.02(2)(i)2.-3., the
Administrator may issue a permit where issuance is necessary to
prevent substantial economic hardship to a retail customer of the
Permittee or applicant; to allow the Permittee or applicant to comply
with state or federal law or Town ordinance or an order of a court or
administrative agency.
(iii) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Administrator
revoking, suspending, refusing to issue or refusing to extend a
permit may file a request for review by the Board with the Town
Clerk. A request for review shall be filed within 10 days of the
decision being appealed. Following a hearing, the Board may
affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the Administrator. The
Board shall issue its decision in writing and shall state the reasons
for its action. The provisions of Chapter 68, Wis. Stats., shall not
apply to any such appeal.
(q) Work Done Without a Permit.
(i) Emergency Situations. Each Registrant shall immediately notify the
Town by verbal notice on an emergency phone number provided by
the Town of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be
an emergency. The Registrant may proceed to take whatever actions
are reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency provided that
those actions do not unreasonably interfere with any Town or other
Registrant’s use of the Right-of-Way. The Registrant may not make
any permanent repairs without first obtaining a permit. The
Administrator may require additional street surfacing removal and
replacement for streets less than 5 years old. Within 2 business days
after the occurrence of the emergency, the Registrant shall apply for
the necessary permits, pay the associated fees, and otherwise fully
comply with the requirements of this Section. If the Town becomes
aware of an emergency regarding a Registrant's facilities, the
Administrator may attempt to contact the local representative of
each Registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency.
55
The Town may take whatever action it deems necessary to protect
the public safety as a result of the emergency, the cost of which shall
be borne by the Registrant whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
(ii) Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, excavates
or places facilities in a Right-of-Way must subsequently register and
apply for a permit and shall, in addition to any penalties prescribed
by ordinance, pay double the normal fee for such permit, pay double
all the other fees required by this Section or other Chapters of the
Town of Middleton Municipal Code, deposit with the Administrator
the fees necessary to correct any damage to the Right-of-Way, and
comply with all other requirements of this Chapter. If a subsequent
permit is denied or is not approved, the Registrant shall discontinue
use of its facilities and remove them from the Right-of-Way.
(r) Supplementary Notification. If the excavation of the Right-of-Way begins
later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit, the Permittee shall
notify the Administrator of the actual commencement and end dates as soon
as this information is known.
(s) Location of Facilities.
(i) Undergrounding. Unless in conflict with state or federal law, except
where existing aboveground facilities are used, the installation of
new facilities and replacement of existing facilities shall be buried
underground or contained within buildings or other structures in
conformity with applicable codes.
(ii) Corridors. The Board may assign specific corridors within the
Right-ofWay,
or any particular segment thereof as may be
necessary, for each type of facility that is or, pursuant to current
technology, the Town expects will someday be located within the
Right-of-Way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits issued
by the Town involving the installation or replacement of facilities
shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue
consistent with the Board's assignment. Any Registrant who has
facilities in the Right-of-Way in a position at variance with the
corridors established by the Town shall, no later than at the time of
the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the facilities
are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the
Right-of-Way, unless this requirement is waived by the Town for
good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors as the
remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer
56
service needs and hardship to the Registrant.
(iii) Limitation of Space. To protect health, safety, and welfare, or when
necessary to protect the Right-of-Way and its current use, the
Administrator may prohibit or limit the placement of new,
replacement or additional facilities within the Right-of-Way if there
is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests of Persons
to occupy and use the Right-of-Way. In making such decisions, the
Administrator shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all
existing and potential users of the Right-of-Way, but shall be guided
primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public's needs
for the particular service, the condition of the Right-of-Way, the
time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of
existing facilities in the Right-of-Way and the Town’s future plans
for public improvements and development projects determined to be
in the public interest.
(t) Relocation of Facilities. Except as prohibited by state or federal law, a
Registrant must promptly and at its own expense, with due regard for
seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate its facilities
in the Right-of-Way whenever the Administrator requests such removal and
relocation, and shall restore the Right-of-Way to the same condition it was
in prior to the removal or relocation. The Administrator may make such
request to prevent interference by the Registrant’s facilities with (i) a
present or future Town use of the Right-of-Way, (ii) a public improvement
undertaken by the Town, (iii) an economic development project in which
the Town has an interest or investment, (iv) when the public health, safety
and welfare require it, or (v) when necessary to prevent interference with
the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the Right-of-Way.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be required to remove or
relocate its facilities from any Right-of-Way that has been vacated in favor
of a nongovernmental
entity unless and until the person has been paid the
reasonable cost of the removal or relocation by the non-governmental
entity.
(u) Interference with Other Facilities During Municipal Construction. When
the Town performs work in the Right-of-Way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, shore, or move a Registrant's facilities, the Town shall
notify the local representative. The Registrant shall meet with the Town’s
representative within 24 hours and coordinate the protection, maintenance,
supporting, and/or shoring of the Registrant's facilities. The Registrant shall
accomplish the needed work within 72 hours, unless the Town agrees to a
longer period. In the event that the Registrant does not proceed to maintain,
support, shore, or move its facilities within the required time period, the
Town may arrange to do the work and bill the Registrant therefor or, if the
57
Registrant completes the work outside the required time period, the Town
shall bill the Registrant for any additional costs the Town incurs due to the
delay caused by Registrant. Any bill issued to Registrant under this
subsection shall be paid by Registrant within thirty (30) days of receipt.
(v) Indemnification. By registering with the Town, or by accepting a permit
under this Section, a Registrant or Permittee, as the case may be, agrees to
indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the Town, its elected and appointed
officials, officers, employees, agents, representatives and volunteers, and
each of them (collectively, “Town of Middleton,” as used in this subsection,
from and against any and all suits, actions, legal or administrative
proceedings, claims, demands, damages, liabilities, interest, attorneys' fees,
costs and expenses of whatsoever kind or nature in any manner caused in
whole or in part or claimed to be caused in whole or in part, by reason of
any act, omission, fault, or negligence, whether active or passive, of
Registrant or of anyone acting under its direction or control or on its behalf,
even if liability is also sought to be imposed on the Town of Middleton.
The obligation to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the Town of
Middleton shall be applicable even if the liability results from an act or a
failure to act on the part of the Town of Middleton. However, the obligation
does not apply if the liability results from the willful misconduct of the
Town of Middleton.
(w) Abandoned Facilities.
(i) Discontinued Operations. A Registrant who has determined to
discontinue its operations in the Town must do the following:
1. Provide information satisfactory to the Administrator that
the Registrant’s obligations for its facilities under this
Section have been lawfully assumed by another Registrant;
or
2. Submit to the Administrator a proposal and instruments for
dedication of its facilities to the Town. If a Registrant
proceeds under this clause, the Town may, at its option:
a. Accept the dedication for all or a portion of the
facilities; or
b. Require the Registrant, at its own expense, to remove
the facilities in the Right-of-Way; or
c. Require the Registrant to post a bond or provide
payment sufficient to reimburse the Town for
58
reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in
removing the facilities.
3. In any event, the Registrant has 2 years in which to remove
from the Right-of-Way any unusable or abandoned facilities
it owns or over which it has control unless the Administrator
waives this requirement.
(ii) Abandoned Facilities. Facilities of a Registrant who fails to comply
with subsection (i) above and which, for 2 years, remains unused
shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed
to be a nuisance. In addition to any remedies or rights it has at law
or in equity, the Town may, at its option, take any of the following
actions: abate the nuisance; take possession of the facilities; or
require removal of the facilities by the Registrant or its successor in
interest.
(iii) Public Utilities. A Public Utility that is required to follow the
provisions of § 196.81, Wis. Stats., must seek authorization from the
PSC to abandon its facilities within the time frame set out in
subsection (w)(i)3. above.
(x) Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers. The Town, by the granting
of an Excavation and Facilities Placement Permit to excavate or locate
facilities in the Right-of-Way, or by registering a person under this Section,
does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair or lessen the lawful
powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter granted to the Town
under the Constitution or statutes of the State of Wisconsin to regulate a
Permittee’s use of the Right-of-Way. Moreover, a Permittee by its
acceptance of a or by its registration under this Section agrees that all lawful
powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or
the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the Town, shall
be in full force and effect and that the Permittee is subject to the exercise
thereof by the Town at any time. A Permittee or Registrant is deemed to
acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers
of the Town to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety
and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the Town pursuant to
such powers.
(y) Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion
of this Section 8.02(2) is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such
holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
59
(3) Vegetation obstructing views; tree removal; fences, walls and boulders.
(a) Visibility.
(i) Intent. This subsection is established to recognize the public and
private benefits of preserving and planting street trees and other
landscape elements along public rights-of-way to preserve and to
promote the Town of Middleton's rural character while also
recognizing the necessity for adequate vehicular vision clearance
and safety.
(ii) Traffic visibility. Streets shall afford adequate visibility and safety
for motorist, bicycle, and pedestrian use and shall intersect at right
angles, where practicable.
(iii) Clear zones. All vegetation shall be removed from right-of ways
dedicated with a Land Division. However, as approved by the Town
Board, some vegetation may remain in a right-of-way in accordance
with subsection 8.02(3)(g). In those cases, areas clear of
obstructions (other than lawn type grasses, ground cover, necessary
traffic signage, utility lines, culverts meeting Town ordinances, and
mail boxes meeting Town ordinances and U.S. postal requirements)
shall parallel all street rights-of-way, including boulevards, and shall
be established using American Association of State Highway
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Roadside Design standards
(latest edition). Landscape vegetation (including shrubs, perennials,
and annuals) 2 1/2 feet in height or lower may be allowed within the
clear zone subject to the affirmative recommendation of the Town
Engineer. Clear Zones for previously dedicated right-of-ways shall
be determined per subsection 8.02(3)(h).
(b) Obstruction of intersections.
(i) Purpose. No person shall maintain, plant or permit to remain on any
private or public premises situated at the intersection of two or more
roads, streets or alleys in the Town of Middleton any hedge, tree,
shrub or other growth which may obstruct the view of the operator
of any motor vehicle or pedestrian approaching such intersection.
(ii) Vision corners and triangles. For any street connection, except
between two roads classified as Local Roads, the two intersecting
roads shall meet vision triangle and intersection sight distance
requirements of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation
(WisDOT) Facilities Development Manual (FDM), current edition.
60
(iii) Intersection visibility. On a corner lot, no structure (including
fences), screening, planting, tree branches, or embankment of any
kind shall be erected, placed, maintained or grown between the
heights of 2 1/2 feet and 14 feet above the surface created by
connecting the three corners of the vision triangle and the three
corners of the intersection sight distance triangle except for
necessary traffic signs and approved public utility lines, provided,
however, that based on field conditions, the 2 1/2 feet may be
increased and the 14 feet decreased subject to the affirmative
recommendation of the Town Engineer. In the case of streets
intersecting with railways, the vision corners shall be determined by
the State of Wisconsin Office of the Commissioner of Railroads.
(iv) Traffic circles and roundabouts. Clear zones and vision corners shall
be established using AASHTO Roadside Design standards (latest
edition) subject to review on a case-by-case basis by the Town
Engineer.
(c) Obstruction of signs. It is unlawful for any person to plant, cause to grow,
allow to grow or maintain any trees, shrubs or vegetation of any kind that is
an obstruction to the clear and complete vision of any traffic sign in the
Town. It shall be the duty of every owner of such tree, shrubs or other
vegetation to remove such obstruction.
(d) Abatement procedure. A tree, shrub, or other plant which obstructs the view
at an intersection, in a vision triangle, in a vision corner, in a clear zone, or
the view of a traffic sign shall be deemed to be dangerous to public travel.
The Town Clerk shall notify the property owner in writing, describing the
conditions, stating the steps necessary to correct the conditions, and
establishing a reasonable time frame within which the corrective steps shall
be taken. In the event that effective steps are not taken within the time
specified, it shall be lawful for the Town to abate these conditions to the
extent necessary to assure compliance with the foregoing requirements, and
the costs thereof shall be assessed to the owner of the obstruction.
(e) Removal of fallen or hazardous trees.
(i) If any tree or a significant portion thereof falls within a road rightof-
way, the property owner or occupant of the land shall
immediately remove the tree or portion from the right-of-way. If the
tree or portion is not removed by the property owner or occupant
following notice from the Town, the Town may remove it and assess
the cost thereof to the property owner pursuant to Wisconsin Statute
§ 66.0627.
61
(ii) A tree or significant portion thereof located within or adjacent to a
road right-of-way that is determined by the Town to be creating a
hazard, such as a dead, dying or structurally defective tree, shall be
removed by the property owner or occupant of the land after
notification by the Town Clerk following the abatement procedure
in Subsection 8.02(3)(d).
(iii) If the Town determines that any tree or significant portion thereof
within a road right-of-way, Clear Zone, Vision Triangle, or Vision
Corner is an immediate hazard, whether it is fallen or standing, the
Town may waive prior notification, remove the hazard, and assess
the cost thereof to the property owner.
(f) Cutting or injuring trees on highway. No person shall remove, break, girdle,
bruise the bark or in any other manner injure any public or private tree or
shrub growing within the road right-of-way. A property owner may remove
a tree or shrub from the right-of-way adjacent to their property with prior
authorization by the Town. The public authority maintaining the right-ofway
may also remove or trim trees and shrubs for the purpose of benefiting
the property owner's land or public facility and pursuant to other sections of
this ordinance. When it is necessary for trees in a road right-of-way to be
removed by the Town, adjacent property owners, whose deeds extend to the
street centerline, shall have a right of first refusal to harvest the wood. After
receiving notice that a tree is to be removed, such adjacent property owners
shall have fourteen (14) days to remove the downed trees.
(g) Fences, walls, landscape berms, and boulders. Decorative fences, walls,
boulders, and landscaped berms four feet or less in height may be allowed
within a public right-of-way (including boulevards) subject to the
following. They shall:
(i) Be subject to clear zone and visibility restrictions as noted elsewhere
in this section.
(ii) Be subject to restrictions of Wisconsin Statute § 86.03.
(iii) Not interfere with public utilities.
(iv) Be subject to a case-by-case review by the Town Engineer.
(v) Be approved by the Town Board.
(h) Ordinance administration. The procedure for evaluating clear zones
described in this ordinance shall be administered by the Town according to
62
the document titled "Town of Middleton — Procedure for Evaluating Clear
Zones" as first adopted on September 11, 2006, and as amended from time
to time to reflect current engineering standards.
(4) Injury to trees and shrubs prohibited.
(a) No person shall, without the consent of the owner in the case of a private
tree or shrub, or without written permits from the Town Board in the case
of a public tree or shrub, do or cause to be done by others any of the
following acts:
(i) Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire sign, unprotected electrical
installation or other device or material to, around or through a tree
or shrub.
(ii) Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub or
permit any fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub.
(iii) Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil or other injurious
substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or about any tree or
shrub, or place cement or other solid substance around the base of
the same.
(iv) Remove any guard, stake or other device or material intended for
the protection of a public tree or shrub, or close or obstruct any open
space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to permit
access of air, water and fertilizer.
(v) Attach any sign, poster, notice and other object on any tree, or fasten
any guy wire, cable, rope, nails, screws or other device to any tree;
except that the Town may tie temporary "no parking" signs to trees
when necessary in conjunction with street improvement work, tree
maintenance work or parades.
(vi) Cause or encourage any fire or burning near or around any tree.
(b) All trees on any parkway or other publicly owned property near any
excavation or construction of any building, structure or street work shall be
sufficiently guarded and protected by those responsible for such work as to
prevent any injury to said trees.
(5) Deposit of rubbish and stones on highway right-of-way. It shall be unlawful for
any person to throw or deposit any snow, weeds, sod, brush, cans, glass, gravel,
stones, boulders, machinery, garbage or other waste or rubbish in or on the rightof-
way of any highway located in the Town of Middleton, without written
63
permission of the Town Board for temporary use.
(6) Placement of rural mailboxes. This section shall apply to all new or any
replacement rural mailbox and mailbox post. Rural mailboxes are prohibited on the
right-of-way of all highways within the Town of Middleton except as hereinafter
provided: [Amended 5-3-2021 by Ord. No. 20210503-1]
(a) Mailboxes are approved only if they are of a construction of design
approved by the United States Postal Service or previously approved by the
Postmaster.
(b) Newspaper tubes are permitted only if provided by the newspaper or of a
construction or design that will not present a hazard to the public use of the
right-of-way. Where the newspaper tube used has not been provided by the
newspaper, the Building Inspector or Town designee shall have the
exclusive authority to approve the tube. If the Building Inspector or Town
designee refuses to approve the newspaper tube, it must be removed.
(c) A nameplate bearing the name and address numbers of the mailbox owner
shall be permitted on each box.
(d) The support for the mailbox and newspaper tube shall adhere to the
standards governing construction of mailbox supports as established by the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation and shall not constitute a hazard
to the public use of the right-of-way. Plastic posts are prohibited.
(e) Mailbox and newspaper tubes must be located on the side of the road
required by the United States Postal Service and, where practicable, to the
left side of the driveway determined by facing the lot from the road. The
door to the mailbox or protruding end of the newspaper tube should be at
least 1 1/2 feet from the paved portion of the road.
(f) The owner of each mailbox and/or newspaper tube or, in the case of
clustered mailbox units, the homeowners’ association of the subdivision for
which the clustered mailbox unit is provided, shall, within 24 hours after
the end of each snowfall, remove all snow and ice which has fallen or
accumulated in front of said mailbox and/or said newspaper tube and shall
remove the snow for a distance of 15 feet to each side of said mailbox and/or
newspaper tube.
(g) No other object of any kind shall be attached to the mailbox, newspaper
tube or their supports. No other objects, including, but not limited to,
landscaping boulders or fences may be placed on the right-of-way unless
allowed by subsections 8.02(3)(a)(iii) and 8.02(3)(g) of this Chapter.
64
(h) Clustered Mailbox Units (CBUs) are allowed as required by the U. S. Postal
Service as long as they are not located in Vision Corners and that their
placement is consistent with the requirements for CBUs as described in the
Town of Middleton’s Design Requirements for Public Infrastructure.
(i) Mailboxes that must be removed during a street reconstruction project shall
be replaced with a new post that conforms to the standards of this section.
If a different post is requested by the property owner, it shall be purchased
by the property owner and supplied to the contractor in accordance with the
construction schedule. A non-standard mailbox shall be approved by the
Town Building Inspector or Town designee prior to installation.
(j) This section is not intended to and shall not be construed to create any
affirmative duty on the part of the Town of Middleton to locate and remove
obstructing mailboxes.
(7) Discontinuance or alteration of highways. Town roads and highways may be
altered or discontinued as provided and pursuant to § 82.10, et. seq., Wis. Stats., §
66.1003 Wis. Stats. or, in platted subdivisions, § 236.36, et. seq., Wis. Stats.
(8) Street Use Permits
(a) Purpose. The streets in possession of the Town are primarily for the use of
the public in the ordinary way. However, under proper circumstances, the
Town Clerk may grant a permit for street use, subject to reasonable
municipal regulation and control. Therefore, this Section is enacted to
regulate and control the use of streets pursuant to a Street Use Permit to the
end that the health, safety and general welfare of the public and the good
order of the Town can be protected and maintained.
(b) Application. A written application for a Street Use Permit by persons or
groups desiring the same shall be made on a form provided by the Town
Clerk and shall be filed with the Town Clerk. The application shall set forth
the following information regarding the proposed street use:
(i) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant or
applicants.
(ii) If the proposed street use is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorizing responsible
heads of such organization.
(iii) The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons
who will be responsible for conducting the proposed use of the
65
street.
(iv) The date and duration of time for which the requested use of the
street is proposed to occur.
(v) An accurate description of that portion of the street proposed to be
used.
(vi) The approximate number of persons for whom use of the proposed
street area is requested.
(vii) The proposed use, described in detail, for which the Street Use
Permit is requested.
(c) Representative at meeting. The person or representative of the group
making application for a Street use Permit shall be present when the Town
Board gives consideration to the granting of said Street Use Permit to
provide any additional information which is reasonably necessary to make
a fair determination as to whether a permit should be granted.
(d) Insurance. The applicant for a Street Use Permit may be required to
indemnify, defend and hold the Town and its employees and agents
harmless against all claims, liability, loss, damage or expense incurred by
the Town on account of any injury to or death of any person or any damage
to property caused by or resulting from the activities for which the permit
is granted. As evidence of the applicant's ability to perform the conditions
of the permit, the applicant may be required to furnish a Certificate of
Comprehensive General Liability Insurance with the Town of Middleton.
The applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond prior to being
granted the permit.
(e) Termination of a street use permit. A Street Use Permit for an event in
progress may be terminated by the Town Chairperson or a law enforcement
officer if the health, safety and welfare of the public appears to be
endangered by activities generated as a result of the event or the event is in
violation of any of the conditions of the permits or Ordinances of the Town
of Middleton. The Town Chairperson or a law enforcement officer has the
authority to revoke a permit or terminate an event in progress if the event
organizers fail to comply with any of the regulations in the street use policy
or conditions stated in the permit.”
66
8.03 Sewers
(1) General Provisions. The intent of this article is to regulate the use of the Town of
Middleton's wastewater facilities and to set forth equitable revenue systems so as
to derive the maximum public benefit. This article has been developed pursuant to
§ 281.58(14)(b) of the Wisconsin Statutes. This article shall supersede any previous
sewer use ordinance and shall repeal all parts thereof that may be inconsistent with
this article. If there is any conflict between this article and any applicable statute,
the statute shall be controlling.
(2) Definitions. The terms defined in Chapter 2 of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage
District's Sewer Use Ordinance shall have the same meaning when used in this
article unless the context specifically indicates otherwise. In addition, unless the
context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the following terms used
in this article shall be:
(a) BUILDING SEWER – A sanitary sewer which begins at the immediate
outside of the foundation wall of any building or structure being served, and
ends at its connection with a Community Sewer or Intercepting Sewer.
(b) CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (CBOD) —
The quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical degradation of organic
material in five days at 20° C. when the oxidation of reduced forms of
nitrogen is prevented by the addition of an inhibitor. This analytical
procedure shall be performed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 and Wis.
Admin. Code ch. NR 219.
(c) COMBINED SEWERS – Sewers which convey a combination of
wastewater and storm water.
(d) COMMERCIAL USER — Any user not classified as a Residential User, a
Multifamily User or an Industrial User and discharges wastewater to a
Community Sewer or Intercepting Sewer.
(e) COMMUNITY SEWER – Any sanitary sewer owned and/or operated by a
Town of Middleton Sanitary District
(f) DIRECTOR - The Director of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District
or other authorized representative of the Commission or District.
(g) MMSD – The Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District.
(h) MMSD'S SEWER USE ORDINANCE — The Sewer Use Ordinance
adopted by the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District in August 2017
and any amendments thereto.
67
(i) INDUSTRIAL USER - Any person who engages in the manufacture or
production of goods and discharges wastewater to a Community Sewer or
Intercepting Sewer.
(j) INTERCEPTING SEWER – Any sanitary sewer owned or operated by the
Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District.
(k) MULTIFAMILY USER — Any dwelling unit containing three or more
family living units which discharges wastewater to a Community Sewer or
Intercepting Sewer.
(l) PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER – A sanitary sewer owned by a Town of
Middleton Sanitary District or the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District.
(m) PRIVATE ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM or
POWTS – A privately owned, operated and maintained wastewater
treatment and disposal system.
(n) PRIVATE SANITARY SEWER – A privately owned sanitary sewer which
conveys wastewater from two or more privately owned buildings.
(o) REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE - A sample of the appropriate wastewater
stream that is representative of daily operations, collected using 24-hour
flow proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible, unless
another sampling technique or sample type is specified by the Town or
MMSD. If compositing of grab samples is specified, compositing shall be
consistent with protocols identified in Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 219 and
EPA or DNR guidance.
(p) RESIDENTIAL USER — Any dwelling unit containing one or two family
living units which discharges wastewater to a Community Sewer or
Intercepting Sewer.
(q) SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER – An Industrial User meeting the
requirements in Chapter 6 of the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District’s
Sewer Use Ordinance.
(r) TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN) — The quantity of organic
nitrogen and ammonia as determined in accordance with 40 C.F.R. pt. 136
and Wis. Admin. Code ch NR 219.
(s) TOTAL PHOSPHORUS (TP) — The quantity of total phosphorus as
determined in accordance with 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 and Wis. Admin. Code
ch.NR 219 .
68
(t) TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) - Total suspended matter that either
floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, Wastewater, or other
liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in 40
C.F.R. pt. 136 and Wis. Admin. Code ch. NR 219.
(u) TOWN – The Town of Middleton, a Town of Middleton Sanitary District,
or an authorized representative of either the Town or a Town of Middleton
Sanitary District.
(v) TOWN SANITARY DISTRICT – Any Town of Middleton Sanitary
District.
(w) WASTEWATER UNIT — The average amount of wastewater that would
be generated by one full-time employee of a Commercial User.
(3) Use of Public Sewers Required.
(a) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town or in
any area under the jurisdiction of said Town any wastewater or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this article, Chapter 46 of the
Dane County Sanitary Ordinance, or under the provisions of the public
health laws of the State of Wisconsin.
(b) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of wastewater in the Town.
(c) The owners of all dwellings, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the
Town and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is a
Public Sanitary Sewer in the Town or MMSD is hereby required to connect
to the Public Sanitary Sewer in accordance with this article within 90 days
after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said Public Sanitary
Sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. Any septic tank, cesspool or
similar Privately Owned Wastewater Treatment System (POWTS) that is
no longer in use shall be properly abandoned in accordance with Chapter 46
of the Dane County Sanitary Ordinance and Wis. Admin. Code ch. 383. A
Private Sewerage System Abandonment Form shall be submitted to the
Sanitarian of the Public Health Madison & Dane County Division of
Environmental Health.
(4) Private Onsite Wastewater Treatment Systems (POWTS).
69
(a) Where a Public Sanitary Sewer is not available under the provisions of §
8.03(3), the Building Sewer shall be connected to a Private Onsite
Wastewater Treatment System (POWTS) complying with the provisions of
this article, Chapter 46 of the Dane County Sanitary Ordinance, and Chapter
SPS 383 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(b) Before starting construction of a POWTS, the owner shall first obtain a
written sanitary permit signed by the Sanitarian of the Public Health
Madison & Dane County Division of Environmental Health. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Public
Health Madison & Dane County Division of Environmental Health, which
the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other
information as are deemed necessary by the Public Health Madison & Dane
County Sanitarian.
(c) A permit for a POWTS shall not become effective until the installation is
completed to the satisfaction of the Public Health Madison & Dane County
Sanitarian. The Sanitarian shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage
of construction; and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify
the Public Health Madison & Dane County Sanitarian when the work is
ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered.
The inspection shall be made no later than the first working day after the
receipt of notice by the Public Health Madison & Dane County Sanitarian.
(d) The owner shall operate and maintain the POWTS in a sanitary manner at
all times, in accordance with the Public Health Madison & Dane County
Division of Environmental Health approved maintenance plan, and at no
expense to the Town.
(e) No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Public Health
Madison & Dane County Division of Environmental Health or the State of
Wisconsin.
(f) Holding tanks are not allowed in the Town unless a variance is granted by
the Town Board.
(5) Connection to Community Sewers.
(a) Prohibited Connections: No combined Sewers, building foundation drains,
septic tank connections, groundwater discharges, rain water drains, roof
runoff drains, street drains, and building drains subject to backflow or back
water shall be connected to Community Sewers.
(b) Sanitary Sewer Connections:
70
(i) No connections of a Building Sewer or Private Sanitary Sewer to a
Community Sewer shall be made without the approval of the Town
under this Section. This includes existing connections which are
reinstated or altered in any way as part of regular maintenance
activities or during replacement or reconstruction projects.
(ii) Applications for permission to connect to a Community Sewer shall
be made in writing to the Town by a master plumber or utility
contractor licensed by the State of Wisconsin and authorized by the
owner or operator of the premises for which such connection is
desired. The application shall include a statement giving the exact
location of the premises, the purposes for which the connection is to
be used, the time when the work is to be done, any special
circumstances or conditions of the connection, and such other
information that may be required by the Town. The application shall
constitute an agreement by the owner or operator and said licensed
master plumber or licensed utility contractor that they will be bound
by and subject to the rules and regulations of the Town.
(iii) The Town shall determine whether to approve such connection.
Upon approval of the application, the Town will issue a permit
granting the right to make the connection, specifying special
conditions which must be met prior to connection, and such
additional conditions as it may require. A nonrefundable permit fee
shall be paid to the Town prior to the issuing of the permit.
(iv) No connection shall be made with any Community Sewers without
the inspection and approval of such connection by the Town.
(v) No work of laying the Building Sewer or Private Sanitary Sewer
shall be commenced or continued without the required connection
permit being on the premises and in the hands of the licensed master
plumber or licensed utility contractor or one employed by him/her.
(vi) Application for Industrial Waste Discharge: If a connection to a
Community Sewer will convey industrial wastewater, a separate
application must be made to the Town and to the MMSD. Approvals
by the Town and by MMSD are required for all industrial
wastewater discharges.
(c) Supervision of Construction of Community Sewers, Private Sanitary
Sewers, and Building Sewers:
(i) Construction of Community Sewers shall be under the direction of
71
a licensed Professional Engineer. Such Engineer shall keep accurate
records of the location, depth and length of sewers as built and the
location of the Y-branches or slants.
(ii) All Building Sewers and Private Sanitary Sewers to be connected to
a Community Sewer shall be inspected by the Town and constructed
as required by ch. SPS 382 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(iii) The building owner shall give the Town written notice at least five
(5) business days prior to commencing construction of any
connection to a Community Sewer to allow the Town to inspect
construction of the connection.
(6) Connection to MMSD’s Intercepting Sewers.
(a) Prohibited Connections: No Combined Sewers, building foundation drains,
septic tank connections, groundwater discharges, rain water drains, roof
runoff drains, street drains, and building drains subject to backflow or back
water shall be connected to Intercepting Sewers.
(b) Sanitary Sewer Connections: No connections of a Building Sewer or
Private Sanitary Sewer directly to an Intercepting Sewer of the MMSD shall
be made, without the approval of the MMSD. Applications shall be made
in accordance with Section 4.3.3 of the MMSD's Sewer Use Ordinance.
(c) Supervision of Construction of Building Sewers & Private Sanitary Sewers
Connecting to Intercepting Sewers. Intercepting sewers shall be
constructed and inspected as required by Section 4.3.3 of MMSD’s Sewer
Use Ordinance.
(7) MMSD Connection Charges. In accordance with the MMSD’s Sewer Use
Ordinance, for each sewer connection made to a Community Sewer or Intercepting
Sewer, a connection charge is billed to and paid by the Town Sanitary District in
which the sewer connection is made. In turn, the Town will bill, and the building
owner shall pay, the Town for said connection charge. The connection charge shall
be in such amount as the MMSD may set as part of a fee schedule adopted by
resolution of the MMSD Commission and shall be payable at such time or times as
the Commission may require. The failure to pay the connection charge at or before
the time the connection is made shall be subject to additional fees or penalties as
the MMSD Commission shall determine. Any fees or penalties or additional
charges for failure to pay the connection charge at or before the time the connection
is made shall be paid by the building owner.
(8) Abandonment of Sewer Connections. All Building Sewers and Private Sanitary
Sewers proposed for abandonment must be plugged according to the Town and
72
MMSD’s standards. The owner of the Building Sewer or Private Sanitary Sewer
shall obtain an approval from the Town prior to disconnecting the sewer from the
Public Sanitary Sewer and/or demolishing any buildings or structures which its
serves.
(9) Use of Public Sanitary Sewers.
(a) Prohibited Discharges: Prohibited discharges shall be the same as those
prohibited by Sections 5.1 and 5.2 of the MMSD's Sewer Use Ordinance.
In addition, no person shall discharge wastes to a Community Sewer or
Intercepting Sewer that cause, or are capable of causing, either alone or with
other substances:
(i) A condition unacceptable to any public agency having regulatory
jurisdiction over the Town.
(ii) Use of a disproportionate share of the Town's wastewater facilities.
(b) Pharmaceutical Wastes Prohibited: No persons shall dispose of
pharmaceuticals in a manner that results in intentional discharges of
pharmaceuticals to Community Sewers or Interceptor Sewers.
(c) Discharges from Dental Clinics: Requirements for discharges from dental
clinics shall be in accordance with Section 7.1 of MMSD’s Sewer Use
Ordinance.
(d) Limitations on Discharge Characteristics: The limitations on the
characteristics of wastewater discharged to any Public Sanitary Sewer in the
Town shall be the same as the limits set in Sections 5.1 & 5.2 of the
MMSD's Sewer Use Ordinance.
(e) Accidental Discharge of Prohibited Wastewater: Any person who
discharges into a Public Sanitary Sewer wastes or wastewater prohibited
under this article shall immediately report such a discharge to the Town and
to the Director of the MMSD. Within fifteen (15) days of such discharge, a
detailed written statement describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures taken to prevent a future occurrence shall be submitted to the
Town and the Director of the MMSD. Where the Town or Director of
MMSD deems necessary, Industrial Users shall provide facilities to prevent
accidental discharges or spills of wastes or Wastewaters prohibited under
this Ordinance.
(f) Alternatives to Acceptance of Wastewater: If any waters or wastes are
discharged or are proposed to be discharged to a Public Sanitary Sewer in
excess of those limitations enumerated in Subsection (d), the Town, subject
73
to approval of the Director of the MMSD, may:
(i) Reject the wastes;
(ii) Require pretreatment;
(iii) Control the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(iv) Recover the increased costs of handling and treating such wastes
from the person discharging the wastes.
(g). Pretreatment of Industrial Wastes: Pretreatment of industrial discharges
shall be in accordance with Section 6.3 of the MMSD's Sewer Use
Ordinance.
(h) Pretreatment and Other Obligations for Significant Industrial Users:
(i) Significant Industrial User Classification: The Town and/or MMSD
may classify an Industrial User as a “Significant Industrial User” in
accordance with Section 6.1 of MMSD’s Sewer Use Ordinance.
(ii) Permit requirements for Significant Industrial Users shall be in
accordance with Section 6.2 of MMSD’s Sewer Use Ordinance.
(iii) Pretreatment facilities requirements for Significant Industrial Users
shall be in accordance with Section 6.3 of MMSD’s Sewer Use
Ordinance.
(iv) Requirements for monitoring, inspection, reporting, slug control,
by-pass provisions, records retention, and violations of pretreatment
requirements shall be in accordance with Sections 6.4 to 6.9 of
MMSD’s Sewer Use Ordinance
(i) Limitations of Discharge of Holding Tank Wastes, Septage and Other
Hauled Waste: No person shall discharge any holding tank wastes, septage,
or other hauled waste directly into a manhole or other opening in a Public
Sanitary Sewer. Discharge of holding tank wastes, septage and other hauled
wastes at MMSD’s receiving facilities shall be in accordance with Section
8.2 of the MMSD's Sewer Use Ordinance.
(j) Sand and Grease Trap Installations: Building owners shall install grease,
oil and sand interceptors at repair garages, gasoline stations, car washes, and
other industrial or commercial establishments, where necessary in the
opinion of the Town or the MMSD’s Director to prevent discharge of sand,
flammable wastes, oil or grease in amounts exceeding the limits of Chapter
74
5 of MMSD’s Sewer Use Ordinance. All such traps shall be constructed and
maintained by the building owner at their expense, in accordance with the
Wisconsin Plumbing Codes and the specifications of the Town; and shall
be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. No separated solids, oil or
grease from such traps shall be disposed of in a Public Sanitary Sewer.
(k) Special Permits for Commercial or Industrial Users: The MMSD may
require a permit under Section 7.2 of the MMSD’s Sewer Use Ordinance
for Commercial or Industrial Users to regulate the discharge wastes and
wastewater to a Community Sewer or Intercepting Sewer that have the
potential individually or cumulatively to impact the ability of the MMSD to
meet its WPDES Permit requirements or impact the ability of the sewer
system to convey wastewater to MMSD’s wastewater treatment plant. Such
wastes and wastewaters include those stated in Section 7.2.1 of MMSD’s
Sewer Use Ordinance.
(10) Wastewater Measurement, Sampling and Reporting.
(a) The Town may require any User to construct a sampling manhole or other
monitoring facility to facilitate collection of a Representative Sample of
wastewater being discharged to a Public Sanitary Sewer. Construction of
such facility must be completed within 90 days after the User has been
notified of the requirement, unless the Town grants an extension of time. In
the event that the User fails to construct such a facility, the Town may do
so and shall assess the cost to the User.
(b) Monitoring facilities shall be constructed, operated and inspected and
reports filed in accordance with Section 6.4 of the MMSD's Sewer Use
Ordinance.
(11) Service Charges.
(a) User Classification: All users shall be classified as residential, multifamily,
commercial, industrial or significant industrial.
(b) Definitions: The following terms shall have the following meanings under
this section:
(i) DEBT SERVICE CHARGES — Includes all costs associated with
repayment of debts incurred for the construction and/or
rehabilitation of the wastewater collection system and treatment
facility.
(ii) NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER —
Wastewater with concentrations of CBOD, Suspended Solids, Total
75
Kjeldahl Nitrogen and Total Phosphorus no greater than 200, 250,
40 and 10 milligrams per liter (mg/L), respectively.
(iii) NORMAL USER — A user whose contributions to the sewerage
system consist only of normal domestic strength wastewater
originating from a house, apartment, flat, or other living quarters
occupied by a person or persons constituting a distinct household,
business or commercial enterprise.
(iv) OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — Includes all costs
associated with the operation and maintenance of the sewerage
system.
(v) REPLACEMENT COSTS — Includes all costs necessary to replace
equipment as required to maintain capacity and performance during
the design life of the facility. A separate, segregated, distinct
replacement fund shall be established and used for only replacement
of equipment.
(c) Policy: It shall be the policy of each of the Town of Middleton sanitary
districts to obtain sufficient revenues to pay the costs of the operation and
maintenance of the sewerage system, including a replacement fund (i.e., a
cash account to be used for future expenditures for obtaining or installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain
the capacity and performance of the sewerage system during the service life
for which such facilities were designed and constructed), through a system
of sewer service charges as defined in this section. The system shall assure
that each User of the sewerage system pays its proportionate share of the
cost of such facilities.
(d) Basis for Service Charge: The annual service charge shall be sufficient to
pay the billing and customer related administration expenses and the
operation and maintenance expenses, including any replacement costs, of
the sewerage system. The rates in this section shall be reviewed not less
than biennially. Rates shall be adjusted, as required, to reflect actual number
and size of Users and actual costs. Users will be notified annually of the
portion of service charges attributable to operation and maintenance.
(e) Sewer Service Charge Imposed: A sewer service charge is hereby imposed
upon each lot, parcel of land, building, or premises served by a Public
Sanitary Sewer and wastewater facilities or otherwise discharging sewage,
including industrial wastes, into the pubic sewerage system. Such sewer
service charge shall be payable as hereinafter provided and in amount
determinable as follows:
76
(i) Category A service charges shall be imposed on users whose water
use is metered and whose sewer discharges are normal domestic
strength wastewater. The Category A sewer service charge is of the
following form:
Service charge = Customer Charge + Volume Charge
Customer Charge = A flat rate based on the size of the water meter
Volume Charge = A volume of metered water in thousands of
gallons multiplied by a volume rate
Volume Rate = The volume unit price expressed in dollars per
1,000 gallons
(ii) Category B service charges shall be imposed on users whose water
use is not metered and whose sewage discharges are normal
domestic strength wastewater. The Category B sewer service charge
shall be of the form as follows:
Service Charge = Equivalent Residential Units multiplied by the
Equivalent Residential Unit Rate.
No user shall be assigned less than one Equivalent Residential Unit.
The number of Residential Unit Equivalents for nonresidential users
shall be as determined by the sanitary district commissioners.
(iii) Category C service charges shall be imposed on users whose sewer
discharges are high strength wastewater having concentrations of
Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand (CBOD) greater than
200 milligrams per liter (mg/L), and/or Total Suspended Solids
(TSS) greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/L), and/or total
Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN) greater than 40 milligrams per liter
(mg/L), and/or Total Phosphorus (TP) greater than 10 milligrams
per liter (mg/L). The form of the Category C service charge is as
follows:
Service Charge = Customer Charge + Volume Charge + High
Strength Surcharge.
The Customer Charge and the Volume Charge are similar to those
components of the Category A Service Charge.
High Strength Surcharge = The excessive CBOD, TSS, TKN, and
TP multiplied by the respective CBOD, TSS, TKN and TP rates.
The excessive CBOD, TSS, TKN, and TP are the portions of each
of these constituents that are in excess of normal domestic strength
wastewater. The excessive amounts of CBOD, TSS, TKN, and TP
77
are expressed in pounds, and their respective rates are expressed in
dollars per pound.
(f) Special Charges: Whenever any User discharges wastes into any Public
Sanitary Sewer which cause physical damage to the Town’s wastewater
facilities and/or which cause the Town to incur unusual additional costs, the
Town may assess a special charge against such User for the work required
to repair the facilities and/or to recover the unusual additional costs. Special
charges shall be in addition to the service charges specified herein; and shall
be billed directly to the User.
(g) Special Assessments: Nothing contained in this Article or elsewhere in this
Ordinance shall be construed as prohibiting or precluding the Town from
assessing and levying special assessments against property, pursuant to
Wis. Stat. § 200.13, as amended from time to time.
(h) Reassignment of Sewer Users. The sanitary district will reassign sewer
users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if wastewater
sampling programs and other related information indicate a change of
categories is necessary.
(12) Billing and Collection.
(a) Service Charges Billing and Collection: Service charges shall be billed
annually. A surcharge of 1% of the service charge per month will be added
to bills not paid by the 10th day of the following month.
(b) Delinquent Payments: Delinquent payments shall be collected in the
manner provided by §§ 66.0821 and 200.13(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
(13) Enforcement of MMSD’s Ordinance.
Enforcement and abatement of the MMSD's Sewer Use Ordinance shall be in
accordance with Chapter 11 of the MMSD's Sewer Use Ordinance.
(14) Violations and Penalties; Appeals.
(a) Notice of Violation and Special Order of Remedy. Any person found in
violation of this article or of any prohibition, limitation or requirement
contained therein will be served with a written notice stating the nature of
the violation and issuing a special order for the appropriate remedy thereof.
(b) Appeal Procedure: Any person who objects to a notice of violation or a
special order shall, upon request made to the President of the applicable
Sanitary District Commission, be entitled to be heard by the Commission
78
with respect to the objection.
(c) Penalties: A violation of any rule or order of the applicable Sanitary District
Commission shall be a public nuisance pursuant to § 146.13 of the
Wisconsin Statutes and shall be abated and damages and costs recovered
therefor in accordance with §§ 146.13 and 254.59, Wis. Stats. Any person
who fails to comply with a special order within the time specified shall be
declared to be a person creating a public nuisance enjoinable under §
254.59(2), Wis. Stats., and shall forfeit to the Town not less than $25 nor
more than $500 for each day such failure continues.
(d) Falsifying Information: No person shall knowingly make any false
statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document filed with
the Town or the District, or falsify, tamper with or knowingly render
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article or
the District Sewer Use Ordinance. Any person who violates this provision
shall be subject to the penalties imposed under Subsection C above.
(15) Purpose. The purpose of sections 8.03(15) through (23) is to provide for the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Middleton and protect
waters of the State through the regulation of illicit discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system as required by federal and state law. These sections
establish methods for controlling the discharge of pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system owned or operated by the Town of Middleton in order
to comply with the requirements of the Clean Water Act, § 283.33, Wis. Stats., and
the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System municipal stormwater
discharge permit program under Chapter NR 216, Wis. Adm. Code. The objectives
of these sections are:
(a) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm
sewer system associated with discharges from any user of the municipal
storm sewer system.
(b) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system.
(c) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
(16) Definitions. For the purposes of sections 8.03(15) through (23), the following
definitions are applicable:
(a) AUTHORIZED AGENCY — Any person(s) designated by the Town
Board of the Town of Middleton to administer, implement and/or enforce
sections 8.03(15) through (23), and any employees or designees of such
79
person(s).
(b) ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows the discharge of sanitary waste to the
municipal separate storm sewer and any connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system from indoor drains and sinks.
(c) ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the municipal separate storm
sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges
with a Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or other
discharges allowed locally.
(d) MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER or MS4 — A conveyance or
system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm
drains, which meets the following criteria:
(i) Which is owned or operated by the Town of Middleton.
(ii) Which is designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater.
(iii) Which is not a combined sewer conveying both sanitary wastewater
and stormwater.
(iv) Which is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works
that provides secondary or more stringent treatment.
(e) NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the municipal
separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
(f) STORMWATER — Surface runoff and drainage of rainfall and snow or ice
melt.
(g) WATERS OF THE STATE — Those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake
Superior within the boundaries of Wisconsin, all lakes, bays, rivers,
streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes,
watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater,
natural or artificial, public or private, within the state or under its
jurisdiction, except those waters which are entirely confined and retained
completely upon the property of a person.
(17) Applicability. Sections 8.03(15) through (23) shall apply to all discharges to the
MS4 and to all activities that can reasonably be expected to result in a discharge to
the MS4.
80
(18) Responsibility for administration. The Town Administrator shall be responsible
for the general administration, implementation and enforcement of the provisions
of sections 8.03(15) through (23). The Town Engineer shall be responsible for all
inspections, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with said sections. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
Town Administrator or Town Engineer may be delegated in writing by the Town
Administrator or the Town Engineer to other persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the Town or Town Engineer.
(19) Ultimate responsibility. The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant
to this article are minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor
imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no
contamination, pollution or unauthorized discharges.
(20) Prohibitions.
(a) Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the MS4 or waters of the State any materials, including, but
not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit
discharge to the MS4 is prohibited. The following non-stormwater
discharges or flows are generally not considered illicit discharges if done in
a nonpolluting manner: water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted
stream flows, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated
pumped groundwater, discharges from potable water sources, foundation
drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, lawn watering,
individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and
wetlands, de-chlorinated swimming pool water, street wash water and fire
fighting.
(b) Prohibition of illicit connections. The construction, use, maintenance or
continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. This
prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made
in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law
or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A person is
considered to be in violation of this section if the person connects a line
conveying sanitary waste to the MS4 or allows such a connection to
continue.
(21) Monitoring of discharges; access to facilities. The authorized agency shall be
permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under sections 8.03(15)
through (23) as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with said
sections. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry onto its premises, the discharger shall
81
make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the
authorized agency.
(22) Notification of spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any
person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected
release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or
pollutants discharging into stormwater, the MS4 or water of the State, said person
shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of
such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency
dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person
shall notify the authorized agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than
the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized agency within three business
days of the phone notice.
(23) Enforcement.
(a) Sections 8.03(15) through (22) may be enforced by citation issued by the
Town Administrator or his or her designee.
(b) Any person found to have violated any provision of sections 8.03(15)
through (22) may be required to forfeit not less than $50 nor more than
$500. Each day or part of a day a violation occurs or continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
(c) Every violation of sections 8.03(15) through (22) is a public nuisance.
Compliance with sections 8.03(15) through (22) may be enforced by
injunction restraining the person or entity from activities which would
create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for
forfeiture before resorting to injunctive relief.
(d) The Town Administrator or designee may, upon discovery of any violation
of sections 8.03(15) through (22), take any abatement actions reasonably
necessary to prevent damage to the waters of the State. The costs incurred
by the Town, plus interest and legal costs, shall be billed to the record owner
of the property, and if not paid, shall be entered on the tax rolls and collected
as a special charge pursuant to § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
(e) The remedies listed herein are not exclusive of any other remedies available
under any applicable federal, state or local law, and the Town Engineer may
seek cumulative remedies.
82
(f) The Town Administrator is authorized to refer any violation of sections
8.03(15) through (22) to the Town Attorney for the commencement of legal
proceedings.
1
CHAPTER 9
PARKS AND RECREATION
9.01 Park definitions and regulations.
9.02 Radio-controlled devices prohibited in parks.
9.03 Use of metal detectors on public property.
9.04 Fees and user regulations.
9.05 Public utilities and private construction.
9.06 Reservation of park space or shelters.
9.01 Park definitions and regulations.
(1) Purpose and definitions. In order to protect the parks within the Town of Middleton
from injury, damage or desecration, these regulations are enacted. Definitions as
used in this Chapter are as follows:
(a) PARK – The term “park” shall mean any area dedicated to the public use as
a park, parkway, trail, recreation area or facility, public easement or
conservancy area in the Town of Middleton and shall include all grounds,
structures and watercourses within such areas.
(b) ACTIVE PARK – “Active Park” shall mean a park with use areas
characterized by formal fields (e.g., baseball, soccer), outdoor courts (e.g.,
basketball, tennis and volleyball), open free play areas, picnic shelters and
event areas. Active Park use areas may include unstructured areas for
softball, soccer, flying disc, basketball or other pick-up games. A good
design will include flexible spaces that accommodate a range of occasional
activities or events and allow separate activities to take place without
disturbing adjacent areas. Active Park category includes: mini-parks,
neighborhood parks, and community parks.
(c) PASSIVE PARK – “Passive Park” shall mean a park designated for passive
uses. A basic level of passive use is viewing – views of nature, seasonal
interests, and human activities that permit or encourage the unobtrusive
engagement of viewing. In this context, passive recreation as defined for a
passive park may include hiking, jogging, cross-country skiing, horseback
riding in designated areas and other non-motorized outdoor recreation
activities that do not materially alter the landscape, degrade environmental
quality or disrupt established tranquility. A park that is designated as
passive may accommodate activities that are engaged in by individuals or
small groups that are not dependent on a delineated area designed for
specific non-commercial activities, for example, educational field trips or
Audubon groups. No organized sports that require athletic fields or open
space such as soccer, baseball, or commercial uses, are permitted in passive
2
parks. All Town of Middleton conservancy areas are passive parks. Passive
Park category includes: nature areas and conservancies. All Town of
Middleton conservancy areas are Passive Parks.
(d) PRIMARY RECREATIONAL TRAILS – An Easement or dedication for a
linear corridor, at least 30 feet in width (or at least 20 feet in width if
adjacent to a public right-of-way), that is proposed for development by the
Town of Middleton as part of a continuous public trail system linking
neighborhoods with parks, schools, conservancy areas, historic sites, and
other public facilities and public open spaces. As Owner of the Public
Recreational Trail, the Town shall have the right to improve, repair,
maintain, and allow public use of the Public Recreational Trail Easement as
the Town from time to time determines. Trail surfaces are typically crushed
stone or crushed limestone screenings. Other surfaces, such as compacted
earth, mowed grass, wood chips, or asphalt pavement, may be permissible
as determined by the Town. These trails are primarily intended for use by
bicycles and pedestrians. Other uses may be permissible as determined by
the Town.
(e) SECONDARY RECREATIONAL TRAILS – An Easement or dedication
for a linear corridor, at least 15 feet in width, that is proposed for
development by the Town of Middleton as part of a public trail system
within neighborhoods, parkland, conservancy areas and other public open
spaces providing access to Primary Recreational Trails from neighborhoods
and/or providing corridors within and throughout parkland, conservancy
areas and other public open spaces. As Owner of the Public Recreational
Trail, the Town shall generally have the right to improve, repair, maintain,
and allow public use of the Public Recreational Trail Easement as the Town
from time to time determines. Trail surfaces are typically compacted earth,
mowed grass, or wood chips. Other surfaces, such as crushed stone, crushed
limestone screenings, or asphalt pavement may be permissible as
determined by the Town. These trails are primarily intended for use by
pedestrians. Other uses, such as bicycle or equestrian uses, may be
permissible as determined by the Town.
(2) Specific regulations.
(a) Active uses Prohibited in Passive Parks. Organized sports that require
athletic fields or open space such as soccer, baseball or commercial uses,
are prohibited in passive parks, unless written authority is obtained from the
Town Board or Designee.
(b) Unreasonable Noise Prohibited. No auto radio, portable radio, television,
band instrument or other sound device shall be operated in any town park
at such volume as to unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of
the park facilities by other users of the park and neighboring property
3
owners.
(c) Animals. No person having control of a dog, cat, horse or other pet shall
allow or permit such dog, cat, horse or other pet to enter or remain in any
park or trail (except parks and trails exempted by the Town Board where
animals will be permitted subject to rules established by the Town Board).
The Park Commission shall cause signs to be posted in parks notifying the
public of this prohibition. The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply
service dogs individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit
of an individual with a disability, or to dogs or horses used by or under local
law enforcement officers in the course of official police business.
(d) Bill posting. No person shall post, paste, fasten, paint or attach any placard,
bill, notice, sign or advertising matter upon any structure, tree or other
natural object in any park, except park regulations and other signs
authorized by the Town Board or designee.
(e) Trapping. No person shall trap in any park unless specific written authority
is first obtained from the Town Board or designee.
(f) Release of pets, wildlife, non-native plants and chemicals. Releasing or
abandoning any pet or wildlife or introducing any plant, chemical or other
agent in or on any park is prohibited unless authorized by the Town Board
or designee.
(g) Making of fires. No person shall start, tend or maintain a fire except in
personal grills or designated fireplaces. Personal grills shall be used only in
designated picnic areas. The use of personal grills is permitted provided
lawns and vegetation are not endangered. Unburned fuel, coals, and ashes
may not be placed in park containers except those specifically designated
for this purpose. If no proper designated container is accessible, then the
unburned fuel, coals or ashes shall be removed from the park or recreation
area to prevent fire or damage to any park property.
(h) Protection of park property. No person shall kill, injure, remove or disturb,
or attempt to injure or disturb, waterfowl, birds or animals, wild or
domestic, within any park unless authorized by Town Board or designee.
No person shall climb any tree or remove flowers or fruit, wild or cultivated,
or break, cut down, trample upon, remove or in any manner injure, deface,
write upon or ill use any tree, shrub, flower, flower bed, turf, soil, sand,
fountain, ornament, building, structure, apparatus, bench, table, official
notice, sign or other property within any park.
(i) Motorized vehicles. No person shall operate an unlicensed or licensed
motorized vehicle, except for authorized maintenance vehicles, outside of
areas specifically designated as parking areas, except areas where the
4
operation of such vehicles is specifically permitted. For purposes of this
chapter, “motorized vehicle” includes snowmobiles, ATVs, UTVs, NEVs,
mopeds, scooters, golf carts and any other motorized device used to
transport persons or property, including electronic bicycles (e-bikes) with
the motor in operation.
(j) Non-motorized vehicle regulations.
(i) No person shall ride bicycles, e-bikes with or without the motor in
operation or other non-motorized vehicles upon trails or grounds
unless the trails or grounds are designated for such use.
(ii) Bicycles, e-bikes without the motor in operation and other nonmotorized
vehicles may be operated in areas not otherwise
designated for their use, if authorized by a special use permit issued
by the Town Board or designee.
(k) Reckless driving in parks prohibited. No person shall operate a motor
vehicle in a reckless manner in any park.
(l) Parking in parks. No person shall park any motor vehicle in any park in the
Town except in a designated parking area. Parking areas are provided for
users of parks and facilities only. Parking for any other purpose is
prohibited.
(m) Throwing stones and missiles prohibited. No person shall throw stones or
other missiles in or into any park.
(n) Removal of park equipment prohibited. No person shall remove benches,
seats, tables, or other park equipment from any park.
(o) Closing hours. Parks are open from 6am-10pm unless specifically posted
otherwise at a park. Trails not located within active parks are open from
sunrise to sunset. The Town Board or designee may authorize specific parks
to be open at other hours for designated events. It shall be unlawful for any
person to be in or to remain in any park or on any trail outside of these
designated hours.
(p) Speed limit. No other person shall operate any vehicle in a Town park in
excess of 10 miles per hour unless otherwise posted.
(q) Firearms, bows and arrows.
(i) Except as expressly permitted by law, within a Town park, it shall
be unlawful for any unauthorized person to have in his possession
or under his control:
5
1. Any firearm or airgun as defined in the Wisconsin Statutes
and including gas operated guns, pellet guns or any device
which will propel projectiles, unless the same is unloaded
and enclosed in a carrying case.
2. Any bow, unless the same is unstrung or enclosed in a
carrying case or unless written permission has first been
granted by the Town Board or designee to use a bow in a
specific, supervised sport or activity, and then only within a
designated area, provided, however, that it shall be unlawful
to engage in any sport or activity involving a strung bow that
constitutes a safety hazard in the judgment of any law
enforcement officer. Hunting is prohibited in all Town parks
and recreational areas.
(ii) No person shall carry, shoot, fire or discharge any gun, pistol,
slingshot, rocket, torpedo, or any fireworks of any description within
or into any park unless written authority is obtained from the Town
Board or designee and all required permits have been obtained.
(r) Vending. Vending is prohibited in Town parks unless authorized by the
Town Board or designee.
(s) Structures. No temporary or permanent structures are to be erected in a park
without specific approval of the Town Board or designee.
(t) Snowmobiles. No person shall operate a snowmobile in a park except in
designated areas. Snowmobiles shall only be operated on designated trails
to conform with state statutes.
(u) Golfing and sporting activities. No person shall golf or practice golf in a
park or recreation area. All sporting activities must be held in areas so
designated for that purpose.
(v) Camping. No overnight camping shall be permitted in a park, unless written
authority is obtained from the Town Board or designee.
(w) Interference with permit holder. No person shall, in any manner harass,
disturb, or interfere with persons holding written permits or reservations
approved by the Town Board or designee for the use of park or recreation
facilities or park shelters.
(x) Littering prohibited. No person shall litter, dump or deposit any rubbish,
refuse, earth or other material in a park except by placing such materials in
receptacles provided for such purpose.
6
(y) Glass beverage bottles in parks prohibited. No person shall bring into, carry
onto or possess while in any public park glass bottles or glass containers,
including those containing or normally used for containing soda water,
fermented malt beverages or alcohol. [Added 6-18-2007]
(z) Horse and carriages. No person shall ride a horse or drive a horse-driven
vehicle in any park, except on roads or designated equestrian trails, unless
prior approval of the Town Board or designee is obtained. It shall be
unlawful for any person to ride a horse or drive a horse-driven vehicle in a
careless, negligent or reckless manner which may endanger the safety and
well-being of others. No person shall ride a horse which cannot be held
under such control that it may be easily turned or stopped. Pedestrians shall
have the right-of-way when crossing an equestrian trail, and whenever
groups of people are visible within 100 feet, horses shall be ridden at slow
gait. [Added 6-18-2007]
(aa) Removing tree protectors. No person shall remove any device installed for
the protection of trees and shrubs. [Added 6-18-2007]
(bb) Controlled substances. Possessing, using, growing or dispensing of a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances
Act1 is prohibited in all Town parks. [Added 6-18-2007]
(cc) Alcohol. No person shall carry in, consume or be under the influence of
alcohol in the Town parks after the parks have closed. [Added 6-18-2007]
(dd) Flying aircraft. The taking off or landing of aircraft, including hot air
balloons, hang gliders, or any other type of flying or gliding aircraft, or
dropping of parachutists or objects from the air into any park is prohibited.
(ee) Fire balloons. No person shall launch a fire balloon (also known as a sky
balloon or Chinese lantern) in any public park.
9.02 Radio-controlled devices prohibited in parks.
(1) Definition. Radio Controlled Device means any toy, model, ship, boat, airplane,
unmanned aerial vehicle and drone, or similar device, propelled by a motor and
where directional and/or operational controls are remotely directed by means of a
radio transmitter.
(2) Restriction. No person shall fly a radio-controlled device in any park in the Town
of Middleton except in areas specifically designated and posted for such purpose.
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
7
9.03 Use of metal detectors on public property. Absent authorization by the Town Board or
designee, the use of metal detectors and digging for buried objects on Town property are
prohibited.
9.04 Fees and user regulations.
(1) Fee schedule. The Town Board shall establish a fee schedule for exclusive and large
group use of the parks and for such other uses and activities it deems proper. It
shall be unlawful for any person to use any Town of Middleton park facility, shelter,
land, or recreational area for which a fee or charge has been approved by the Town
Board without payment of such fee or charge. Fees and charges shall be reviewed
annually following a recommendation from the Park Commission and approval by
the Town Board. Fees and charges may be waived by the Town Board or designee
at their exclusive discretion.
(2) Special fees. Any park structure, facility, or area may be reserved or rented for
special purposes subject to the approval of the Town Board or designee. Fees may
be established for recreational programs where costs warrant them.
(3) Additional rules. Rules and regulations may be made from time to time by the Park
Commission and/or Town Board governing the further use of and enjoyment of
Town parks, parkways, playgrounds, campgrounds, and their facilities. Any person
who shall violate such rules or regulations may be excluded from the use of such
facility.
(4) Permits. Any person to whom a permit shall have been issued by the Town Board
or agent thereof shall be bound by the provisions of all ordinances and rules of the
Town of Middleton as fully as though the laws were inserted in each permit.
9.05 Public utilities and private construction.
(1) Public utilities; location. The location of all sewers and receivers, gas pipes, water
pipes, stopcock boxes, hydrants, lamp posts, telegraph, telephone and electric
power posts and lines, manholes, conduits, and pumps within any Town park or
parkway shall be subject to the jurisdiction and control of the Town Board, and
their construction, repair or relocation shall be undertaken only after written
permission is received from the Town Board or designee.
(2) Private construction.
(a) No curb, whether stone, concrete, or grass, shall be cut for the purpose of
constructing a private driveway across any parkway border, nor for any
other purpose, without the written permission of the Town Board or
designee.
(b) The location, width, grade, and construction of all paths, driveways, and
8
roadways across any sidewalk bordering along any parkway shall be subject
to the approval of the Town Board or designee and constructed only after
written permission is obtained from the Town Board or designee.
9.06 Reservation of park space or shelters and large group activities.
(1) Policy on reservation. The Town-owned parks, park facilities and shelter areas are
primarily for the nonexclusive use of the residents and visitors of the Town of
Middleton. However, under proper circumstances, exclusive use or large group use
of the same or parts thereof may be permitted. This section is intended to regulate
exclusive and large group use of Town-owned parks, park facilities, shelters, or
parts thereof in the Town to the end that the general welfare of the Town is
protected.
(2) Reservation of park space. A person or group, firm, organization, partnership, or
corporation may reserve the use of a park, a park facility or shelter by written
application filed with the Town Office for a permit for exclusive use of the same.
The Town Office shall issue permits for exclusive use of a shelter, while the Town
Board or Designee shall issue permits for the exclusive use of Town parks. The
Town Board shall annually establish a fee to be charged for the rental of any park
shelter, park or park facility. Such fee shall apply to a rental period of 24 hours or
less. All groups or activities involving 20 or more persons, other than organized
sports activities whose use of the parks has been approved, shall be required to
(3) Large group activities. All groups or activities involving 20 or more persons, other
than organized sports activities for which use of the parks has been approved, shall
be required to obtain a permit for use of any park, park facility or shelter area
whether such use is exclusive or nonexclusive.
(4) Application. Applications shall be filed with the Town Office at least 14 days prior
to the date on which the exclusive use of the entire park is requested or a large
group activity is to occur, or at least three days prior to the date on which a shelter
is to be used, and shall set forth the following information regarding the proposed
exclusive use:
(a) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
(b) If the use is proposed for a group, firm, organization, partnership, or
corporation, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters
of the same, and the responsible and authorized heads or partners of the
same.
(c) The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be
responsible for the use of the said park, area, or facility.
(d) The date when the use is requested and the hours of the proposed use.
9
(e) The anticipated number of persons to use the said park, area, or facility.
(f) Any additional information which the Town Office, Town Board or
designee finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued.
(5) Deposit. All applicants for reservation of park shelters, park or park facility for
which a permit is required shall pay a security deposit in an amount determined by
the Town Board to pay for the Town's maintenance and cleanup expense. The
deposit shall be returned if cleanup or repair by the Town is not required. All
cleanup and damage is the responsibility of the person reserving the shelter or park
or recreation facility. If the Town is required to provide any cleanup or maintenance
or repairs as a result of the activity included in the reservation or permit, the costs
of such activities will be charged to the individual who reserved the shelter or park
or recreation facility. Such charges shall include the costs of all materials and
supplies required plus a labor charge that reflects the then current Town of
Middleton labor rate including fringe benefits plus overhead. The deposit, or
portion thereof, shall be returned when all cleanup, repairs and maintenance have
been completed. The deposit may be waived by the Town Board or its designee in
its exclusive discretion.
(6) Action on application. The Town Board or its designee shall act promptly on all
applications for permits for exclusive park use (not shelter use) after consulting
with the applicant, if necessary.
(7) Reasons for denial. Applications may be denied for any of the following reasons:
(a) If it is for a use which would involve a violation of federal or state law or
any provision of this Code.
(b) If the granting of a permit would conflict with another permit already
granted or for which application is already pending.
(c) If the application does not contain the information required by Subsection
(4) above.
(d) The application is made less than the required days in advance of the
scheduled exclusive use.
(e) If it is for a use of the park or park facility at a date and time when, in
addition to the proposed use, anticipated nonexclusive use by others of the
park or park facility is expected and would be seriously adversely affected.
(f) If the law enforcement requirements of the exclusive use will require so
large a number of persons as to prevent adequate law enforcement to the
10
park, park facility, or shelter area involved or of the rest of the Town.
(g) The exclusive use will reasonably create a substantial risk of injury to
persons or damage to property.
(h) The use is so poorly organized that there is an unreasonable risk of damage
or destruction of park property or facilities.
(8) Indemnification. Prior to granting any permit for use of the parks, park facilities
and park shelter areas, the Town Board or designee may require the permittee to
file evidence of good and sufficient sureties, insurance in force, or other evidence
of adequate financial responsibility, running to the Town and such other third
parties as may be injured or damaged, in an amount depending upon the likelihood
of injury or damage as a direct and proximate result of the use sufficient to
indemnify the Town and such third parties as may be injured or damaged thereby,
caused by the permittee, its agents, or participants.
(9) Permit not required for Town activity. A permit is not required for use of a park or
a park facility sponsored by the Town.
(10) Permit revocation. The Town Board or designee, after a permit is granted, may
revoke a permit already issued if it is deemed that such action is justified by an
actual or potential emergency due to weather, fire, riot, other catastrophe, or
likelihood of a breach of the peace or by major change in the conditions forming
the basis of the issuance of the permit.
(11) Form of permit. Each permit shall be in a form prescribed by the Town Board and
shall designate the park, park facility, or shelter area involved, date, hours of the
exclusive use, purpose of the use, and the name of the person, group, firm,
organization, partnership, or corporation to which the permit is issued.
1
CHAPTER 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
10.01 State traffic laws adopted.
10.02 State Administrative Code provisions adopted.
10.03 Official traffic signs and control devices; prohibited signs, signals and markers.
10.04 Registration record of vehicle as evidence.
10.05 School bus warning lights.
10.06 Operators to obey traffic control devices.
10.07 Speed limits.
10.08 Special weight limits.
10.09 Restrictions on parking; posted limitations
10.10 Snow emergencies.
10.11 Unlawful removal of parking citations.
10.12 Motor vehicle conduct prohibited.
10.13 Unauthorized vehicles prohibited on public lands.
10.14 Penalties.
10.15 Enforcement.
10.16 State snowmobile laws adopted.
10.17 Applicability of traffic regulations to snowmobiles.
10.18 Operation of Snowmobiles Prohibited on Public Property.
10.19 Penalty.
10.01 State traffic laws adopted.
(1) Statutes adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the
statutory provisions in Chapters 340 to 348 of the Wisconsin Statutes, describing
and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, for which the penalty
is a forfeiture only, exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory penalty is
a fine or term of imprisonment or exclusively state charges, are hereby adopted and
by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required
to be performed or prohibited by any regulation incorporated herein by reference is
required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or
modifications of the statutory regulations in Chapters 340 to 348 incorporated
herein are intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure to the extent
legally practicable uniform statewide regulation of vehicle traffic on the highways,
streets and alleys of the State of Wisconsin. Any person who shall, within the Town
of Middleton, Wisconsin, violate any provisions of any Statute incorporated herein
by reference shall be deemed guilty of an offense under this section.
(2) Other state laws adopted. There are also hereby adopted by reference the following
sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, but the prosecution of such offenses under this
chapter shall be as provided in Chapters 340 to 348 of the Wisconsin Statutes and
the penalty for violation thereof shall be limited to a forfeiture as hereinafter
provided in this chapter:
2
§ 941.01 Negligent operation of vehicle
§ 941.03 Highway obstruction
§ 943.11 Entry into locked vehicle
§ 943.23 Operating vehicle without owner's consent
(3) Statutes specifically incorporated by reference. Whenever this chapter incorporates
by reference specific sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, such references shall mean
the Wisconsin Statutes of 2017-18 as from time to time amended, repealed or
modified by the Wisconsin Legislature.
(4) General references. General references in this chapter to Wisconsin statutory
sections or chapters describing or defining procedures or authority for enactment
or enforcement of local traffic regulations shall be deemed to refer to the most
recent enactments of the Wisconsin Legislature describing or defining such
procedures or authorities.
10.02 State Administrative Code provisions adopted.
(1) Administrative regulations adopted. The following administrative rules and
regulations adopted by the Secretary of the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation and published in the Wisconsin Administrative Code, exclusive of
any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed, are hereby adopted
by reference and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
Chapter Trans 146 Vehicle Registration and Fuel Trip Permits
Chapter Trans 304 Slow Moving Vehicle Emblem
Chapter Trans 305 Standards for Vehicle Equipment
Chapter Trans 326 Motor Carrier Safety Requirements for Transportation of
Hazardous Materials
(2) Non-compliance prohibited. No person shall operate or allow to be operated on any
highway, street or alley within the Town a vehicle that is not in conformity with the
requirements of Subsection A or the provisions of § 110.075 and Chapter 347, Wis.
Stats., incorporated by reference in § 10.01 of this chapter.
(3) Owner's liability. Any owner of a vehicle not equipped as required by this section
who knowingly causes or permits such vehicle to be operated on a highway in
violation of this section is guilty of the violation the same as if he or she had
operated the vehicle. The provisions of Wis. Stat. § 347.04 relating to nonapplicability
of demerit points shall apply to owners convicted of a violation of this
section.
(4) Safety checks.
(a) Operators to submit to inspection. When directed to do so by any law
enforcement officer, the operator of any motor vehicle shall stop and submit
such vehicle to an inspection and such tests as are necessary to determine
3
whether the vehicle meets the requirements of this section or that the
vehicle's equipment is in proper adjustment or repair. No person, when
operating a motor vehicle, shall fail to stop and submit such vehicle to
inspection when directed to do so by any law enforcement officer as herein
provided.
(b) Authority of officer. Any law enforcement officer of the Town is hereby
empowered whenever he or she shall have reason to believe that any
provision of this section is being violated to order the operator of the vehicle
to stop and to submit such vehicle to an inspection with respect to brakes,
lights, turn signals, steering, horns and warning devices, glass, mirrors,
exhaust systems, windshield wipers, tires and other items of equipment.
(c) Vehicle to be removed from highway. Whenever, after inspection as
provided by this section, a law enforcement officer determines that a vehicle
is unsafe for operation, he or she may order it removed from the highway
and not operated, except for purposes of removal and repair until the vehicle
has been repaired as directed in a repair order. Repair orders may be in the
form prescribed by the secretary of the Department of Transportation under
Wis. Stat. § 110.075(5), and shall require the vehicle owner or operator to
cause the repairs to be made and return evidence of compliance with the
repair order to the department of the issuing officer within the time specified
in the order.
10.03 Official traffic signs and control devices; prohibited signs, signals and markers.
(1) Duty of Town to erect and install uniform traffic control devices. Whenever traffic
regulations created by this chapter, including a State of Wisconsin traffic regulation
adopted by reference in § 10.01, require the erection of traffic control devices for
enforcement, the Town Board or its designee shall procure, erect and maintain
uniform traffic control devices conforming to the Uniform Traffic Control Device
Manual promulgated by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, giving notice
of such traffic regulation to the users of the streets and highways on which such
regulations apply. Whenever State law grants discretion to local authorities in
erecting or placement of a uniform traffic control device, devices shall be erected
in such locations and in such a manner as, in the judgment of the Town Board or
its designee, will carry out the purposes of this chapter and give adequate warning
to users of the streets and highways of the Town of Middleton.
(2) Code numbers to be affixed to official traffic control devices. The Town Board or
its designee shall cause to be placed on each official traffic control sign a guide
board, mile post, signal or marker erected under Subsection A, a code number
assigned by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, and shall also place or
direct the placing of code numbers on all existing official traffic control devices as
required by the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
4
(3) Prohibited signs and markers in highways. No person other than an officer
authorized by this chapter to erect and maintain official traffic control devices or
his or her designee shall place within the limits of any street or highway maintained
by the Town any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument unless permission is first
obtained from the Town Board or its designee or, where applicable, the State or
Dane County Highway Commission. Any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument
placed or maintained in violation of this subsection shall be subject to removal as
provided in Subsection (4).
(4) Removal of unofficial signs, markers, signals and traffic control devices. The Town
Board or its designee may remove any sign, signal, marking or other device that is
placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this chapter or state law. Any charge
imposed against premises for removal of a prohibited or illegal sign, signal,
marking or device shall be noted by the Town Board or its designee to the Town
Board for review and certification at the Board's next regular meeting following the
imposition of the charge. Any charge not paid on or before the next succeeding
November 15 shall be placed upon the tax roll for collection as other special
municipal taxes.
10.04 Registration record of vehicle as evidence. When any vehicle is found upon a street or
highway in violation of any provision of this chapter regulating the stopping, standing or parking
of vehicles and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner, as shown by the
ownership registration of the vehicle supplied by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, or
a comparable authority of any other state, shall be deemed to have committed the violation for
purposes of enforcement of this chapter and specifically § 10.01 and shall be subject to the
applicable forfeiture penalty, provided the defenses defined and described in Wis. Stat. §
346.485(5)(b) shall be a defense for an owner charged with such violation.
10.05 School bus warning lights. Notwithstanding the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 346.48(2)(b)2.,
adopted by reference in § 10.01 to the contrary, school bus operators shall use flashing amber
warning lights when a school bus is so equipped and flashing red warning lights in residential and
business districts when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at
locations at which there are no crosswalk or traffic signals so that pupils must cross the street or
highway before being loaded or after being unloaded.
10.06 Operators to obey traffic control devices. Every operator of a vehicle approaching an
intersection at which an Official Traffic Control Device is erected in accordance with this chapter
shall obey the direction of such Official Traffic Control Device as required by the Wisconsin
Statutes incorporated by reference in § 10.01. Operators of vehicles approaching a stop sign shall
stop before entering a highway as required by Wis. Stat. § 346.46. Operators approaching
intersections as which a yield sign has been installed shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
as required by Wis. Stat. § 346.18(6).
10.07 Speed limits.
(1) State speed limits adopted. The provisions of Wis. Stat. §§ 346.57, 346.58 and
5
346.59 relating to the maximum and minimum speed of vehicles are hereby adopted
as part of this section as if fully set forth herein, except as specified by this section
pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 349.11(3)(c) where the Town Board has determined that
the statutory speed limits are unreasonable, unsafe, and imprudent and has modified
such limits.
(2) Speed limits established.
(a) The maximum speed limit on any Town road in the Town of Middleton
shall be 45 miles per hour except as outlined in Subsections (b) through (o)
below.
(b) Except as provided in Subsection (f), the speed limit for Airport Road
located within the Town shall be 45 miles per hour.
(c) The speed limit for roads in platted areas shall be 25 miles per hour.
(d) The speed limit for Swoboda Road for that portion from Mineral Point Road
southerly to the bottom of the hill just north of its intersection with Vickiann
Street shall be 25 miles per hour.
(e) The speed limit for that portion of Pleasant View within the Town of
Middleton shall be 35 miles per hour.
(f) That portion of Airport Road under the jurisdiction of the Town of
Middleton lying within the Westerly 745 feet of the Southeast Quarter of
the Northeast Quarter of Section 6, T7N, R8E, Town of Middleton, for the
North side, and also that portion of Airport Road lying within the Westerly
745 feet of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 6,
T7N, R8E, Town of Middleton, for the South side, is designated a School
Zone, as that term is defined in the Federal Highway Administration’s
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (the “MUTCD”). The speed
limit in said School Zone shall be 35 miles per hour when children are
present and 45 miles per hour at all other times.
(g) The speed limit for that portion of South Point Road extending from Valley
View Road Center Line north for a distance of 1,650 feet, shall be 35 miles
per hour.
(h) The speed limit for all of Timber Lane located within the Town of
Middleton shall be 35 miles per hour.
(i) The speed limit for all of Old Sauk Road located within the Town of
Middleton shall be 35 miles per hour.
(j) The speed limit for all of Blackhawk Road located within the Town of
6
Middleton shall be 35 miles per hour.
(k) The speed limit for all of Twin Valley Road located within the Town of
Middleton shall be 35 miles per hour.
(l) The speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour for that portion of Seybold Road
lying within the NW1/4 and NE1/4 of the SW1/4 of Section 25, T7N, R8E,
in the Town of Middleton, Dane County, Wisconsin, approximately
described as follows:
(i) North One-Half of Seybold Road. Beginning at the intersection of
Seybold Road with the Easterly right-of-way of Gammon Road,
thence Easterly 1655 feet, more or less, to the intersection with the
city limits of the City of Madison, being 170 feet, more or less, West
of the Westerly right-of-way of Struck Street and the point of
termination thereof.
(ii) South One-Half of Seybold Road. Beginning 250 feet, more or less,
East of the intersection of Seybold Road with the Easterly right-ofway
of Gammon Road; thence Easterly, 1405 feet, more or less, to
the intersection with the city limits of the City of Madison, being
170 feet, more or less, West of the Westerly right-of-way of Struck
Street and the point of termination thereof.
(m) The speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour for that portion of Evergreen
Road lying in part of the NE1/4 and SE1/4 of the SE1/4 of Section 4, and
part of the SW1/4 of the SW1/4 of Section 3, T7N, R8E, all in the Town of
Middleton, Dane County, Wisconsin, described as follows:
Beginning at the East Quarter Corner of said Section 4; thence Southerly
along the East line of the said SE1/4 of Section 4, 1375 feet, more or less,
to the intersection with the Southeasterly right-of-way of said Evergreen
Road; thence Southwesterly, Southerly and Southeasterly along the
Southeasterly, Easterly and Northeasterly right-of-way of said Evergreen
Road, 1540 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the Northeasterly rightof-
way of said Evergreen Road with the Southeasterly right-of-way of Twin
Sunset Road; thence Southwesterly 33 feet to the center line of said
Evergreen Road; thence Southeasterly 670 feet, more or less, along the
center line of said Evergreen Road, to the intersection with the South line
of the said SW1/4 of said Section 3; thence Westerly 216 feet, more or less,
along the said South line of the SW1/4 of Section 3, to the intersection with
the Southwesterly right-of-way of said Evergreen Road; thence
Northwesterly, Northerly, Northeasterly and Northerly 3500 feet, more or
less, along the Southwesterly, Westerly, Northwesterly and Westerly rightof-
way of said Evergreen Road to the intersection with the North line of the
said SE1/4 of Section 4; thence Easterly along the said North line 25.75 feet,
more or less, to the point of beginning.
7
(n) The speed limit for all of Koch Road located within the Town of Middleton
shall be 30 miles per hour.”
(o) The speed limit for that portion of Bronner Road from Koch Road extending
to a point just south of its intersection with Sunset Ridge Drive shall be 30
miles per hour.
10.08 Special weight limits.
(1) Purpose. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. §§ 349.16 and 349.17, the Town of Middleton is
authorized to impose special weight limitations due to special or temporary
conditions which may cause deterioration of the highways in the Town and regulate
heavy traffic. The streets and highways in the Town of Middleton have been under
considerable stress and will continue to weaken and deteriorate due to construction
and other heavy vehicle traffic and other special traffic uses and may likely be
seriously damaged or destroyed in the absence of special weight limitations and
regulation of heavy traffic. Therefore, in an effort to preserve the Town of
Middleton's street and highway system, and to reduce costs of maintenance and
replacement of the Town streets and highways, the Town Board or its designee, is
hereby authorized to impose special weight limitations and regulate heavy traffic
on the Town streets and highways according to the specific provisions in this
section and in conjunction with the corresponding Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) Applicability. This section shall apply to the following:
(a) Streets and highways. All streets and highways located within the Town of
Middleton;
(b) Non-pneumatic tires. All vehicles not operating completely on pneumatic
tires; and
(c) Heavy vehicles. All vehicles or combination of vehicles, other than motor
buses, designed or used for transporting property of any nature and having
a gross weight of more than 8,000 pounds.
(3) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following:
(a) A street or highway located within the Town over which a state trunk
highway or county trunk highway is routed.
(b) Vehicles being used for the purpose of obtaining orders for supplies or
moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or from any place of
business or residence located on a road designated as a special limit or heavy
traffic route, subject to the provisions of Subsection (3)(f) below. Such
vehicles shall use the shortest possible route from or to a state or county
8
trunk highway to or from the place of business or residence to which such
supplies or commodities are being delivered or moved.
(c) Vehicles transporting agricultural products, including but not limited to
milk, grain, livestock and poultry, to or from a place of business or residence
within the Town, subject to the provisions of Subsection (3)(f) below.
(d) Town-owned or operated vehicles are specifically excluded from the
provisions of this section.
(e) Vehicles owned and operated by a public utility will be exempt from the
provisions of this section when being driven to or from the site of any
construction, repair or maintenance of electric, gas or water service located
within the Town of Middleton.
(f) In no event shall the weight of any vehicle and load on any Town street or
highway exceed the limitations pertaining to Class "A" highways.
(4) Administration. The Town Board, in cooperation with the Dane County Sheriff's
Department, shall administer this section. Administration shall include:
(a) Posting of signs. Appropriate signs shall be procured, erected and
maintained, giving notice of this section and of the special weight
limitations and heavy traffic regulations established herein. The Town
Board or its designee shall erect signs in such locations and in such a manner
as, in the judgment of the Town Board or its designee, will carry out the
purposes of this section and the corresponding Statutes sufficient to give
reasonable notice to users of the streets and highways of the Town of
Middleton that a special weight or heavy traffic limitation is in effect and
the nature of that limitation.
(b) Construction vehicles. The Town Board or its designee may grant
temporary permits to allow construction vehicles to use Town streets and
highways designated as special weight limit or heavy traffic routes. These
permits may be granted only when use of a designated route is shown by
the user to be necessary for the vehicle to gain access to the construction
site and that such route is the shortest possible route to/from a state or
county trunk highway from/to the construction site.
(5) Violations. Any owner of a vehicle whose vehicle has violated the provisions of
this Ordinance, will be subject to the following:
(a) Penalty. A forfeiture of $500 for a first violation, a forfeiture for a second
or subsequent violation shall be $1,000, together with court costs and fees
prescribed by §§ 814.63(1) and (2) or 814.65(1), Wis. Stats.
9
(b) Suspension of operation. The Town Board, or its designee, or any traffic
officer, may order the owner or operator of any vehicle being operated on a
Town street or highway to suspend operation if, in its/his judgment, such
vehicle is causing or likely to cause injury to such highway or is visibly
injuring the permanence thereof or the public investment therein, except
when Wis. Stat. § 84.20 is applicable or when the vehicle is being operated
pursuant to a contract which provides that the Town will be reimbursed for
any damage done to the street or highway.
(6) Review. The Town Board shall review annually the routes designated as special
weight limit routes. In addition, the Board shall annually determine the need, if any,
of continuing to designate special weight limit routes within the Town of
Middleton.
(7) Heavy traffic and special weight limit routes designated. All streets and highways
within the jurisdiction of the Town of Middleton, except a street or highway over
which a state trunk highway or county trunk highway is routed, are hereby
designated as heavy traffic and special weight limit routes.
(8) Prohibited signs and markers on highways. No person, other than an officer or his
designee authorized by this Ordinance to erect and maintain special weight limit
and heavy traffic route signs, shall place within the limits of any street or highway
maintained by the Town of Middleton any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument
unless permission is first obtained from the Town Board or its designee, or where
applicable, the State Highway Commission. Any sign, signal, marker, mark or
monument placed or maintained in violation of this section shall be subject to
removal.
10.09 Restrictions on parking; posted limitations.
(1) Authority to regulate. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 349.13, the Town Board is granted
the authority, with the reasonable exercise of the police power, to prohibit, limit the
time of or otherwise restrict the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles beyond
the provisions of Ch. 346, Wis. Stats.
(2) Forty-eight-hour limitation. No person, firm or corporation shall park or leave
standing any automobile, truck, tractor, trailer or vehicle of any description on any
public street or public parking lot in the Town for a period of 48 or more
consecutive hours in the same location at any time, except that where more
restrictive parking limits have been established, the more restrictive limits shall
apply.
(3) Temporary No Parking Zones. The Town Administrator may designate no parking
zones, for a period of up to two weeks, upon finding that the public safety, the
orderly flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, street maintenance, snow removal,
or other proper purposes requires such action. When such designation is made by
10
filing notice with the Town Clerk’s office, the Administrator shall cause
appropriate temporary signs to be erected and shall remove said signs when they
are no longer needed.
(4) Posted limitations.
(a) The Town Board may designate certain streets or portions of streets as no
parking or no stopping or standing zones or as zones for parking by
physically handicapped persons and may limit the hours in which the
restrictions apply. The Town shall mark, by appropriate signs, each zone so
designated in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 349.13.
(b) The parking of vehicles is prohibited in the following Town highway areas:
Name of Street Side Location
Airport Road Both
Applewood Drive North Starting at the intersection with County
Trunk Highway M and extending to a point
675 feet east of County Trunk Highway M
Ellington Road West Starting at the intersection with Airport
Road and extending to a point 1,050 feet
north of Airport Road
Low Road Both Starting at the intersection with Twin Valley
Road and extending to its terminus to the
west
Old Sauk Road Both
Pioneer Road West Starting at the intersection of Old Sauk
Road and extending to a point 125 feet to
the south of Old Sauk Road
Seybold Road Both
Stonewood West Starting at the intersection of Meadow
Valley Road and extending to a point 350
feet north of Meadow Valley Road
Swoboda Road East Starting at the intersection with Mineral
Point Road and extending to a point 200
feet north of Mineral Point Road
Swoboda Road West Starting at a point 350 feet south of the
intersection with Mineral Point Road and
extending to a point 300 feet north of
Mineral Point Road
Twin Valley Road East and West Starting at a point 650 feet north of Old
Sauk Road extending to a point 1,700 feet
north of Old Sauk Road
11
Name of Street Side Location
Wayside Road East and West Starting at its southerly intersection with US
Highway 14 in Section 9, T7N, R8E, and
extending to a point 460 feet north of US
Highway 14
(c) Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, no person shall stop or
leave standing a vehicle in an established no stopping or standing zone when
stopping or standing is prohibited. No vehicle shall be parked in a no parking zone
during hours when parking is prohibited except those used by physicians on
emergency calls or as permitted by state law or elsewhere by this Code of
Ordinances.
(d) Restrictions near intersections. Unless more restrictive parking restrictions exist,
as evidenced by postings with signage, the “no parking, stopping or standing”
regulation shall be enforced along public streets at intersections in the area located
within 25 feet of the adjacent street pavement.
(e) Parking for the disabled. When official traffic signs indicating such restriction have
been erected, no person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle upon any
portion of a street, highway or public or private parking facility reserved for
vehicles displaying special registration plates or identification cards or emblems
issued by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation or, for vehicles registered
in another jurisdiction, by such other jurisdiction designating the vehicle as one
used by a physically disabled person.
(f) Removal of vehicles. When any law enforcement officer shall find a vehicle
stopped, left standing or parked upon a public street or parking lot in violation of
the provisions of this section, the law enforcement officer is authorized to move
such a vehicle or to require the operator in charge thereof to move such vehicle to
a place where stopping, standing, or parking is permitted. The law enforcement
officer may cause said vehicle to be removed to a proper impoundment and storage
area within the Town where space is available, and in such case, the owner of the
vehicle shall pay the costs of removal and storage before the owner may recover
possession of the vehicle.
10.10 Snow emergencies.
(1) Snow emergency declarations. The Town Board hereby declares that a snow
emergency exists in the Town whenever a snowfall during any period of 24 hours
or less reaches a depth of three inches or more. Such emergency is declared to be a
serious public hazard impairing transportation and public health, safety, and
welfare for a period until such time as snow removal operations have been
completed.
12
(2) Parking restrictions.
(a) When signs have been erected at or reasonably near the corporate limits, as
provided in Wis. Stat. § 349.13, no owner or operator of any motor vehicle
shall park upon any public street or alley during a snow emergency which
has been declared by the Town in accordance with Subsection A until the
snow removal operations have completely cleared the street or alley.
(b) Pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stat.§ 323.14, Town employees are
authorized to order the erection of temporary "No Parking" signs at any time
during the existence of any emergency that impairs or prevents the full or
safe use of the highway, street, alley, or parking lot.
10.11 Unlawful removal of parking citations. No person other than the owner or operator
thereof shall remove a Town parking ticket from a motor vehicle.
10.12 Motor vehicle conduct prohibited.
(1) Unnecessary noise prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor
vehicle in such a manner that shall make or cause to be made any loud, disturbing
or unnecessary sounds or noises such as may tend to annoy or disturb another in or
about any public or private area in the Town.
(2) Unnecessary smoke prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
motor vehicle in such a manner which shall make or cause to be made any smoke,
gases or odors which are disagreeable, foul or otherwise offensive which may tend
to annoy or disturb another in or about any public or private area in the Town of
Middleton.
(3) Unnecessary acceleration prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
a motor vehicle in such a manner which shall make or cause to be made any stones,
gravel, soil, dirt, water, snow, slush, ice, rubber or any other debris to be thrown by
the wheels of such motor vehicles upon the person or property of any person in the
Town.
(4) Operation in restricted area prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
a motor vehicle in such a manner as to leave the roadway and park, stop or travel
upon or across any public or private property, parking lot, driveway or business
service area for any purpose except the official conduct of business located on said
property without the consent of the owner or lessee of the property. This section
shall specifically include but not be limited to:
(a) Town property other than driveways, roadways and parking lots;
(b) School properties;
(c) Medical facilities;
13
(d) Service stations;
(e) Grocery stores;
(f) Restaurants;
(g) Financial institutions; and
(h) Other similar-type businesses with service driveways or drive-up or drivethrough
facilities.
(5) Stopping and parking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park
a motor vehicle in any manner on any public or private property or parking lot
contrary to a regulatory sign posted thereon which may permit parking by certain
persons and limits, restricts or prohibits parking as to other persons without the
consent of the owner or lessee of the property. A vehicle parked in violation of this
section may be removed or towed by the property owner at the vehicle owner's
expense.
10.13 Unauthorized vehicles prohibited on public lands.
(1) Declaration of intent. The purpose of this section is to provide safe and healthful
conditions for the enjoyment of the parkland and open spaces of the Town of
Middleton consistent with public rights and interests and with the capability of the
land resources so as to protect and maintain the premises properly.
(2) Applicability.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person without a permit to operate or park any
unauthorized motor vehicle in or upon any portion of public land including
but not limited to, parks, conservancies, open spaces, median strips,
parkways, school grounds or open space easements, unless designated as a
park drive, roadway, parking area or temporary parking areas within such
public land. "Motor Vehicle" means any self-propelled device in, upon or
by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn, it
includes but is not limited to, truck, van or automobile, motorcycle, motor
driven cycle, motor scooter or snowmobile.
(b) Exempted from this section are authorized vehicles consisting of motor
vehicle owned by the Town of Middleton and police, fire and emergency
vehicles.
(3) Permits.
(a) Persons desiring to operate a motor vehicle in or upon such portions of land
14
as designated above shall apply in writing to the Park Commission to do so.
The application shall describe the lands upon which they wish to operate
and the time period, not to exceed three days, for which they wish the permit
to be issued. This application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $10.
(b) The Park Commission shall rule upon the permit consistent with the purpose
of this section, their discretion based on environmental, sociological and
economic impact and with any additional guidelines developed by the Town
Board of the Town of Middleton. If the Park commission rules that a permit
shall be issued, the Park Commission shall issue the permit to the person
making the application.
(c) Regulation of unauthorized motor vehicles and their use.
(i) At no time may a motor vehicle be operated without a muffler which
is so constructed and kept in constant operation that it prevents
excessive or unusual noise at all times while the engine is in
operation.
(ii) At no time may a motor vehicle be operated from sunset to sunrise
unless such vehicle carries the lighting equipment required by the
Wisconsin Code of Motor Vehicles and such lighting equipment as
is necessary to preserve the intent of this ordinance and unless such
equipment is lighted during such operation.
10.14 Penalties.
(1) Forfeiture penalties. The penalty for violation of any provision of this Chapter shall
be a forfeiture as hereafter provided, together with court costs and fees prescribed
by Wis. Stat. §§ 814.63 or 814.65, the penalty assessment for moving traffic
violations and the driver improvement surcharge imposed by Wis. Stat. §§ 757.05
and 346.655, where applicable. Payment of the judgment and applicable court
costs, fees, assessments and surcharges may be suspended by the sentencing court
for not more than 60 days. Any person 18 years of age or older who shall fail to
pay the amount of the forfeiture, court costs, any penalty assessment or driver
surcharge or other penalty imposed for violation of any provision of this Chapter
may, upon order of the court entering judgment therefore and having jurisdiction
of the case, be imprisoned until such forfeiture, costs, fees, assessments, surcharge
or other penalty are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Other sanctions.
(a) By court. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the sentencing
court to exercise additional authorities granted by the Wisconsin Statutes to
suspend or revoke the operating privileges of the defendant, order the
defendant to submit to assessment and rehabilitation programs or to attend
15
traffic safety school in addition to payment of a monetary penalty or in lieu
of imprisonment.
(b) By Town. No person who has been convicted of a violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be issued a license or permit by the Town, except a dog
license, until the forfeiture imposed for such violation and any penalty
assessment, court costs and fees or surcharge is paid.
(3) Forfeitures for violation of uniform moving traffic regulations. Forfeitures for
violations of any moving traffic regulation set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes
adopted by reference in § 10.01 shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to
be imposed for violations of the comparable Wisconsin Statute found in the current
edition of the Revised Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule, as amended from
time to time; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to
permit prosecution under this chapter for any offense described in Chapter 341 to
348, Wis. Stats., for which an imprisonment penalty or fine may be imposed upon
the defendant.
(4) Forfeitures for parking violations.
(a) Forfeitures for uniform statewide parking, stopping and standing offenses.
Minimum and maximum forfeiture for violation of non-moving traffic
violations adopted by reference in § 10.01 as described in Chapters 341 to
348, Wis. Stats., shall be as found in the current edition of the Revised
Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule, as amended from time to time.
(b) Penalty for other parking violations. The penalty for all other parking
violations not included under Subsection (4)(a) above shall be a forfeiture
of not less than $5 nor more than $20 for the first offense and not less than
$10 nor more than $100 for the second or subsequent offense within two
years.
(5) Other violations. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which a penalty is not otherwise established by this section shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $10 nor more than $200.
10.15 Enforcement.
(1) Enforcement procedures.
(a) How enforced. This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes and this section.
(b) Applicable court procedures. Except where otherwise specifically provided
by the laws of the State of Wisconsin or this Code, the traffic regulations in
this Code shall be enforced in Dane County Circuit Court.
16
(2) Citations.
(a) Uniform citation and complaint. The Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Citation
and Complaint described and defined in the Wisconsin Statutes shall be
used for enforcement of all provisions of this chapter except those
provisions with describe or define non-moving traffic violations and
violations of Wis. Stat. §§ 346.71 through 346.73. Violations of Wis. Stat.
§§ 346.71 through 346.73 shall be reported to the District Attorney and the
Wisconsin Uniform traffic Citation shall not be used in such cases except
upon written request of the District Attorney.
(b) Parking citations. Citations shall be used for enforcement of non-moving
traffic regulations created or adopted by this chapter, including violations
of non-moving traffic regulations described in the Wisconsin Statutes
adopted by reference in § 10.01. The citation for non-moving traffic
violations shall be in the form prescribed in this Code of Ordinances. Law
enforcement officers or civilian employees of the Town, may issue nonmoving
traffic citations or Town Officials authorized by the Town Board.
(3) Deposits and stipulations.
(a) Uniform traffic offenses. Any person charged with a violation of this
ordinance corresponding to Chapters 341 through 348 of the Wisconsin
Statutes or any existing or future amendments thereto may, in lieu of
appearing in court, stipulate to no contest by paying to the Dane County
Sheriff's Department, within 10 days following the issue of the citation for
the violation, the appropriate amount specified as a deposit in the deposit
schedule established by the judicial conference pursuant to § 345.26(2)(a)
of the Wisconsin Statutes, a copy of which is available from the State of
Wisconsin officer of judicial education or any law enforcement officer. All
subsequent revisions made by the judicial conference to the deposit
schedule shall be deemed to be adopted by reference and incorporated
herein. Where a deposit is not established under Wis. Stat. § 345.26(2)(a),
the deposit shall be as provided in the cash deposit schedule established by
the Town Board pursuant to this code of Ordinances. Stipulations shall be
in the form contained in the uniform traffic citation and complaint.
(b) Non-moving traffic offenses. Persons cited for violations of non-moving
traffic offenses described and defined in this chapter may discharge the
penalty thereof and avoid court prosecution by mailing or forwarding within
10 days of the issuance of the citation to the Dane County Sheriff's
Department the minimum forfeiture specified for the violation. When
payment is made as provided in this subsection, no court costs shall be
charged. If the alleged violator does not deliver or mail a deposit within 10
days of the date of the citation, the Dane County Sheriff shall forward a
copy of the citation to the Town Attorney, or his designee, for prosecution.
17
(c) Receipt. Every officer accepting a forfeited penalty or money deposit under
this section shall receipt therefor as provided in Wis. Stat. § 345.26(3)(b).
Every officer accepting a stipulation under the provisions of this section
shall comply with the provisions of §§ 345.26(1) and 345.27(1), Wis. Stats.,
and shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice in
substantially the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and
complaint promulgated under § 345.11, Wis. Stats.
10.16. State snowmobile laws adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the statutory provisions in Sections 350.02 to 350.05, 350.07, 350.107, 350.11, 350.12,
350.13, 350.135, 350.15 to 350.17, 350.19 and 350.99 of the Wisconsin Statutes are hereby
adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Acts required to
be performed or prohibited by such statutes are required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future
amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutory regulations incorporated herein are
intended to be made part of this chapter in order to secure to the extent legally practicable uniform
statewide regulations of snowmobiles in the Town. Any person who shall, within the Town of
Middleton, Wisconsin, violate any provisions of any Statute incorporated herein by reference shall
be deemed guilty of an offense under this section.
10.17 Applicability of traffic regulations to snowmobiles. No person shall operate a
snowmobile upon any street, highway or alley within the Town of Middleton in violation of the
traffic regulation provisions of §§ 346.04, 346.06, 346.11, 346.14(1), 346.18, 346.19, 346.20,
346.21, 346.215(3), 346.26, 346.27, 346.33, 346.35, 346.37, 346.39, 346.40, 346.44, 346.46,
346.47, 346.48, 346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52, 346.53, 346.54, 346.55, 346.87, 346.88, 346.89,
346.90, 346.91, 346.92(1) and 346.94(1) and (9), Wis. Stats., applicable to snowmobiles pursuant
to Sec. 346.02(10), Wis. Stats., and § 10.16 of the Town of Middleton’s Code of Ordinances.
10.18 Operation of Snowmobiles Prohibited on Public Property. Except as permitted by this
Code of Ordinances, no person shall operate a snowmobile in any public park or on any public
recreational trail, public parking lot or other public municipal property within the Town of
Middleton.
10.19 Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of § 10.18 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a forfeiture as hereafter provided, together with the costs of prosecution, and,
in default of payment thereof, may be imprisoned in the county jail for not exceeding 10 days.
Forfeitures for violations of § 10.16 shall conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed
under Wis. Stat. § 350.11 for violations of the comparable Wisconsin Statute. Forfeitures for
violations of § 10.17 shall conform to the traffic and parking forfeitures for violations of the
comparable Wisconsin Statute.
1
CHAPTER 11
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
11.01 Offenses Against State Laws Subject To Forfeiture.
11.02 Throwing Or Shooting Of Arrows, Stones, Or Other Missiles Prohibited.
11.03 Carrying Concealed Firearms, Where Prohibited; Carrying Or Possessing Certain
Weapons Prohibited.
11.04 Safe Use And Transportation Of Firearms And Bows.
11.05 Loud and Unnecessary Noise Prohibited
11.06 Disorderly Conduct.
11.07 Destruction of Property Prohibited.
11.08 Littering Prohibited.
11.09 Abandoned Refrigerators Prohibited.
11.10 Trespass.
11.11 Damage To Public Property.
11.12 Cemetery Regulations.
11.13 Sale of Alcohol Beverages to Underage Or Intoxicated Persons Restricted.
11.14 Underage Persons' Presence in Places of Sale; Penalty.
11.15 Underage Persons; Prohibitions; Penalties
11.16 Defense of Sellers.
11.17 Persons' Who Have Attained The Legal Drinking Age; False Or Altered
Identification Cards.
11.18 Possession of Alcohol Beverages on School Grounds Prohibited
11.19 Adult Permitting or Encouraging Underage Violation.
11.20 Solicitation of Drinks Prohibited.
11.21 Use of Cigarettes, Tobacco and Vapor Products
11.22 Restrictions on Sale Or Gift of Cigarettes, Vapor Products Or Tobacco Products
11.23 Smoking In Enclosed Places
11.24 Public Nuisances Prohibited.
11.25 Public Nuisance Defined.
11.26 Public Nuisances Affecting Health.
11.27 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety.
11.28 Abatement of Public Nuisances.
11.29 Cost of Abatement.
11.30 Penalties.
11.01 Offenses Against State Laws Subject To Forfeiture. The following statutes defining
offenses against the peace and good order of the State are adopted by reference to define offenses
against the peace and good order of the Town of Middleton provided the penalty for commission
of such offenses hereunder shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under the general penalty
provisions of this Code of Ordinances. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the
Statutes incorporated herein by reference are intended to be made part of this Code.
2
29.288 Throwing Refuse in Waters
48.335 Disposition of Child Adjudged in Need of Protection
118.07 Safety Requirements
118.08 School Zones; Crossings
118.09 Safety Zones
118.10 School Safety Patrols
118.105 Control of Traffic on School Premises
118.163 Truancy
134.65 Cigarette and Tobacco Products Retailer License
134.66 Restrictions on Sale or Gift of Cigarettes or Tobacco Products
167.10 Fireworks Regulated
175.25 Illegal Storage of Junked Vehicles
938.125. Jurisdiction -- Civil Law and Ordinance Violations
938.13 Disposition of Child Adjudged in Need of Protection
938.17 Dispositions – Traffic, Boating, Snowmobile, All-terrain vehicle, and
Utility Terrain Vehicle violations and over Civil Law and Ordinance
Violations
939.22 Words and Phrases Defined
948.01 Definitions Relating to Crimes Against Children
948.60 Possession of a Dangerous Weapon by a Child
948.61(2)(a) Dangerous Weapons on School Premises
948.63 Receiving Property From a Child
941.01 Negligent Operation of a Vehicle
941.10 Negligent Handling of Burning Materials
941.12(2),(3) Interfering With or Failing to Assist in Firefighting
941.13 False Alarms and Interference with Firefighting
941.20(1) Reckless Use of Weapon
941.23 Carrying Concealed Weapon
941.235 Carrying a Firearm in a Public Building
941.24 Possession of Switchblade Knife
941.35 Emergency Telephone Calls
941.36 Fraudulent Tapping of Electric Wires or Gas or Water Meters or Pipes
941.37(1),(2) Obstructing Emergency or Rescue Personnel
942.05 Opening Letters
943.01(1) Criminal Damage to Property
943.11 Entry Into Locked Vehicle
943.125 Entry Into Locked Coin Box
943.13 Trespass to Land
943.14 Trespass to Dwellings
943.15 Entry Into Locked Site
943.20(3)(a) Theft of Property
943.21(3)(a) Fraud on Innkeeper
943.22 Cheating Tokens
943.23(4),(5) Operating Vehicle Without Owner's Consent
943.34(1)(a) Receiving Stolen Property
943.37 Alteration of Property Identification Marks
3
943.38(3) Forgery
943.41 Credit Card Crimes
943.50(4)(a) Retail Theft
943.55 Removal of a Shopping Cart
945.01 Definitions Relating to Gambling
945.02 Gambling
945.04 Permitting Premises to be Used for Commercial Gambling
946.40 Refusing to Aid Officer
946.41 Resisting or Obstructing Officer
946.42(2) Escape
946.69 Falsely Assuming to Act as Public Officer or Employee
946.70 Impersonating Peace Officer
946.72(2) Tampering with Public Records and Notices
947.01 Disorderly Conduct
947.012 Unlawful Use of Telephone
947.013 Harassment
947.047 Littering Shores
948.40 Contributing to the Delinquency of a Child
948.45 Contributing to Truancy
948.55(3) Leaving/Storing Loaded Firearm within Reach of a Child and Child
Publicly Possesses or Exhibits Firearm
948.60 Possession of a Dangerous Weapon by a Child
948.61 Dangerous Weapons on School Premises
948.62 Receiving Stolen Property from Child (Value Under $500)
948.63 Receiving Property from Child
9.951.01-.18 Crimes Against Animals
9.961.573
(1) & (2) Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
9.961.574
(1) & (2) Manufacture or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia
9.961.575
(1) & (2) Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia to a Minor
11.02 Throwing Or Shooting Of Arrows, Stones, Or Other Missiles Prohibited.
(1) No person shall throw or shoot any object, arrow, stone, BB, pellet, or other missile
or projectile by hand or by means of an air gun, BB gun, pellet gun or sling shot,
bow and arrow, crossbow or any similar device which projects a missile at any
person or at, in or into any building, street, sidewalk, alley, highway, park,
playground or other public or private place within the Town, including any target
practice except as expressly provided in this section. Any air gun, BB gun or pellet
gun shall be carried in a case or securely closed in a holster or wrapping, and shall
be unloaded.
(2) Section (1) shall not apply to a person hunting with a bow and arrow or a crossbow
except:
4
(a) No person may hunt with a crossbow or bow and arrow within 100 yards of
a building located on another person’s land unless the person who owns the
land on which the building is located allows the hunter to hunt within 100
yards of the building. For purposes of this subsection, “building” means a
permanent structure used for human occupancy and includes a
manufactured home.
(b) No person may hunt with a crossbow or bow and arrow in any Town park
or other property owned by the Town.
(c) No person hunting with a crossbow or bow and arrow may discharge the
arrow or bolt from the respective weapon other than toward the ground.
(3) Section (1) shall not apply:
(a) To the shooting or discharging of toy arrows or arrows which have a tip
made of rubber or similar material.
(b) To a supervised archery range approved by the Town Board.
(c) Within the interior of a single family dwelling.
(4) Penalty Provision. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $250.00. The bond amount shall
be $50.00.
11.03 Carrying Concealed Firearms, Where Prohibited; Carrying Or Possessing Certain
Weapons Prohibited.
(1) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the terms used in this
ordinance:
(a) “Public building” shall mean any building owned, occupied or controlled
by the Town of Middleton.
(b) "Special event" means an event that is open to the public, is organized by
the Town of Middleton, is for a duration of not more than 3 weeks, and
either has designated entrances to and from the event that are locked when
the event is closed or requires an admission.
(c) "Weapon" means a handgun, whether loaded or unloaded; an electric
weapon, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 941.295(1c)(a); a knife other than a
switchblade knife under Wis. Stat. § 941.24 or a billy club.
(2) Prohibitions. Other than as provided in sub. (d), it shall be unlawful for any person:
5
(a) While carrying a weapon, to enter or remain at a special event organized by
the Town if the Town has notified the actor not to enter or remain at the
special event while carrying a weapon.
(b) To enter or remain in any part of a public building, if the Town has notified
the actor not to enter or remain in the building while carrying a weapon.
(3) Notice and Signs.
(a) For the purposes of this section, the Town has notified an individual not to
enter or remain in a part of the public building while carrying a weapon if
the Town has posted a sign that is located in a prominent place near all of
the entrances to the public building and any individual entering the building
can be reasonably expected to see the sign.
(b) For the purposes of this section, the Town has notified an individual not to
enter or remain at the special event organized by the Town while carrying a
weapon if the Town has posted a sign that is located in a prominent place
near all of the entrances to the special event and any individual attending
the special event can be reasonably expected to see the sign.
(c) Signs shall be not less than five inches by seven inches in size and shall
state that weapons are prohibited in the building or at the special event.
(4) Exceptions. The prohibitions in sub. (2) do not apply to the following:
(a) A law enforcement officer as defined under Wis. Stat. sec. 175.49(1)(g); or
(b) A peace officer other than a commission warden who is not a state-certified
commission warden; or
(c) A person engaged in food preparation or other activity (e.g., Civil War
reenactment, dramatic production) authorized by the Board if the weapon is
a reasonably necessary tool or prop for the person engaged in such food
preparation or other activity authorized by the Board.
(d) To a person who leases residential or business premises in a public building
or, if the weapon is in a vehicle driven or parked in a parking facility, to any
part of the building used as a parking facility.
(e) To a person attending a special event, if the weapon is in a vehicle driven
or parked in a parking facility, to any part of the special event grounds or
building used as a parking facility.
(f) To a person who rents all or part of a public building for the purpose of
holding an auction or estate sale and who is auctioning or selling the
6
personal property of a household or decedent, provided that any weapon or
firearm sold is removed from the premises promptly after sale and, in the
case of any firearm, said firearm is at all times unloaded.
(5) Other Dangerous Weapons Prohibited.
(a) Prohibition. No person shall, within the Town of Middleton, wear or in any
manner carry under his clothes or conceal upon or about his person any
deadly or dangerous weapon, provided this Subsection shall not apply to a
peace officer or such persons as may be authorized to carry such weapons.
(b) Dangerous Weapon Defined. "Dangerous weapon" means any firearm
other than a handgun, whether loaded or unloaded, or any device designed
as a weapon and capable of producing death or great bodily harm, or any
other device or instrumentality which, in the manner it is used or intended
to be used, is calculated or likely to produce death or great bodily harm
except for those weapons defined under s. (1)(c), above.
(6) Concealed Dangerous Weapons in Public Establishments. No person shall carry or
be possessed of a dangerous weapon in any public building or business
establishment open to the public except a bona fide weapons repair, display, or sales
establishment, unless such dangerous weapon is so stored and concealed (other than
on the person) so as not to be readily accessible to any person or patron. This
subsection shall not apply to peace officers or others duly authorized by law acting
within the scope of their duties. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit
the sale, purchase, repair or trade of firearms by a retail business establishment
doing so in the course of its regular business in accord with state and federal law,
nor to hinder a prospective customer from attempting to buy, sell, or trade firearms
to or from a retailer.
(7) Specific Concealed Weapons Prohibited. No person, except a law enforcement
officer acting within the scope of their duties, shall carry or wear concealed about
his person any dangerous weapon within the Town.
(8) Possession, Sale, and Manufacture of Certain Weapons Prohibited.
(a) No person shall sell, manufacture, purchase, possess or carry metallic
knuckles or knuckles of any substance which could be put to the same use
with the same or similar effect as metallic knuckles, a "numchuk" (also
called a "nunchaku") or any similar weapon, a "cestus" or similar material
weighted with metal or other substance and worn on the hand, a "churkin"
(also called a "suriken") or any similar object intended to injure a person
when thrown, a "sucbai" or similar weapon, a "manrikigusari" or a similar
length of chain having weighted ends, or any other martial arts device or
instrumentality which, in the manner it is used or intended to be used, is
calculated or likely to produce injury or death to another person within the
7
Town of Middleton.
(b) For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
(i) "Numchuk" or "Nunchaku." An instrument consisting of two (2) or
more sticks, clubs, or rods connected by a rope, cord, wire, or chain.
(ii) "Churkin." A round throwing knife consisting of several sharp
points protruding from a rounded disc.
(iii) "Sucbai." A short length of wood or metal or similar material which,
when gripped in the hand, protrudes on either side of the fist. Such
prohibited instrument may or may not have spikes or short pointed
protrusions from either end.
(c) Any such device shall be seized by a law enforcement officer and destroyed
or turned over to the State of Wisconsin Crime Laboratory for destruction.
(6) Reckless Use of Weapons.
(a) Acts Prohibited.
(i) No person shall endanger another's safety by reckless conduct in the
operation or handling of a firearm, air gun, knife or bow and arrow.
(ii) No person shall operate or go armed with a firearm, air gun, knife
or bow and arrow while he is under the influence of an intoxicant.
(iii) No person shall intentionally point a firearm, air gun, knife or bow
and arrow at or toward another person.
(b) Reckless Conduct Defined. "Reckless conduct" consists of an act which
creates a situation of unreasonable risk and high probability of death or great
bodily harm to another and which demonstrates a conscious disregard for
the safety of another and a willingness to take chances of perpetrating an
injury.
(7) Penalty Provision. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than $250.00. The bond amount shall
be $50.00.
11.04 Safe Use And Transportation Of Firearms And Bows.
(1) Handguns may remain unloaded while they are placed, possessed or transported in
or on a vehicle, boat, snowmobile or ATV. Handguns can also be loaded while
inside or on a vehicle.
8
(2) Long guns, including rifles, shotguns and muzzleloaders need not be in a case in
order to place them in or on a vehicle, or to transport them unloaded in or on a
vehicle. No loaded firearm, other than a handgun, may be placed or possessed on
the top or exterior of a vehicle unless the vehicle is stationary.
(3) No long gun may be loaded while the firearm or person loading it is still in the
vehicle. All long guns must be outside a motorized vehicle before a person may
load the firearm. Once loaded, a long gun may be set down on a stationary vehicle,
but must be unloaded before the firearm is placed inside or transported in or on the
vehicle.
(4) Crossbows may only be transported as follows:
(a) The arrow/bolt must be removed from the crossbow and:
(b) The crossbow may not be cocked or loaded before it is placed, possessed or
transported in or on any motorized vehicle.
(5) Bows and arrows may only be transported if the arrow is not nocked.
(6) This section does not apply to a handicapped person who has a permit or license to
transport a firearm, crossbow or bow and arrow in a manner not in conformity with
this section.
11.05 Loud and Unnecessary Noise Prohibited
(1) Loud and Unnecessary Noise Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
make, continue to cause to be made or continued any loud and unnecessary noise.
(2) Types of Loud and Unnecessary Noises. The following acts are declared to be loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this Section, but this enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(a) Horns, signaling devices. the sounding of any horn or signaling device on
any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in
the Town of Middleton for longer than 3 seconds in any period of one 1
minute or less, except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonable
loud or harsh sound by means of any signaling device and the sounding of
any plainly audible device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of
time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or
electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine
exhaust and the use of any signaling device when traffic is for any reason
held up.
(b) Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The using, operating or permitting
9
to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set; musical instrument,
phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound in a loud and unnecessary manner. the operation of any set,
instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. in a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the
parcel or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this Section.
(c) Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the
public street for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting
attention of the public to any building or structure. Announcements over
loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer in person and without the
aid of any mechanical device.
(d) Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird that causes frequent or
long continued unnecessary noise.
(e) Exhausts. the discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine or motor boat except through a
muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive
noise therefrom.
(f) Construction and Machinery Noise. Except for Town employees, between
the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. no person shall do construction work
or operate any chain saw, lawn mower or any other loud machinery of a
similar nature.
(g) Exceptions. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
(i) Any vehicle of the town while engaged in emergency operations or
snow removal.
(ii) The use and operation of farm machinery.
(3) Permits for Amplifying Devices.
(a) Permit Required. The use of loudspeakers or amplifying devices on the
street or in the parks of the Town of Middleton is prohibited unless the party
desiring to use such loudspeaker or amplifying device first obtains a permit
from the Town Board.
(b) Grounds or Reasons for Denial or Allowance. The Town Board shall have
the authority to revoke such permit when he believes such loudspeaker or
10
amplifying device is becoming a nuisance because of the volume, the
method in which it is being used or the location in which it is being operated.
(c) Time Restrictions. The Town Board shall not grant a permit to use a
loudspeaker or amplifying device before the hours of 9:00 a.m. or after
11:00 p.m. Nor shall a permit be granted to anyone who, in the opinion of
the Town Board, uses said loudspeaker or amplifying device in such a
manner or for such a purpose as to constitute a nuisance.
(d) Exceptions. The regulation of the use and times for use of amplifying
devices may be modified by the Town Board.
11.06 Disorderly Conduct.
(1) Disorderly Conduct Prohibited. No person within the Town of Middleton shall:
(a) In any public or private place engage in violent, noisy, riotous, abusive,
indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly
conduct which tends to cause or provoke an immediate disturbance of public
order or tends to annoy or disturb any other person.
(b) Intentionally cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, riot or noisy
altercation other than a bona fide athletic contest.
(2) Disorderly Conduct with Motor Vehicle. No person shall make unnecessary and
annoying noises with a motor vehicle, including motorcycles and all-terrain
vehicles, by squealing tires, excessive acceleration of the engine or by emitting
unnecessary and loud muffler noise.
(3) Defecating or Urinating in Public Places. It shall be unlawful for any person to
defecate or urinate outside of designed sanitary facilities, upon any sidewalk, street,
alley, public parking lot, park, playground, cemetery or other public area within the
Town, or upon any private property in open view of the public, or in the halls,
stairways or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or to indecently expose
his person.
11.07 Destruction of Property Prohibited.
(1) Destruction of Property. No person shall willfully injure or intentionally deface,
destroy or unlawfully remove, take or meddle with any property of any kind or
nature within the Town of Middleton and belonging to the Town or its departments,
or to any private person, without the consent of the owner or proper authority.
(2) Parental Liability. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 895.035, the parents of an
unemancipated minor shall be liable for the damage of property caused by the
willful, malicious or wanton act of such child; such liability shall not exceed
11
$2,500.00.
(3) Unlawful Removal of Property. It shall be unlawful for any person to take and
carry away the property of another without the owner's consent with the intention
to do so.
11.08 Littering Prohibited.
(1) Littering Prohibited. No person shall throw any glass, refuse or waste, filth or other
litter upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the Town,
or upon any private person or the surface of anybody of water within the Town.
(2) Litter from Conduct of Commercial Enterprise.
(a) Scope. The provisions of this Subsection shall apply to all sales, promotions
and other commercial ventures that result in litter being deposited on any
street, alley or other public way.
(b) Cleanup of Litter. Any person, firm, corporation or association carrying on
an enterprise that results in litter being deposited on any street, alley or other
public way shall cleanup the same within twenty-four (24) hours of the time
the same is deposited or immediately if such litter or debris presents a traffic
or safety hazard. If any such litter is subject to being blown about, it shall
be picked up immediately. If any such litter is likely to attract animals or
vermin, such litter shall be picked up immediately.
(c) Litter Picked Up at Litterer's Expense. If any person, firm, corporation or
association fails to pick up any litter as required by Subsection (2)(b) within
the time specified, the Town shall arrange to have the same picked up by
Town crews or by private enterprise. Applicable bidding procedures shall
be used for any arrangement for the use of private enterprise to pick up such
litter. The entire expense of picking up such litter, together with an
additional charge of 20% for administrative expenses, shall be charged to
the person, firm, corporation or association that did the littering. If such
sum is not promptly paid, steps shall be taken, with the advice of the Town
Attorney's office, to collect the same. This charge shall be in addition to
any forfeiture or other penalty for violation of this Section.
(3) Dumping of Refuse and Grass Along Roads. Except for temporary placement up
to 6 hours, no person shall deposit any refuse, leaves or grass clipping in any gutter
or ditch along any public street, road, alley or highway.
(4) Depositing of Materials Prohibited. Except as provided in Subsection (3), it shall
be unlawful for any person to deposit, cause or permit to be deposited, placed or
parked any vegetation, earth, sand, gravel, water, snow, ice, debris, waste material,
foreign substance, construction material, equipment or object upon any street,
12
sidewalk or public property without authorization of the Town Board, or its
designee, pursuant to the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, or upon any private
property without the consent of the owner or lessee of the property. Any person
who deposits, causes or permits to be deposited, placed or parked any such
materials, equipment or objects upon any street, sidewalk or property shall be
responsible to properly mark or barricade the area so as to prevent a safety hazard.
(5) Handbills.
(a) Scattering Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to deliver any handbills or
advertising material to any premises in the Town except by being handed to
the recipient, placed on the porch, stoop or entrance way of the building or
firmly affixed to, or contained within, a building or other appurtenance, so
as to prevent any such articles from being blown about, becoming scattered
or in any way causing litter.
(b) Papers in Public Places Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to leave any
handbill, advertising material or newspapers unattended in any street, alley
public building or other public place, provided that this shall not prohibit
the sale of newspapers in vending machines.
(c) Advertisements upon Public or Private Property. No person shall place any
advertisement upon any public property or any street, alley or public ground
or upon any private property situated and fixed in any street, alley or public
ground or upon any other private property, except by the permission of the
owner thereof, but this Section shall not apply to the posting of notices
required by law.
11.09 Abandoned Refrigerators Prohibited. No person shall leave or permit to remain outside
of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building,
dwelling or other structure under his control in a place accessible to children any abandoned,
unattended or discarded freezer, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid,
snap lock or other locking device, without first removing said door or lid, snap lock or other
locking device from said ice box, refrigerator or container, unless such container is displayed for
sale on the premises of the owner or his agent and is securely locked.
11.10 Trespass.
(1) Purpose. This Section is created for the purposes of securing to the residents of the
Town of Middleton their rights to enjoyment and use of land and property by
providing an efficient and orderly method of enforcement of such rights. This
ordinance is enacted under the authority of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) Violations. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Section for any person to
commit any of the following acts:
13
(a) Enter upon any enclosed or cultivated land of another with intent to catch
or kill any birds, animals, or fish on such land or gather any products of the
soil without the express or implied consent of the owner or occupant to
engage in any such activities.
(b) To enter or remain on any land of another after having been notified by the
owner or occupant not to enter or remain on such premises.
(c) To hunt, shoot, fish, or gather any product of the soil on the premises of
another or enter said premises with intent to do any of the foregoing after
having been notified by the owner or occupant not to do so.
(d) To enter upon any enclosed or cultivated land or another with a vehicle of
any kind without the express or implied consent of the owner or occupant.
(e) To erect upon the land of another any sign which is the same as or similar
to the type of sign described in Subsection (3), unless authorized to do so
by the owner of the lands involved.
(3) Posting of Lands. For lands to be posted against entry by another under this
Section, a sign at least 11 inches square must be placed in at least 2 conspicuous
places for every 40 acres sought to be protected. The sign must carry an appropriate
notice and the name of the person giving the notice followed by the work "owner"
if the person giving the notice is the holder of legal title to the land and by the work
"occupant" if the person giving the notice is not he older of legal title but is a lawful
occupant of the land. Proof that appropriate signs as herein provided were erected
or in existence upon the premises to be protected within 6 months prior to the event
complained of shall be prima facie proof that the premises to be protected were
posted as herein provided.
(4) How Entry Denied. A person has received notice from the owner or occupant
within the meaning of this Section if he or she has been notified personally, either
orally or in writing, or if the land is posted.
(5) Failure to Post. The failure of any person or occupant to post his or her lands shall
not be deemed to constitute consent of such owner or occupant to any uninvited
entry by another. Any entry by a person other than the lawful owner or lawful
occupant of land or building shall constitute a violation of this ordinance if such
entry is made under circumstances tending to create or provoke breach of the peace.
11.11 Damage To Public Property.
(1) Damaging Public Property. No person shall climb any tree or pluck any flowers or
fruit, wild or cultivated, or break, cut down, trample upon, remove, or in any
manner injure or deface, write upon, defile or ill use any tree, shrub, flower, flower
bed, turf, fountain, ornament, statue, building, fence, apparatus, bench, table,
14
official, notice, sign, bridge, structure or other property within any park or parkway,
or in any way injure, damage or deface any public building, sidewalk or other public
property in the Town.
(2) Breaking of Street Lamps or Windows. No person shall break glass in any street
lamps or windows of any building owned or occupied by the Town.
11.12 Cemetery Regulations.
(1) Purpose and Definition. In order to protect cemetery areas within the Town from
injury, damage or desecration, these regulations are enacted. The term "cemetery"
as hereinafter used in this Section shall include all cemetery property, grounds,
equipment and structures, both privately and publicly owned, which are located
within the Town of Middleton.
(2) Authority to Establish Rules and Regulations. The cemetery property owner shall
have the authority to establish reasonable rules and regulations to regulate and
govern the operation of any cemetery in accordance with state law and this Code of
Ordinances. The cemetery property owner shall reserve the right to shrubs, trees,
flowerpots, urns or other objects on cemetery property. Placements of any such
plantings, containers or objects shall be in accordance with established regulations
of the cemetery property owner.
(3) Specific Regulations.
(a) Disturbing Cemetery Property. No person shall cut, remove, damage or
carry away any flowers, plants, vines, shrubs or trees from any cemetery lot
or property, except the owner of the cemetery lot or a person with the
cemetery lot owner's consent or any cemetery employee or representative
engaged in official cemetery duties for the cemetery owner; nor shall any
person without proper authority remove, damage or destroy any vases,
flower pots, urns or other objects which have been placed on any cemetery
lot; nor shall any person move or remove any cemetery equipment without
the owner's consent.
(b) Protection of Cemetery Property. No person shall trap in any cemetery
without specific written authorization of the owner; nor shall any person
kill, injure or disturb or attempt to injure or disturb any animals, birds or
waterfowl, wild or domestic, within any cemetery in any manner except as
provided by this Code of Ordinances; nor shall any person climb any tree,
break, cut down, trample upon, remove or in any manner injure, deface,
write upon or in any manner damage any tree, shrub, flower, flower bed,
turf, grassy area, soil, building, structure, equipment, official notice, sign or
other property within any cemetery.
(c) Motor Vehicles. Motor vehicles are restricted to the roads fan drives and
15
paring areas. Except for authorized maintenance vehicles, no person shall
operate an unlicensed or licensed motorized vehicle on any cemetery
property outside of areas specifically designated as parking areas or areas
where the operation of such vehicles is specifically permitted. It shall be
unlawful for a person to engage in any off-roadway operation of a motorized
vehicle on cemetery property without the owner's consent.
(d) Speed Limit. No person shall operate any motorized vehicle in any
cemetery in excess of 15 miles per hour unless otherwise posted.
(e) Parking. No person, without the owner's consent, shall park any motor
vehicle in any cemetery on any grassy or seeded area or upon any location
except a designated parking area; nor shall any person park a motor vehicle
on cemetery property for any purpose except engaging in official cemetery
business. Any unlawfully parked motor vehicle may be towed or removed
by the cemetery property owner at the vehicle owner's expense.
(f) Littering Prohibited. No person shall litter, dump or deposit any rubbish,
refuse, earth or other material in any cemetery without the owner's consent.
(g) Pets. Pets, including animals of any species, are prohibited in any cemetery
without the cemetery owner's consent.
(h) Sound Devices. No person shall operate or play any amplifying system or
sound device in any cemetery without the owner's consent.
(i) Authorized Notices. No person shall post, paste, fasten, paint or attach any
placard, bill, notice, sign or advertising matter upon any structure, tree or
other natural object in any cemetery, except under these regulations. No
person shall remove, deface or damage in any manner any official sign or
notice posted in any cemetery.
(j) Loitering Prohibited. No person shall loiter or cause a nuisance or engage
in any sport or exercise on any cemetery property without the owner's
consent.
(k) Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. No person shall consume or have in his
possession any open container containing an alcoholic beverage upon any
cemetery property within the Town unless the property is specifically
named as being part of a licensed premises.
(l) Play Vehicles Prohibited. No person shall operate or make use of a play
vehicle upon any cemetery property without the owner's consent. As used
in this Section, a play vehicle shall mean any coaster, skateboard, roller
skates, sled, toboggan, unicycle, or toy vehicle upon which a person may
ride.
16
(m) Presence After Hours Prohibited. No person shall be present upon any
cemetery property without the owner's consent during posted hours when
the cemetery is not open to the public.
11.13 Sale of Alcohol Beverages to Underage Or Intoxicated Persons Restricted.
(1) Sales of Alcohol Beverages to Underage Persons.
(a) No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away any fermented malt
beverages to any underage person not accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age, or procure for,
sell, dispense or give away any intoxicating liquor to any underage person.
(b) No license or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in fermented malt
beverages to or with any underage person not accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age or sell,
vend, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquor to or with any underage person.
(2) Penalties. A person who commits a violation of Subsection (1) above is subject to
a forfeiture of:
(a) Not more than $500.00 if the person has not committed a previous violation
within 12 months of the violation; or
(b) Not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 if the person has committed a
previous violation within 12 months of the violation.
(3) In addition to the forfeitures provided in Subsections (a) and (b) above, a
court shall suspend any alcohol license issued under Chapter 7 of this Code
to a person violating this Section pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 125.07(1)(b)3.
(3) Sale of Alcohol Beverages to Intoxicated Persons.
(a) No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away alcohol beverages
to a person who is intoxicated.
(b) No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in alcohol beverages
to or with a person who is intoxicated.
(4) Penalties. Any person who violates Subsection (3) above shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00.
11.14 Underage Persons' Presence in Places of Sale; Penalty.
(1) Restrictions. An underage person not accompanied by his or her parent, guardian
17
or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age may not enter or be on any
premises for which a license or permit for the retail sale of alcohol beverages has
been issued for any purpose except the transaction of business pertaining to the
licensed premises with or for the licensee or his or her employee. The business
may not be amusement or the purchase, receiving or consumption of edibles or
beverages or similar activities that normally constitute activities of a customer of
the premises. This paragraph does not apply to:
(a) An underage person who is a resident, employee, lodger or boarder on the
premises controlled by the proprietor, licensee or permittee of which the
licenses premises consists or is a part.
(b) An underage person who enters or is on a "Class A" retail intoxicating liquor
premises for the purpose of purchasing edibles or beverages other than
alcohol beverages. An underage person so entering the premises may not
remain on the premises after the purchase.
(c) Hotels, drug stores, grocery stores, bowling alleys, cars operated by any
railroad, regularly established athletic fields, stadiums or public facilities as
defined in Wis. Stat. § 125.51(5)(b)1.d, which are owned by a county or
municipality.
(d) Premises in the state fair park, concessions authorized on state-owned
premises in the state parks and state forests as defined or designated in
Chapters 27 and 28, Wis. Stats., and parks owned or operated by agricultural
societies.
(e) Ski chalets, golf clubhouses and private tennis clubs.
(f) Premises operated under both a "Class B" alcoholic beverage or "Class B"
fermented malt beverage license or permit and a restaurant permit where the
principal business conducted is that of a restaurant. If the premises are
operated under both a "Class B" alcoholic beverage or "Class B" fermented
malt beverage license or permit and a restaurant permit, the principal
business conducted is presumed to be the sale of alcohol beverages, but the
presumption may be rebutted by competent evidence.
(g) An underage person who enters or remains on a "Class B" alcoholic
beverage or "Class B" fermented malt beverage premises for the purpose of
transacting business at an auction or market as defined in Wis. Stat. §
125.32(4)(b)1, if the person does not enter or remain in a room where
alcohol beverages are sold or furnished.
(h) An underage person who enters or remains in a room on "Class B" alcoholic
beverage or "Class B" fermented malt beverage license premises separate
from a room where alcohol beverages are sold or served for the purpose of
18
engaging in marching or drilling with a group of other persons if no alcohol
beverages are furnished or consumed by any person in the room where the
underage person is present and the presence of underage persons is
authorized under this Subsection. An underage person may enter and
remain on "Class B" alcoholic beverage or "Class B" fermented malt
beverage premises under this Subsection only in the municipality which
issued the "Class B" alcoholic beverage or "Class B" fermented malt
beverage license adopts an ordinance permitting underage persons to enter
and remain on the premises as provided in this Subsection and the law
enforcement agency responsible for enforcing the ordinance issues to the
"Class B" alcoholic beverage or "Class B" fermented malt beverage licensee
a written authorization permitting underage persons to be present under this
Subsection on the date specified in the authorization. Before issuing the
authorization, the law enforcement agency shall make a determination that
the presence of underage persons on the licensed premises will not endanger
their health, welfare or safety or that of other members of the community.
The licensee shall obtain a separate authorization for each date on which
underage persons will be present on the premises.
(2) Penalties. A licensee or permittee who directly or indirectly permits an underage
person to enter or be on a licensed premises in violation of Subsection (1) is subject
to a forfeiture of not more than $500.00.
11.15 Underage Persons; Prohibitions; Penalties
(1) Any underage person who does any of the following is guilty of a violation:
(a) Procures or attempts to procure alcohol beverages.
(b) Knowingly possesses or consumes intoxicating liquor.
(c) Enters or is on licenses premises in violation of Section 11.14(1).
(d) Falsely represents his or her age for the purpose of receiving alcohol
beverages from a licensee or permittee.
(2) Any underage person not accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or spouse who
has attained the legal drinking age who knowingly possesses or consumes
fermented malt beverage is guilty of a violation.
(3) Any person violating Subsections (1) or (2) is subject to the following penalties:
(a) For a first violation, a forfeiture of not more than $50.00, suspension of the
person's operating privilege as provided under Wis. Stat. § 343.30(6)(b)1,
participation in a supervised work program under Subsection (4) or any
combination of these penalties.
19
(b) For a violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation, either
a forfeiture of not more than $100.00, suspension of the person's operating
privilege as provided under Wis. Stat. § 343.30(6)(b)2, participation in a
supervised work program under Subsection (4) or any combination of these
penalties.
(c) For a violation committed within 12 months of 2 or more previous
violations, either a forfeiture of not more than $150.00, revocation of the
person's operating privilege under Wis. Stat. § 343.30(6)(b)3, participation
in a supervised work program under Subsection (4) or any combination of
these penalties.
(4) Supervised Work Program.
(a) If the Court orders a person to participate in a supervised work program, the
Court shall set standards for the program within the budgetary limits
established by the Town Board. The program may provide the person with
reasonable compensation reflecting the market value of the work
performed, or it may consist of uncompensated community service work
and shall be administered by the county Department of Public Welfare or a
community agency approved by the Court.
(b) The supervised work program shall be of a constructive nature designed to
promote the person's rehabilitation, shall be appropriate to the person's age
level and physical ability and shall be combined with counseling from an
agency staff member or other qualified person. The program may not
conflict with the person's regular attendance at school. The amount of work
required shall be reasonably related to the seriousness of the person's
offense.
(5) When a court revokes or suspends a person's operating privilege under Subsection
(3), the Department of Transportation may not disclose information concerning or
relating to the revocation or suspension to any person other than a court, district
attorney, county corporation counsel, city, village or town attorney, law
enforcement agency or the person whose operating privilege is revoke or
suspended. A person entitled to receive information under this paragraph may not
disclose the information to any other person or agency.
(6) A person who is under 18 years of age on the date of disposition is subject to Wis.
Stat. § 938.344, unless proceedings have been instituted against the person in a
court of civil or criminal justice after dismissal of the citation under Wis. Stat. §
938.344(3).
(7) Subsections (1) and (2) do not prohibit an underage person employed by a licensee
or permittee from possessing fermented malt beverages during the brewing
20
processor for sale or delivery to customers.
(8) Subsections (1) and (2) do not prohibit an underage person employed by a brewery,
winery or a facility for the rectifying or manufacture of intoxicating liquor or the
production of fuel alcohol from possessing alcohol beverages during regular
working hours and in the course of employment.
11.16 Defense of Sellers.
(1) Defenses. Proof of the following facts by a seller of alcohol beverages to an
underage person is a defense to any prosecution for a violation of this Section:
(a) That the purchaser falsely represented in writing and supported with other
documentary proof that he or she had attained the legal drinking age.
(b) That the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary and prudent
person would believe that the purchaser had attained the legal drinking age.
(c) That the sale was made in good faith and in reliance on the written
representation and appearance of the purchaser in the belief that the
purchaser had attained the legal drinking age.
(2) Book Kept by Licensees and Permittees. Every retail alcohol beverage licensee or
permittee shall cause e book to be kept for the purpose of this Subsection. The
licensee or permittee or his or her employee shall require any person who has shown
documentary proof that he or she has attained the legal drinking age to sign the
book if the person's age is in question. The book shall show the date of the purchase
of the alcohol beverages, the identification used in making the purchase, the address
of the purchaser and the purchaser's signature.
11.17 Persons' Who Have Attained The Legal Drinking Age; False Or Altered
Identification Cards.
(1) Identification Cards.
(a) Any person who has attained the legal drinking age, other than one
authorized by Wis. Stat. § 125.08, who makes, alters or duplicates an
official identification card may be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than
$500.00 or imprisoned not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days or both.
(b) Any person who has attained the legal drinking age who, in applying for an
identification card, presents false information to the issuing officer may be
fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00 or imprisoned not more
than 10 days or both.
(2) Any underage person who does any of the following is subject to the penalties
21
specified under Section 11.15(3) or (4):
(a) Intentionally carries an official identification card not legally issued to him
or her, an official identification car obtained under false pretenses or an
official identification card that has been altered or duplicated to convey false
information. A law enforcement officer shall confiscate any card that
violates this Subsection.
(b) Makes, alters or duplicates an official identification card.
(c) Presents false information to an issuing officer in applying for an official
identification card.
11.18 Possession of Alcohol Beverages on School Grounds Prohibited
(1) In this Subsection:
(a) "Motor Vehicle" means a motor vehicle owned, rented or consigned to a
school.
(b) "School" means a public, parochial or private school which provides an
educational program for 1 or more grades between grades 1 and 12 and
which is commonly known as an elementary school, middle school, junior
high school, senior high school or high school.
(c) "School administrator" means the person designated by the governing body
of a school as ultimately responsible for the ordinary operations of a school.
(d) "School premises" means premises owned, rented or under the control of a
school.
(2) Except as provided by Subsection (3) no person may possess or consume alcohol
beverages:
(a) On school premises;
(b) In a motor vehicle, if a pupil attending the school is in the motor vehicle; or
(c) While participating in a school-sponsored activity.
(3) Alcohol beverages may be possessed or consumed on school premises, in motor
vehicles or by participants in school-sponsored activities if specifically permitted
in writing by the school administrator consistent with applicable laws and
ordinances.
(4) A person who violates this Section is subject to a forfeiture of not more than
22
$200.00, except that Wis. Stat. § 938.344, Wis. Stats., and Section 11.15(3) and (4)
of this Code of Ordinances provide the penalties applicable to underage persons.
11.19 Adult Permitting or Encouraging Underage Violation.
(a) No adult may knowingly permit or fail to take action to prevent the illegal
consumption of alcohol beverages by an underage person on premises owned by
the person or under the person's control. This Subsection does not apply to alcohol
beverages used exclusively as part of a religious service.
(b) No adult may intentionally encourage or contribute to a violation of Section
11.15(1) or (2).
(c) A person who violates this Section is subject to a forfeiture of not more than
$200.00.
11.20 Solicitation of Drinks Prohibited. Any licensee, permittee or bartender of a retail alcohol
beverage establishment covered by a license or permit issued by the Town who permits an
entertainer of an employee to solicit a drink of any alcohol beverage defined in Wis. Stat. §
125.02(1), or any other drink form a customer on the premises, or any entertainer or employee who
solicits such drinks from any customer is deemed in violation of this Section.
11.21 Use of Cigarettes, Tobacco and Vapor Products
(1) Statement of Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the property and persons in the city by prohibiting persons under
21 years of age from possessing tobacco products and vapor products, and
prohibiting the sale of tobacco products and vapor products to persons under
21 years of age.
(b) Persons under age 21 are prohibited by law from purchasing or possessing
cigarettes and other tobacco products, and retailers are prohibited from
selling them to underage persons. There are new tobacco-less products,
however, commonly referred to as “electronic cigarettes,” “e-cigarettes,”
“e-cigars,” “e-cigarillos,” “e-pipes,” “e-hookahs,” or “electronic nicotine
delivery systems,” which allow the user to simulate cigarette smoking.
These products may be purchased by underage persons and are being
marketed without age restrictions or health warnings and come in different
flavors that appeal to young people.
(c) E-cigarettes, and similar devices, are a relatively new nicotine delivery
system. While devices vary in their appearance and specific method of
operation, they have a few basic elements in common. A solution of water,
dissolved nicotine, and other ingredients (usually flavoring) is heated with
23
a heating element (usually battery-powered). This vaporizes the nicotine
solution, which passes into a mouthpiece and is inhaled in a manner similar
to cigarette smoking. Often, glycerol or propylene glycol is added to the
solution to give the appearance of smoke when the solution is vaporized.
The concentration of nicotine contained in the solution can be customized
by the retailer to the buyer’s specifications, and many manufacturers make
nicotine-free solutions.
(d) The production and distribution of e-cigarettes is now regulated by federal
or state authorities, and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not
completed testing of these products. But, initial studies by the FDA have
determined that e-cigarettes can increase nicotine addiction among young
people and contain chemical ingredients known to be harmful, which may
expose users and the public to potential health risks.
(e) The use of e-cigarettes and similar devices has increased significantly in
recent years.
(f) Existing studies on electronic smoking devices’ vapor emissions and
cartridge contents have found a number of dangerous substances including
chemicals known to cause cancer such as formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, lead,
nickel and chromium as well as PM 2.5, acrolein, tin, toluene, and
aluminum, which are associated with a range of negative health effects such
as skin, eye, and respiratory irritation, neurological effects, damage to
reproductive systems, and even premature death from heart attacks and
stroke.
(g) Some cartridges used by electronic smoking devices can be refilled with
liquid nicotine solution, creating the potential for exposure to dangerous
concentrations of nicotine.
(h) Clinical studies about the safety and efficacy of these products have not
been submitted to the FDA for the over 400 brands of electronic smoking
devices that are on the market and for this reason, consumers have no way
of knowing whether electronic smoking devices are safe, what types of
potentially harmful chemicals the products contain, and what dose of
nicotine the products deliver.
(i) Electronic smoking devices often mimic conventional tobacco products in
shape, size, and color, with the user exhaling a smoke-like vapor similar in
appearance to the exhaled smoke from cigarettes and other conventional
tobacco products.
(j) The use of electronic smoking devices in smoke-free locations threatens to
undermine compliance with smoking regulations and revers the progress
24
that has been made in establishing a social norm that smoking is not
permitted in public places and places of employment.
(k) It is the intent of this Board, in enacting the ordinance codified in this
section, to provide for the public health, safety and welfare by facilitating
uniform and consistent enforcement of smoke-free air laws; by reducing the
potential for re-normalizing smoking in public places and places of
employment; by reducing the potential for children to associate the use of
electronic smoking devices with a normative or healthy lifestyle; and by
prohibiting the sale or distribution of electronic smoking devices to
underage persons.
(l) Therefore, the Town Board determines that prohibiting the sale, giving, or
furnishing of e-cigarettes to underage persons and prohibiting the purchase,
possession, or use of e-cigarettes by underage persons is in the Town’s best
interest and will promote public health, safety, and welfare.
(2) Definitions. For the purpose of construction and application of this section, the
following definitions shall apply:
(a) “Cigarette” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. sec. §139.30(1).
(b) Electronic delivery device shall include any component part of such a
product whether or not sold separately. Electronic delivery device shall not
include any product that has been approved or otherwise certified by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for legal sales for use in
tobacco cessation treatment or other medical purposes, and is being
marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
(c) “Law Enforcement Officer” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. §
30.50(4s).
(d) “Tobacco Products” have the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 139.75(12).
(e) “Person who sells vapor products at retail” means a person whose ordinary
course of business consists, in whole or in part, of the retail sale of vapor
products.
(f) “Possession of a tobacco product” shall mean either actual physical control
of the tobacco product without necessarily owning that product, or the right
to control the tobacco product even though it is in a different room or place
than where the person is physically located
(g) “Public place” means a public street, sidewalk, or park or any area open to
the general public in a publically owned or operated building or premises,
or in a public place of business or a school.
25
(h) “Tobacco product” has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. §139.75(12).
(i) “Underage person” means an individual who is less than 21 years of age.
(j) “Use a tobacco product or vapor product” means to smoke, chew, suck,
inhale or otherwise consume a tobacco product or vapor product.
(k) “Vapor product” means any product containing or delivering nicotine,
lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be
used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine or any other
substance through inhalation of vapor from the product.
(3) Prohibited Conduct. Except as provided in sub. (5) below, no underage person may
do any of the following:
(a) Purchase or attempt to purchase any cigarette, tobacco product or vapor
product.
(b) Possess or attempt to possess a cigarette, tobacco product or vapor product.
(c) Use a cigarette, tobacco product or vapor product in a public place.
(d) Falsely represent his or her age for the purpose of receiving any cigarette,
vapor product or tobacco product.
(4) School Property. No individual, regardless of age, who is enrolled in secondary
school may possess or attempt to possess a cigarette, tobacco product or vapor
product while on school property.
(5) Exceptions. A person under 18 years of age may purchase cigarettes, vapor
products or tobacco products for the sole purpose of resale in the course of
employment during his or her working hours if employed by a retailer licensed
under Wis. Stat. § 134.65(1).
(6) Enforcement. A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette, vapor product
or tobacco product involved in any violation of sub. (3) or (4) above committed in
his or her presence.
(7) Penalty. An individual who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be subject
to a forfeiture as provided in sec. 25.06 of this Code.”
11.22 Restrictions on Sale Or Gift of Cigarettes, Vapor Products Or Tobacco Products
(1) Definitions. The definitions set forth in §134.66(1) are hereby adopted by reference
and made apart hereof.
26
(2) Restrictions. (a) No retailer may sell or give cigarettes, vapor products or tobacco
products to any person under the age of 21, except as provided in §48.983(3), Wis.
Stats. A vending machine operator is not liable under this paragraph for the
purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products from his or her vending machine by a
person under the age of 21 if the vending machine operator was unaware of the
purchase.
(b) (i) A retailer shall post a sign in areas within his or her premises where
cigarettes or tobacco products are sold to consumers stating that the sale of
any cigarette, vapor product or tobacco product to a person under the age of
21 is unlawful under this section and § 48.983, Wis. Stats.
(ii) A vending machine operator shall attach a notice in a conspicuous
place on the front of his vending machines stating that the purchase
of any cigarette or tobacco product by a person under the age of 21
is unlawful under § 48.983, Wis. Stats., and that the purchaser is
subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $25.
(c) No person may place a vending machine within 500 feet of a school.
(d) No manufacturer, distributor, jobber, subjobber or retailer, or their
employees or agents, may provide cigarettes, vapor products or tobacco
products for nominal or no consideration to any person under the age of 21.
(3) Defense of Retailer. Proof of all of the following facts by a retailer who sells
cigarettes, vapor products or tobacco products to a person under the age of 21 is a
defense to any prosecution for a violation of sub. (2)(a) above:
(a) That the purchaser falsely represented that he or she had attained the age of
21 and presented an identification card.
(b) That the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary and prudent
person would believe that the purchaser had attained the age of 21.
(c) That the sale was made in good faith, in reasonable reliance on the
identification card and appearance of the purchaser and in the belief that the
purchaser had attained the age of 21.
(4) Penalties. In this subsection, "violation" means a violation of sub. (2)(a), (c) or (d)
above.
(a) A person who commits a violation is subject to a forfeiture of:
(i) Not more than $500 if the person has not committed a previous
violation within 12 months of the violation; or
27
(ii) Not less than $200 nor more than $500 if the person has committed
a previous violation within 12 months of the violation.
(iii) A court shall suspend any license or permit issued under §§134.65,
139.34 or 139.79, Wis. Stats., to a person for:
a. Not more than 3 days if the court finds that the person
committed a violation within 12 months after committing
one previous violation; or
b. Not less than 3 days nor more than 10 days if the court finds
that the person committed a violation within 12 months after
committing 2 other violations; or
c. Not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days if the court finds
that the person committed the violation within 12 months
after committing 3 or more other violations.
(b) The court shall promptly mail notice of a suspension under subpar. (iii)
above to the Department of Revenue and to the clerk of each municipality
which has issued a license or permit to the person.
(c) Whoever violates sub. (2)(b) above shall forfeit not more than $25.
11.23 Smoking In Enclosed Places
(1) Prohibition. The provisions of Wis. Stat. § 101.123, including the definitions
provided therein, relating to the prohibition of smoking in various enclosed places,
are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter by reference.
(2) Penalties. Any person who violates this section relating to the prohibition of
smoking in various enclosed places shall be $100 for each violation, except that the
forfeiture for a "person in charge" shall not exceed $100 per day. As prescribed by
state law, a warning notice shall be issued to the "person in charge" for the first
violation.
11.24 Public Nuisances Prohibited. No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain
or permit to exist any public nuisance within the Town of Middleton.
11.25 Public Nuisance Defined. A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use
of property which shall continue for such length of time as to:
(1) Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the
public;
28
(2) In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property;
(3) Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render
dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other
public way or the use of public property.
11.26 Public Nuisances Affecting Health. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions
and thins are hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the
definition of Section 11.25:
(1) Adulterated Food. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or
drink sold or offered for sale to the public.
(2) Unburied Carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human
consumption or foods that are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary
manner within 24 hours after death.
(3) Breeding Places for Vermin, Etc. Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable
matter (other than composting sites), trash, rubbish, bedding, packing material,
scrap metal, tires or any material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, diseasecarrying
insects, rats or other vermin may breed.
(4) Garbage Cans. Garbage cans that are not fly-tight.
(5) Water Pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances.
(6) Noxious Odors, Etc. Any use of property, substances or things within the town or
within 4 miles thereof or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious
or disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the
physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or
inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the Town,
other the livestock manure.
(7) Street Pollution. Any use of property that shall cause any nauseous or
unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley,
sidewalk or public place within the Town.
(8) Animals at Large. All animals running at large.
(9) Accumulations of Refuse. Accumulations of old cans, diseased elm firewood, and
other refuse.
(10) Air Pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly
ash or industrial dust within the limits or within 1 mile therefrom in such quantities
29
as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause
substantial injury to property.
11.27 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety. The following acts, omissions, places,
conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances, affecting peace and
safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting
public peace or safety coming within the definition of Section 11.25:
(1) Illegal Buildings. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the
provisions of the Ordinances of the Town relating to materials and manner of
construction of buildings and structures within the Town.
(2) Obstruction of Intersections. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions
which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from
obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian
crosswalk.
(3) Tree Limbs. All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk or ditch area
of the right-of-way less than 10 feet above the surface thereof and all limbs which
project over a public street less than 14 feet above the surface thereof.
(4) Dangerous Trees. All trees which are a menace to public safety or are the cause of
substantial annoyance to the general public.
(5) Dilapidated Buildings. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of
repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use.
(6) Wires Over Streets. All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds that are strung
less than 15 feet above the surface thereof.
(7) Obstructions of Streets: Excavations. All obstructions of street, alleys, sidewalks
or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the
Ordinances of the Town or which, although made in accordance with such
Ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time
after the purpose thereof has been accomplished, or which do not conform to the
permit.
(8) Open Excavations. All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused
basements accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
11.28 Abatement of Public Nuisances.
(1) Enforcement. The Town Board, Fire Inspector and the Building Inspector shall
enforce those provisions of this Chapter that come within the jurisdiction of their
offices, and they shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint
to insure that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under this
30
Section to abate a public nuisance unless the officer shall have inspected or caused
to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and has satisfied
himself that nuisance does in fact exist.
(2) Summary Abatement. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public
nuisance exists within the Town and that there is great and immediate danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Town Board, upon
recommendation of the appropriate department head, may direct the proper officer
to cause the same to be abated and charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant
or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
(3) Abatement After Notice. If the inspecting officer shall determine that public
nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such
as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals
or decency, he shall serve notice on the person causing or maintaining the nuisance
to remove the same within 10 days. If such nuisance is not removed within such
10 days, the proper officer shall cause the nuisance to be removed as provided in
Subsection (2).
(4) Other Methods Not Excluded. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as
prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Town or its officials in
accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
11.29 Cost of Abatement. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Chapter for the
erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of
abating a public nuisance by the Town shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, such cost shall be assessed against the real
estate as a special charge.
11.30 Penalties. In addition to the general penalty of this Code in Section 25.06 or any other
penalty imposed for violation of any Section of this Chapter, any person who shall cause physical
damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such
damaged or destroyed property. The parent or parents of any unemancipated minor child who
violates Section 11.07(1) may also be held liable for the cost of replacing or repairing such
damaged or destroyed property in accordance with the Wisconsin Statues. Nothing in this Code
of Ordinances shall prevent law enforcement officers from referring violations of the provisions
of this Chapter to the District Attorney's office in the interest of justice.
1
CHAPTER 12
HEALTH AND SANITATION
12.01 Deposit Of Deleterious Substances Prohibited.
12.02 Destruction Of Noxious Weeds.
12.03 Recycling.
12.04 Anti Scavenging.
12.05 Illegal Dumping.
12.06 Violations and Penalties.
12.07 Special Assessments.
12.08 Promulgation of Regulations.
12.09 Consistency.
12.10 Administration and Enforcement.
12.01 Deposit Of Deleterious Substances Prohibited.
(1) No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any public street or on any public
ground or Town park property or on any private property not his or her own any
snow, refuse, garbage, litter, waste material or liquid, including manure, or any
other objectionable material or liquid. When any such material is placed on the
person’s own private property, it shall be properly enclosed and covered so as to
prevent the same from becoming a public nuisance.
(2) Properly maintained compost piles and silage and manure storage maintained as
part of a farming operation shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section.
(3) Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall forfeit, upon
conviction thereof, not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 for each separate
violation hereunder, provided that the range of forfeiture for a subsequent violation
shall be not less than $400.00 or more than $800.00 for a second violation and no
less than $500.00 nor more than $2,000 for a third or any subsequent violation of
this Chapter or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto within a 12 month period
for each separate violation. Each incident of violation shall be a separate offense
and each day or part thereof during which a violation occurs or continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
12.02 Destruction Of Noxious Weeds.
(1) The Town Clerk shall annually on or before May 15th publish as required by state
law a notice that every person is required by law to destroy all noxious weeds on
lands in the Town of Middleton which he owns, occupies or controls. A joint notice
with other towns or municipalities may be utilized.
(2) If the owner or occupant shall neglect to destroy any weeds as required by such
2
notice, then the Weed Commissioner of the Town shall give 5 days’ written notice
by mail to the owner or occupant of any lands upon which the weeds shall be
growing to the effect that the said Weed Commissioner after the expiration of the
5 day period will proceed to destroy or cause to be destroyed all such weeds
growing upon said lands and that the cost thereof will be assessed as a tax upon the
lands upon which such weeds are located under the provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes. In case the owner or occupant shall further neglect to comply within such
5 day notice, then the Weed Commissioner shall destroy such weeds or cause them
to be destroyed in the manner deemed to be the most economical method and the
expense thereof, including the cost of billing and other necessary administrative
expenses, shall be charged against such lots and be collected as a special tax
thereon.
(3) As provided for in Wisconsin Statutes, the Town shall require that all noxious
weeds shall be destroyed prior to the time in which such plants would mature to the
bloom or flower state. The growth of noxious weeds in excess of 12 inches in
height from the ground surface shall be prohibited within the Town corporate limits.
Noxious weeds may include any weed, grass or similar plant growth that, if allowed
to pollinate, would cause or produce hay fever in human beings or would cause a
skin rash through contact with the skin. A schedule identifying noxious weeds and
grasses, as defined in this Section, is available at the Town Office.
12.03 Recycling
(1) Title. This section comprises the Recycling Ordinance for the Town of Middleton.
(2) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote recycling, composting, and
resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling program, as
provided in s. 287.11, Wis. Stats., and Chapter NR 544, Wis. Administrative Code.
(3) Statutory Authority. This section is adopted as authorized under s. 287.09(3)(b),
Wis. Stats.
(4) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal,
abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances
or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this
section imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this section shall apply.
(5) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this section
shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where any terms
or requirements of this section may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more
restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a provision of this
section is required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by a standard in Chapter NR 544,
Wis. Administrative Code, and where the section provision is unclear, the
provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wisconsin Statutes and the Chapter
NR 544 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this section, or in effect
3
on the date of the most recent text amendment to this section.
(6) Severability. Should any portion of this section be declared unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this section shall not
be affected.
(7) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all persons within the
boundaries of the Town of Middleton.
(8) Administration. The provisions of this section shall be administered by the Town
Board of the Town of Middleton, and its designees.
(9) Effective Date. The provisions of this section shall take effect upon adoption.
(10) Definitions. For the purpose of this section:
(a) “Bi-metal container” means a container for carbonated or malt beverages
that is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
(b) “Container board” means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture
of shipping containers and related products.
(c) “Foam polystyrene packaging” means packaging made primarily from
foam polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
(i) Is designed for serving food or beverages.
(ii) Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
(iii) Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
(d) “Glass Container” means a glass bottle, jar or other packaging container
used to contain a product that is the subject of a retail sale and does not
include ceramic cups, dishes, oven ware, plate glass, safety and window
glass, heat resistant glass such as pyrex, lead based glass such as crystal, or
TV tubes.
(e) “HDPE” means high density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code # 2.
(f) “LDPE” means low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code # 4.
(g) “Magazines” means magazines and other materials printed on similar
paper.
(h) “Major appliance” means a residential or commercial air conditioner,
clothes dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven,
refrigerator, furnace, boiler, dehumidifier, water heater or stove.
4
(i) “Multiple-family dwelling” means a property containing 5 or more
residential units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
(j) “Newspaper” means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
(k) “Non-residential facilities and properties” means commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional and government facilities and properties. This term
does not include multiple family dwellings.
(l) “Office paper” means high grade printing and writing papers from offices
in non- residential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and
computer printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high
grade. This term does not include industrial process waste.
(m) “Other resins or multiple resins” mean plastic resins labeled by the SPI code
# 7.
(n) “Person” includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
local government unit, as defined in s. 66.0131(1)(a), Wis. Stats., state
agency or authority or federal agency.
(o) “PETE” or “PET” means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI
code # 1.
(p) “Plastic container” means an individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can,
jar or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a
product that is the subject of a retail sale.
(q) “Postconsumer waste” means solid waste other than solid waste generated
in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in s. 291.01(7) Wis.
Stats., waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap
automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in s. 289.01(17).,
Wis. Stats.
(r) “PP” means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code # 5.
(s) “PS” means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code # 6.
(t) “PVC” means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code # 3.
(u) “Recyclable materials” includes lead acid batteries; major appliances;
waste oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other
container board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines;
newspaper; office paper; rigid plastic containers, including those made of
PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and other resins or multiple resins; steel
containers; waste tires; and bi-metal containers.
(v) “Solid waste” has the meaning specified in s. 289.01(33), Wis. Stats.
(w) “Solid waste facility” has the meaning specified in s. 289.01(35), Wis.
5
Stats.
(x) “Solid waste treatment” means any method, technique or process which is
designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of solid waste. “Treatment” includes incineration.
(y) “Waste tire” means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
(z) “Yard waste” means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and
brush, including clean woody vegetative material no greater than 6 inches
in diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact
root balls.
(11) Separation of Recyclable Materials. Occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit
residences, multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties
shall separate the following materials from postconsumer waste:
(a) Lead acid batteries
(b) Major appliances
(c) Waste oil
(d) Yard waste
(e) Aluminum containers
(f) Bi-metal containers
(g) Corrugated paper or other container board
(h) Foam polystyrene packaging
(i) Glass containers
(j) Magazines
(k) Newspaper
(l) Office paper
(m) Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and
other resins or multiple resins
(n) Steel containers
(o) Waste tires
(12) Separation Requirements Exempted. The separation requirements of s. (11) do not
apply to the following:
6
(a) Occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties that send their
postconsumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources that recovers the materials specified in s.
(11) from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
(b) Solid waste which is burned as a supplement fuel at a facility if less than
30 % of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste burned
as supplement fuel.
(c) A recyclable material specified in s. (11)(e) through (o) for which a
variance has been granted by the Department of Natural Resources under s.
287.11(2m), Wis. Stats., or s. NR 544.14, Wis. Administrative Code.
(13) Care of Separated Recyclable Materials. To the greatest extent practicable, the
recyclable materials separated in accordance with s. (11) shall be clean and kept
free of contaminants such as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other nonrecyclable
materials, including but not limited to household hazardous waste,
medical waste, and agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be
stored in a manner which protects them from wind, rain, and other inclement
weather conditions.
(14) Management of Lead Acid Batteries, Major Appliances, Waste Oil and Yard
Waste. Occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties shall manage lead acid
batteries, major appliances, waste oil, and yard waste as follows:
(a) Lead acid batteries shall be returned to area retail businesses that sell
vehicle batteries or may be collected by special arrangement with the
collection contractor serving the Town (there may be a fee for such service).
(b) Major appliances may be collected by special arrangement with the
collection contractor serving the Town (there may be a fee for such service).
(c) Waste oil may be collected by special arrangement with the collection
contractor serving the Town (there may be a fee for such service).
(d) Yard waste shall be taken to the site designated by the Town Board.
(15) Preparation and Collection of Recyclable Materials. Except as otherwise directed
by the Town Board, occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit residences shall do
the following for the preparation and collection of the separated materials specified
in s. (11)(e) through (o):
(a) Aluminum containers shall be empty.
(b) Bi-metal containers shall be empty and any labels removed.
(c) Corrugated paper or other container board shall be clean and must be
7
flattened and bundled.
(d) Foam polystyrene packaging shall be disposed of as required by the DNR.
(e) Glass containers shall be cleaned, with caps and neck rings removed. Glass
must be color separated into clear, brown and green/blue. Glass should not
be broken.
(f) Magazines shall be bundled in bundles or placed in a brown paper grocery
bag. Magazines may be mixed with newspaper and office paper.
(g) Newspaper shall be shall be bundled in bundles or placed in a brown paper
grocery bag. Newspaper may be mixed with magazines and office paper.
(h) Office paper shall be shall be bundled in bundles or placed in a brown paper
grocery bag. Office Paper may be mixed with magazines and newspaper.
(i) Rigid plastic containers shall be prepared and collected as follows:
(i) Plastic containers made of PETE, including all plastic bottles
marked or labeled #1 with recycling emblem, except for motor oil
bottles, shall be cleaned and flattened and caps must be removed.
(ii) Plastic containers made of HDPE, including all plastic bottles
marked or labeled #2 with recycling emblem, except for motor oil
bottles, shall be cleaned and flattened and caps must be removed.
(iii) Plastic containers made of PVC, including all bottles or products
marked or labeled #3 with recycling emblem, except for motor oil
bottles, shall be cleaned and bottles flattened and caps must be
removed.
(iv) Plastic containers made of LDPE, including all bottles or products
marked or labeled #4 with recycling emblem, except for motor oil
bottles, shall be cleaned and bottles flattened and caps must be
removed.
(v) Plastic containers made of PP, including all bottles or products
marked or labeled #5 with recycling emblem, except for motor oil
bottles, shall be cleaned and bottles flattened and caps must be
removed.
(vi) Plastic containers made of PS, including all bottles or products
marked or labeled #6 with recycling emblem, except for motor oil
bottles, shall be cleaned and bottles flattened and caps must be
removed.
(vii) Plastic containers made of other resins or multiple resins, including
all bottles or products marked or labeled #7 with recycling emblem,
8
except for motor oil bottles, shall be cleaned and bottles flattened
and caps must be removed.,
(j) Steel (including tin and tin coated containers) containers shall be clean,
labels shall be removed, both ends must be cut out and the containers shall
be flattened. Ends shall be recyclable. Tin cans or containers with molded
or round bottoms can be recycled without removing the “molded or round”
bottom provided the can has been rinsed and the labels removed.
(k) Waste tires may be collected by special arrangement with the collection
contractor serving the Town (there may be a fee for such service).
(16) Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents of Multiple-Family Dwellings.
(a) Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of
the following to recycle the materials specified in s. (11)(e) through (o):
(i) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(ii) Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the
dwelling and at least semi-annually thereafter about the established
recycling program.
(iii) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility.
(iv) Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which
materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet
the processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations
and hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including
a name, address and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to the owners or designated
agents of multiple-family dwellings if the postconsumer waste generated
within the dwelling is treated at a processing facility licensed by the
Department of Natural Resources that recovers for recycling the materials
specified in s. (11)(e) through (o) from solid waste in as pure a form as is
technically feasible.
(17) Responsibilities of Owners or Designated Agents of Non-Residential Facilities and
Properties.
(a) Owners or designated agents of non-residential facilities and properties
shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in s. (11)(e)
through (o):
(i) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
9
(ii) Notify in writing, at least semi-annually, all users, tenants and
occupants of the properties about the established recycling program.
(iii) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
(iv) Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and
recycle, which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in
order to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or
sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or
company, including a name, address and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to the owners or designated
agents of non-residential facilities and properties if the postconsumer waste
generated within the facility or property is treated at a processing facility
licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for recycling
the materials specified in s. (11)(e) through (o) from solid waste in as pure
a form as is technically feasible.
(18) Prohibitions on Disposal of Recyclable Materials Separated for Recycling. No
person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid waste
treatment facility any of the materials specified in s. (11)(e) through (o) which have
been separated for recycling, except waste tires may be burned with energy
recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
(19) Enforcement.
(a) For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
section, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the Town of
Middleton may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling,
postconsumer waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and
facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwellings
and non-residential facilities and properties, and any records relating to
recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when necessary to
protect proprietary information. No person may refuse access to any
authorized officer, employee or authorized representative of the Town of
Middleton who requests access for purposes of inspection, and who
presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper, or
interfere with such an inspection.
(b) Any person who violates a provision of this section may be issued a citation
by law enforcement offers employed or contracted by the Town of
Middleton. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding under
any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter.
Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any
other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this
paragraph.
10
(c) Penalties for violating this section may be assessed as follows:
(i) Any person who violates s. (18) may be required to forfeit $50 for
a first violation, $200 for a second violation, and not more than
$2000 for a third or subsequent violation.
(ii) Any person who violates a provision of this section, except s. (18),
may be required to forfeit not less than $10 or more than $1000 for
each violation.
12.04 Anti Scavenging. Persons shall not pilfer recyclables or disturb recyclables once those
materials are placed for collection. All recyclable materials placed for collection pursuant to this
Chapter shall thereupon become the property of the Town or the Town’s authorized agent, or a
private collector/hauler whom persons in the Town have contracted to perform functions pursuant
to the recycling plan provided in this Chapter. Only persons authorized by the Town or the
generator of waste shall collect or handle recyclable materials once those materials have been
placed appropriately for collection. Any and each collection by unauthorized persons in violation
of this provision shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as provided hereinafter.
12.05 Illegal Dumping.
(1) Town Use Only. The use of the parking lots of the Town Hall or other Town
property shall be limited to only designated area(s) for the disposal of refuse and
recyclables produced, accumulated and collected within the limits of the Town
of Middleton.
(2) Non-Resident Dumping Prohibited. No person not a resident of the Town of
Middleton or the representative of a resident of the Town of Middleton shall use
the parking lots of the Town Hall or other Town property for the purposes of
dumping refuse. No person shall dispose of refuse produced outside of or from the
outside of the Town of Middleton in the parking lots of the Town Hall.
(3) Hours of Use. The use of the parking lots of the Town Hall or other Town property
in only areas designated for the disposal of refuse and recyclables shall be open for
disposal operations on such days and hours as the Town Board may hereinafter
establish.
(4) Trespassing Prohibited. No person without the consent of the Town of
Middleton shall enter upon the Town Hall parking lot or other Town property
premises during hours in which the Town or Town Hall is not in operation.
(5) Dumping on Public Roads. It shall be unlawful to dump or move onto any public
road or highway in the Town of Middleton any debris, refuse, or snow, at any time,
or to place objects thereon, without specific permission from the Town Board.
For purposes of this subsection, public road or highway shall include any street,
bridge, underpass, overpass, and adjacent ditch in the Town, dedicated or
devoted to public use.
11
(6) Dumping on Private Property. No person may dump any refuse or garbage upon
private property without the owner’s consent. No owner may consent to the
dumping of refuse or garbage on his or her property unless said procedure is
licensed by and done in accordance with the laws and regulations of the State of
Wisconsin.
(7) Public Nuisance. Violations of this ordinance are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
(8) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating this ordinance shall forfeit and
pay for each offense (and each day that such nuisance shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense) a penalty of not less than $100.00 nor more than
$300.00.
12.06 Violations and Penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this Chapter or any
regulations promulgated pursuant to this Chapter for which a penalty has not been otherwise
specifically provided shall forfeit, upon conviction thereof, not less than $50.00 nor more than
$200.00 for each separate violation hereunder, provided that the range of forfeiture for a
subsequent violation shall be not less than $200.00 or more than $500.00 for a second violation
and no less than $500.00 nor more than $2,000. For a third or any subsequent violation of this
Chapter or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto within a 12 month period for each separate
violation. Each incident of violation shall be a separate offense and each day or part thereof during
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
12.07 Special Assessments. Solid waste disposal charges, including recycling fees as authorized
in Sec. 66.0606, Wis. Stats., may be made to each property on a per-unit basis. A unit consists of
an improved non-residential property or a dwelling unit. Non-residential improved properties that
generate on waste may be exempt from such charges by action of the Town Board.
12.08 Promulgation of Regulations. The Town Board shall prepare regulations, standards and
schedules as necessary to make effective all provisions of this Chapter. Periodically, upon a
schedule adopted by the Town, the Town clerk shall prepare notices and distribute other
information to person generating waste within the Town for the purposes of informing the public
about the requirements dictated by this Chapter.
12.09 Consistency.
All ordinances of the Town or parts of those ordinances construed to be inconsistent with this
Chapter for the purpose of achieving an effective recycling program in the Town shall be hereby
repealed as to such inconsistency only for the limited purpose of making effective all provisions
in this Chapter.
12.10 Administration and Enforcement.
(1) The provisions of this Chapter, as well as the town’s recycling and solid waste
12
disposal program as a whole, shall be administered and enforced by the Town
Administrator, or any other officer, employee or representative of the Town of
Middleton authorized by the Town Board.
(2) For the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, the
Town Administrator, or any other officer, employee or representative of the Town
of Middleton authorized by the Town Board, may inspect recyclable materials
separated for recycling, post-consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling
collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiplefamily
dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties, and any records
relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential when necessary to
protect proprietary information.
(3) No person may refuse access to any authorized officer, employee or authorized
representative of the Town of Middleton who requests access for purposes of
inspection and who presents appropriate credentials nor may any person obstruct,
hamper or interfere with such an inspection.
(4) This Chapter shall be enforced using the citation method provided for under
Chapter 3 of the Town’s Code of Ordinances.
Appendix A
Visit the Dane County Web Site www.co.dane.wi.us for current information regarding dropoff
centers.
The Town’s website and recycling newsletter provide additional information.
1
CHAPTER 14
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
14.01 Statutory authority.
14.02 Public participation.
14.03 Plan Commission resolution.
14.04 Public hearing.
14.05 Adoption of plan.
14.01 Statutory authority.
Pursuant to § 62.23(2) and (3), Wis. Stats., the Town of Middleton is authorized to prepare and
adopt a comprehensive plan as defined in § 66.1001(1)(a) and (2), Wis. Stats.
14.02 Public participation.
The Town Board of the Town of Middleton, Wisconsin, has adopted written procedures designed
to foster public participation in every stage of the preparation of a comprehensive plan as required
by § 66.1001(4)(a), Wis. Stats.
14.03 Plan Commission resolution.
The Plan Commission of the Town of Middleton, by a majority vote of the entire Commission
recorded in its official minutes, has adopted a resolution recommending to the Town the adoption
of the document titled "Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Middleton," containing all of the
elements specified in § 66.1001(2), Wis. Stats.
14.04 Public hearing.
The Town has held at least one public hearing on this chapter, in compliance with the requirements
of § 66.1001(4)(d), Wis. Stats.
14.05 Adoption of plan.
The Town Board of the Town of Middleton, Wisconsin, does, by enactment of this chapter,
formally adopt the document titled "Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Middleton," pursuant to
§ 66.1001(4)(c), Wis. Stats.1”
1. Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the office of the Town Clerk. The Town’s original comprehensive plan
was adopted April 6, 2009, and the Town’s 2040 comprehensive plan was adopted December 19, 2019.
1
CHAPTER 15
LAND DIVISION AND SUBDIVISIONS
15.01 Introduction and purpose.
15.02 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
15.03 Interpretation.
15.04 Title.
15.05 Definitions.
15.06 Transition area.
15.07 Compliance; jurisdiction; minor subdivisions; building permits; condominiums.
15.08 Land suitability.
15.09 Condominium developments.
15.10 Dedication and reservation of land.
15.11 Hillside protection.
15.12 Administrative fees.
15.13 Landscape requirements.
15.14 Preliminary consultation.
15.15 Submission of Preliminary Plat for major subdivisions.
15.16 Preliminary plat review and approval.
15.17 Final plat review and approval.
15.18 Replat.
15.19 Assessor's plat.
15.20 Technical requirements for Preliminary Plats.
15.21 Technical requirements for final plats.
15.22 Technical requirements for certified survey land divisions; review and approval.
15.23 Cost of improvements; general standards.
15.24 Required agreement providing for proper installation of improvements.
15.25 Required construction plans; Town Review; inspections.
15.26 Street improvements.
15.27 Curb and gutter.
15.28 Sidewalks.
15.29 Park and trail improvements.
15.30 Sanitary sewerage system.
15.31 Stormwater drainage facilities.
15.32 Other utilities.
15.33 Street signs and lighting.
15.34 Erosion control.
15.35 Partition fences.
15.36 Easements.
15.37 Buffer strips.
15.38 Greenways.
15.39 Vegetation in right-of-way.
15.40 General street design standards.
15.41 Pedestrian pathways.
15.42 Lot design standards.
2
15.43 Drainage system.
15.44 Nonresidential land divisions.
15.45 General park, conservancy area, recreational trail, and public land dedication
requirements.
15.46 Parkland, conservancy areas, and recreational trail dedication.
15.47 Reservation of additional land.
15.48 Development of park area.
15.49 Development of trails.
15.50 Preservation of conservancy areas.
15.51 Variances and exceptions.
15.52 Violations and penalties; appeals.
Environmental Checklist (Attachment 1)
15.01 Introduction and purpose.
(1) Introduction. In accordance with the authority granted by § 236.45 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and for the purposes listed in §§ 236.01 and 236.45 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, the Town Board of the Town of Middleton, Dane County, Wisconsin, does
hereby ordain as follows:
(a) The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
adopted to promote the health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity and
general welfare of the Town of Middleton.
(b) This chapter shall not repeal, impair or modify private covenants or public
laws, except that it may apply whenever it imposes stricter restrictions on
division of land.
(2) Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare of the Town of Middleton. The regulations
are designed to foster the orderly layout and use of land; to facilitate
adequate provision for transportation, water and sewerage systems, parks,
playgrounds, schools and educational facilities, and other public necessities;
to discourage overcrowding of the land; to provide for a system of
transportation which meets or exceeds minimum standards for public
safety; to lessen congestion on Town roads, highways and streets; to secure
safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; and to facilitate the further
division of large tracts of land into smaller parcels.
(b) The regulations are made with reasonable consideration of, but not limited
to, the present character of the Town and its environs, with the objectives
of conserving the value of the land and improvements placed thereon,
providing for the most appropriate environment for human habitation,
3
encouraging open space, and providing for the most appropriate use of land
in the Town of Middleton.
15.02 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing
easements, covenants, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued
pursuant to law. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
chapter shall govern.
15.03 Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the
minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Town of Middleton and
shall not be deemed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes. Land Dividers, Owners, Applicants, etc. who propose a land division per this Chapter
should understand all risks, financial and otherwise, associated with their proposals. As such, they
will be asked to agree to pay all Town costs incurred with review of their application with no
guarantee of gaining the approval they seek.
15.04 Title.
This chapter shall be known as, referred to, or cited as the "Town of Middleton Subdivision
Ordinance" or "Town of Middleton Land Division and Subdivision Ordinance."
15.05 Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable to this chapter:
(1) ALLEY — A public or private right-of-way in a Major or Minor Subdivision,
which provides secondary access to a lot, block or parcel of land.
(2) ARTERIAL STREET — A street that provides for the movement of relatively
heavy traffic to, from, and within the Town. It has a secondary function of providing
access to abutting land.
(3) BLOCK — An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by a
combination or combinations of streets, exterior boundary lines of the subdivision
and streams or bodies of water.
(4) BUILDING ENVELOPE — The area within which structures are permitted to be
built on a Lot, as defined by the existing ground level, all applicable setback, side
yard and rear yard requirements (notwithstanding any variances, special
exceptions, or special or conditional uses in effect) and any Land Use Plan and
Town Ordinances adopted by the Town.
(5) CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP — A map or plan of record of a Minor Subdivision
meeting all the requirements of § 236.34, Wis. Stats., the Dane County Land
4
Division Ordinance and this chapter.
(6) CLUSTER SUBDIVISION/SUBDIVISION, CLUSTER — A Major Subdivision
where the Parcel to be divided is 15 acres or more in size and uses smaller (as
defined in § 15.42(1) of this chapter) individual Lot sizes and common open space
areas as a means to reduce site disturbances, preserve sensitive features and open
space, ensure a rural-like atmosphere, yet maintain gross densities similar to those
permitted under Traditional Subdivision controls.
(7) COLLECTOR STREET — A street that collects and distributes internal traffic
within an urban area such as a residential neighborhood, between Arterial and Local
Streets.
(8) COMMISSION — The Plan Commission created by the Town Board pursuant to
§ 62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(9) COMPREHENSIVE PLAN – The Town adopted Plan as defined by Chapter
66.1001, Wis. Stats., and Chapter 14 of these Ordinances. For purposes of this
chapter, the “Comprehensive Plan” shall also be referred to as “Land Use Plan” and
“Master Plan.”
(10) CONDOMINIUM — Property subject to a Condominium declaration established
under Chapter 703, Wis. Stats.
(11) CORNER LOT/LOT, CORNER — A Lot abutting intersecting streets at their
intersection.
(12) CUL-DE-SAC — A short street having but one end open to traffic and the other
end being terminated in a vehicular turnaround.
(13) DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — A separate
document developed, approved, and modified from time to time by the Town
Board. The document details design and construction standards for public street
and drainage improvements in the Town.
(14) DEVELOPER — A Person that constructs or creates a Development or
Redevelopment.
(15) DEVELOPMENT/REDEVELOPMENT — The construction or modification of
improvements to improved or unimproved real property that creates additional
residential Dwelling Units or that results in new or expanded nonresidential uses,
the use of any principal structure or land, or any other activity that requires issuance
of a building permit or creates a need for new, expanded or improved public
facilities within the Town.
(16) DIVISION OF LAND/LAND DIVISION — Any action which creates or modifies
5
a Parcel of land that is less than 35 acres.
(17) DRAINAGE WAY – MAJOR – Any watercourse, drainage way, channel, stream
or swale that has a tributary drainage area of 10 acres or more.
(18) DRAINAGE WAY – MINOR – Any watercourse, drainage way, channel, stream
or swale that has a tributary drainage area of at least 3 and less than 10 acres , or
that drains 2 or more lots.
(19) DWELLING UNIT — Each separate living unit authorized to be constructed on a
parcel of land (e.g., a single-family residence shall be considered one Dwelling
Unit; a duplex shall be considered two Dwelling Units; a four-family building shall
be considered four Dwelling Units, etc.).
(20) EASEMENT — The area of land set aside or over or through which a liberty,
privilege or advantage in land, distinct from ownership of the land, is granted to the
public or some particular Person or part of the public.
(21) EXTRATERRITORIAL PLAT APPROVAL JURISDICTION — The
unincorporated area within 1 1/2 miles of a fourth-class city or a village and within
three miles of all other cities.
(22) FILING DATE — The date on which a Certified Survey map, Preliminary Plat, or
Final Plat is submitted to the Town Office.
(23) FINAL PLAT/PLAT, FINAL — The final map on which the Land Divider's plan
of subdivision is presented for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted
to the County Register of Deeds for recordation.
(24) FRONTAGE STREET — A Local Street auxiliary to and located on the side of an
Arterial Street for control of access and for service to the abutting land.
(25) GREENWAY — An open area of land, the primary purpose of which is to carry
stormwater on the surface of the ground in lieu of an enclosed storm sewer.
Greenways may serve the following multiple public purposes in addition to their
principal use, including but not limited to, vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic,
sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers, stormwater retention basins, and park
development.
(26) IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC/PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, open channel, water main, roadway, park, parkway, public access,
sidewalk, pedestrian way, planting strip or other facility for which the Town may
ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation.
(27) LAND DIVIDER/SUBDIVIDER — A Developer or Owner, or any agent thereof,
dividing or proposing to divide land resulting in a Major Subdivision, Minor
6
Subdivision or Replat.
(28) LAND DIVISION/DIVISION OF LAND — See definition for "Division of
Land/Land Division".
(29) LAND USE PLAN — Also known, or referred to as the “Comprehensive Plan” or
the "Master Plan," as defined below.
(30) LOCAL STREET — A street of little or no continuity designed to provide access
to abutting property and leading into Collector Streets.
(31) LOT — A Parcel of land having frontage on a public street or other officially
approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal
structure or use and sufficient in size to meet the Lot Width, Lot frontage, Lot Area,
yard, parking area and other open space provisions of this chapter and any
applicable zoning ordinance.
(32) LOT AREA — The area contained within the exterior boundaries of a Lot,
excluding streets and land under navigable bodies of water.
(33) LOT, CORNER/CORNER LOT — See definition for "Corner Lot/Lot, Corner."
(34) LOT LINES — The peripheral boundaries of a Lot as defined herein.
(35) LOT, REVERSED CORNER/REVERSED CORNER LOT — A Corner Lot which
is oriented so that it has its rear Lot Line coincident with or parallel to the side Lot
Line of the interior Lot immediately to its rear.
(36) LOT, THROUGH/THROUGH LOT — A Lot having a pair of opposite Lot Lines
along two more or less parallel public streets and which is not a Corner Lot. On a
"Through Lot" both street lines shall be deemed front Lot Lines.
(37) LOT WIDTH — The width of a Parcel of land measured along the front boundary
line.
(38) MAJOR SUBDIVISION/SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any Land Division that is
not a "Minor Subdivision."
(39) MAJOR THOROUGHFARE — A street used or intended to be used primarily for
fast or heavy through traffic. Major Thoroughfares shall include freeways,
expressways and other highways and parkways, as well as Arterial Streets.
(40) MASTER PLAN — A plan for guiding and shaping the growth and development
of the Town which has been or will be adopted from time to time by the Town
Board. Also known as, or referred to as the “Comprehensive Plan” or the "Land
Use Plan."
7
(41) MINOR STREET — A street used, or intended to be used, primarily for access to
abutting properties; also referred to as a "Local Street."
(42) MINOR SUBDIVISION/SUBDIVISION, MINOR — The Division of Land by the
Owner or Land Divider resulting in the creation of not more than four Parcels or
building sites, except where the act of division creates five or more Parcels or
building sites by successive division within a period of five years, whether done by
the original Owner or by a successor Owner.
(43) NATIVE TREES — Trees known to grow naturally (as opposed to cultivated or
introduced) in Southern Wisconsin.
(44) OFFICIAL MAP — The map indicating the location, width and/or extent of
existing and proposed streets, highways, parkways, parks and playgrounds, as
adopted by the Town Board pursuant to § 62.23(6), Wis. Stats.
(45) OPEN SPACE --- Areas intended for the permanent protection and preservation of
sensitive sites, vistas and Town-wide trails or bikeways available to all Town
residents. Open space generally includes farms, golf courses, prairies and other
large expanses, and may include public roads in certain Cluster Subdivisions. Parks
are not counted as open space.
(46) OWNER — Includes the plural as well as the singular and may mean either a
natural Person, firm, association, partnership, limited liability company, private
corporation, public or quasi-public corporation, or a combination of these that has
title to a Parcel of real estate.
(47) PARCEL — Contiguous lands under the control of a Land Divider(s), Developer(s)
and/or Owner(s) not separated by streets, highways or railroad rights-of-way.
(48) PARK COMMISSION — The Town of Middleton Park Commission.
(49) PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY — A public way, usually running at right angles to
streets, which is intended for the convenience of pedestrians only; it may also
provide public right-of-way for utilities.
(50) PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, corporation or limited
liability company, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state.
(51) PLAN COMMISSION — The Town of Middleton Plan Commission.
(52) PLAT — The map on which the Land Divider's Plat of subdivision is presented to
the Town for approval.
(53) PLAT, FINAL/FINAL PLAT — See definition for "Final Plat/Plat, Final".
8
(54) PLAT, PRELIMINARY/PRELIMINARY PLAT — The Preliminary Plat map
indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Town Board
for its consideration as to compliance with the regulations contained in this chapter
along with required supporting data.
(55) PRELIMINARY PLAT/PLAT, PRELIMINARY — See definition for "Plat,
Preliminary/Preliminary Plat".
(56) PRIMARY RECREATIONAL TRAIL/RECREATIONAL TRAIL, PRIMARY —
An Easement or dedication of a curvilinear or linear corridor, at least 30 feet in
width (or at least 20 feet in width if adjacent to a public right-of-way), that is
proposed for development by the Town of Middleton as part of a continuous public
trail system linking neighborhoods with parks, schools, conservancy areas, historic
sites, and other public facilities and public open spaces. As Owner of the Public
Recreational Trail, the Town shall have the right to improve, repair, maintain, and
allow public use of the Public Recreational Trail Easement as the Town from time
to time determines. Trail surfaces are typically crushed stone or crushed limestone
screenings. Other surfaces, such as compacted earth, mowed grass, wood chips, or
asphalt pavement, may be permissible as determined by the Town. These trails are
primarily intended for use by bicycles and pedestrians. Other uses may be
permissible as determined by the Town.
(57) PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT — Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, open channel,
water main, roadway, park, parkway, private access, sidewalk, pedestrian way,
planting strip, or other facility for which the maintenance and operation is the
responsibility of the Land Divider, Owner, or homeowners' association. Private
roadways shall be constructed according to § 15-26(1).
(58) PROTECTIVE COVENANTS/RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS — Contracts
entered into between private parties or between private parties and public bodies
pursuant to § 236.293, Wis. Stats., which constitute a restriction on the use of all
private or platted property within a Certified Survey or Subdivision for the benefit
of the public or property Owners and to provide mutual protection against the
undesirable aspects of Development which would tend to impair the stability of
property values.
(59) PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT/IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC — See definition for
"Improvement, Public/Public Improvement".
(60) RECREATIONAL EASEMENT — An Easement to the Town of Middleton to
place, replace, maintain or operate recreational facilities according to the rules and
regulations of the Town.
(61) RECREATIONAL TRAIL, PRIMARY/PRIMARY RECREATIONAL TRAIL —
See definition for "Primary Recreational Trail/Recreational Trail, Primary".
9
(62) RECREATIONAL TRAIL, SECONDARY/SECONDARY RECREATIONAL
TRAIL — An Easement or dedication of a curvilinear or linear corridor, at least 15
feet in width, that is proposed for development by the Town of Middleton as part
of a public trail system within neighborhoods, parkland, conservancy areas and
other public open spaces providing access to Primary Recreational Trails from
neighborhoods and/or providing corridors within and throughout parkland,
conservancy areas and other public open spaces. As Owner of the Public
Recreational Trail, the Town shall have the right to improve, repair, maintain, and
allow public use of the Public Recreational Trail Easement as the Town from time
to time determines. Trail surfaces are typically compacted earth, mowed grass, or
wood chips. Other surfaces, such as crushed stone, crushed limestone screenings,
or asphalt pavement may be permissible as determined by the Town. These trails
are primarily intended for use by pedestrians. Other uses, such as bicycle uses, may
be permissible as determined by the Town.
(63) REDEVELOPMENT/DEVELOPMENT — See definition for
"Development/Redevelopment."
(64) REPLAT — The process of changing, or the map or Plat which changes, the
boundaries of a recorded subdivision Plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of a
Block, Lot or Outlot within a recorded Subdivision Plat without changing exterior
boundaries of said Block, Lot or Outlot is not a Replat.
(65) RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS/PROTECTIVE COVENANTS — See definition
for "Protective Covenants/Restrictive Covenants".
(66) REVERSED CORNER LOT/LOT, REVERSED CORNER — See definition for
"Lot, Reversed Corner/Reversed Corner Lot".
(67) SANITARY DISTRICT COMMISSION — A commission established under §
60.74, Wis. Stats.
(68) SECONDARY RECREATIONAL TRAIL/RECREATIONAL TRAIL,
SECONDARY — See definition for "Recreational Trail, Secondary/Secondary
Recreational Trail".
(69) SHARED USE PATH --- A path physically separated from motor vehicle traffic
by an open space or barrier, which is either within a road right-of-way or an
independent right-of-way and is used by pedestrians, bicyclists and other nonmotorized
travelers for transportation as well as recreational purposes.
(70) SHORELANDS — Those lands within the following distances: 1,000 feet from the
ordinary high-water mark of navigable lakes, ponds or flowages, or 300 feet from
the ordinary high-water mark of navigable streams or to the landward side of a
floodplain, whichever is greater.
10
(71) STORMWATER MASTER PLAN — Also known as Stormwater Master Plan —
Town of Middleton (2017). A Stormwater report developed primarily to address
requirements of Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES)
Permit No. WI-S058416-2
(72) SUBDIVIDER/LAND DIVIDER — See definition for "Land Divider/Subdivider".
(73) SUBDIVISION, CLUSTER/CLUSTER SUBDIVISION — See definition for
"Cluster Subdivision/Subdivision, Cluster".
(74) SUBDIVISION, MAJOR/MAJOR SUBDIVISION — See definition for "Major
Subdivision/Subdivision, Major".
(75) SUBDIVISION, MINOR/MINOR SUBDIVISION — See definition for "Minor
Subdivision/Subdivision, Minor".
(76) SUBDIVISION, TRADITIONAL/TRADITIONAL SUBDIVISION — Any Major
Subdivision that does not meet the definition of a Cluster Subdivision.
(77) THROUGH LOT/LOT, THROUGH — See definition for "Lot, Through/Through
Lot".
(78) TOWN — The Town of Middleton, Dane County.
(79) TRADITIONAL SUBDIVISION/SUBDIVISION, TRADITIONAL — See
definition for "Subdivision, Traditional/Traditional Subdivision".
(80) URBAN SERVICE AREA — That area in the Town served by public water and
sewer facilities, designated on a map adopted by the Town Board and the former
Dane County Regional Planning Commission, the Capital Area Regional Planning
Commission, or other future or subsequent equivalent bodies.
(81) WETLANDS — An area where water is at, near or above the land surface long
enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which
has soils indicative of wet conditions. [See § 23.32(1), Wis. Stats.]
(82) WISCONSIN ADMINISTRATIVE CODE — The rules of the administrative
agencies having rule-making authority in Wisconsin, published in a loose-leaf,
continual revision system, as directed by § 35.93 and Chapter 227 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, including subsequent amendments to those rules.
15.06 Transition area.
(1) Transition area defined. In furtherance of the purposes of the Town's Land Division
and Subdivision Ordinance, a Transition Area has been created lying south of Old
11
Sauk Road and east of a line 1/2 mile west of and parallel to Pioneer Road and
Pioneer Road extended (the west section lines of Sections 20, 29 and 32), a portion
of which is subject to Intergovernmental Agreement between the City of Madison
and Town of Middleton dated March 28, 2002, and City of Madison and Town of
Middleton Cooperative Plan under § 66.0307, Wis. Stats., signed September 22,
2003, and dated September 29, 2003.
(2) Transition area cluster subdivisions. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary
contained elsewhere in the Town's Land Division and Subdivision Ordinance, any
Cluster Subdivision created within the Transition Area shall comply with the
following minimum standards for open space, Lot size and development density.
(a) Open space requirements. Open space (excluding streets and dedicated
parkland) shall be provided for Cluster Subdivision Lots within the
Transition Area according to the following:
(i) For Lots served by public sewer containing between 12,000 square
feet and less than 25,000 square feet, an associated minimum open
space of 10,000 square feet, plus 32,700 square feet minus the Lot
size.
(ii) For Lots (sewered and unsewered) containing at least 25,000 square
feet but less than 32,700 square feet, an associated minimum open
space of 10,000 square feet, plus 32,700 square feet minus the Lot
size.
(iii) For Lots (sewered and unsewered) containing at least 32,700 square
feet but less than 65,000 square feet, an associated open space of
5,000 square feet.
(iv) For Lots (sewered and unsewered) containing 65,000 square feet or
more and containing only one Dwelling Unit, no open space shall
be required.
(v) For all sewered and unsewered lots containing multiple Dwelling
Units, the required total space (open space plus lot area) shall be
calculated by summing: 1) the product of the number of dwelling
units on the lot by the open space derived from the formulas listed
under §15.06(2)(a)(i-iv), and 2) the product of the number of
dwelling units on the lot multiplied by the lot size.
Example 1: a 14,000 sf lot with 2 dwelling units would require the
following:
1. (32,700 sf - 14,000 sf + 10,000 sf) x 2 = 57,400 sf
2. (2 dwelling units x 14,000 sf) = 28,000 sf
12
Total open space and lot area required = 85,400 sf
(An acre equals 43,560 sf)
Example 2: a 60,000 sf lot with 2 dwelling units would require the
following:
3. (5,000 sf) x 2 = 10,000 sf
4. (2 dwelling units x 60,000 sf) = 120,000 sf
Total open space and lot area required = 130,000 sf
(An acre equals 43,560 sf)
(b) Lot size standards.
(i) Calculation of lot size. New Lots in any Cluster Subdivision created
in the Transition Area shall be at least 80% of the size of abutting
Lots or Parcels three acres in size or less. If the new Lot abuts two
or more existing Lots or Parcels, the size of the new Lot shall be
calculated based on the size of the abutting existing Lot or Parcel
with which it shares the greatest length of common lot line. In the
event required open space within the Plat separates a new Lot from
an existing Lot or Parcel, such Lots or Parcels shall be considered to
be abutting Lots or Parcels, and the area of open space located
between the two Lots or Lot and Parcel and within the extended Lot
Lines of the new Lot shall be counted toward the required square
footage of the new Lot. No new Lot will be required to exceed
65,000 square feet.
(ii) Minimum lot size. New unsewered Lots in any Cluster Subdivision
created in the Transition Area shall have a minimum Lot size of
25,000 square feet.
(iii) Minimum lot size. New sewered Lots created in the Transition Area
shall have a minimum Lot size of 12,000 square feet, with an
additional 2,000 square feet required for each additional Dwelling
Unit.
(iv) Development density. The gross development density for any
Subdivisions created within the Transition Area shall be a maximum
of one Dwelling Unit per 50,000 square feet.
(3) All other subdivision requirements contained in the Town's Land Division and
Subdivision Ordinance, including Cluster Subdivision requirements not modified
herein, shall apply to subdivisions created in the Transition Area.
13
15.07 Compliance; jurisdiction; minor subdivisions; building permits; condominiums.
(1) Compliance. No Person shall divide any land located within the jurisdictional limits
of these regulations which results in a Land Division or a Replat as defined herein;
no such Land Division or Replat shall be entitled to record; and no street shall be
laid out or improvements made to land without compliance with all requirements
of this chapter and the following:
(a) The provisions of Chapter 236 and § 82.18 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Comprehensive plans or components of such plans prepared by state,
regional, county or municipal agencies duly adopted by the Town Board.
(c) All applicable local and county regulations, including zoning, sanitary,
building and official mapping ordinances.
(d) Applicable provisions of the Dane County Code of Ordinances.
(e) All applicable rules contained in the Wisconsin Administrative Code not
listed in this subsection.
(2) Jurisdiction. Jurisdiction of these regulations shall include all lands within the limits
of the Town of Middleton. The provisions of this chapter, as they apply to Major
and Minor Subdivisions, shall not apply to:
(a) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order;
(b) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or Easements;
(c) The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
property if all of the following are complied with:
(i) The number of parcels is equal to or less than the original number
of parcels.
(ii) A deed is recorded at the Register of Deeds and a plat of survey is
filed at the County Surveyor’s office for each newly arranged parcel
created by conveyance and/or reconveyance to each property owner
within the limits of the transfer. In addition, the plat of survey is
included as an exhibit in the deed.
(iii) The newly created parcels do not violate zoning setbacks.
(iv) The parcels are of the same zoning classification.
14
(v) Lot sizes are not changed beyond area thresholds of zoning
classifications or this ordinance.
(vi) If there are multiple tax parcels that make up one ownership parcel,
they are all included within the newly formed boundary.
(3) Minor subdivisions. Any Minor Subdivision other than a subdivision as defined in
§ 236.02(12), Wis. Stats., shall be surveyed and a Certified Survey map prepared
as provided in § 236.34, Wis. Stats.
(4) Building permits. The Town of Middleton shall not issue any building permit
relating to any Parcel of land forming all or any part of lands included in a Major
Subdivision, Minor Subdivision or Replat originally submitted to the Town of
Middleton on or after the effective date of this chapter until the Land Divider has
complied with all of the provisions and requirements of this chapter. The following
represents the minimum site improvements and other requirements that must be
completed in order to obtain a building permit:
(a) The lower course or lower layer of asphalt pavement must be installed along
the entire street frontage for a Lot requesting a permit (including the
placement of shoulder stone laid up to and flush with the lower course of
pavement).
(b) Installation of all street and regulatory signs shall be installed if the Lot is
in a platted subdivision.
(c) Subdivision gas, electric, telephone and cable utilities are installed and
working.
(d) Approval of a driveway culvert map must be obtained if the Lot is contained
in a platted subdivision.
(e) Recorded copies of the Final Plat or Certified Survey map, deed restrictions
and Protective Covenants, and other recorded documents required by the
Town to gain a Land Division approval, are submitted to the Town Office,
the Town Attorney, and the Town Engineer.
(f) All other subdivision (or phase of a subdivision in which a Lot is located)
street and drainage improvements are substantially complete.
(5) Applicability to condominiums. This chapter is expressly applicable to
Condominium Developments within the Town's jurisdiction, pursuant to §
703.27(1), Wis. Stats. For purposes of this chapter, a Condominium unit and any
associated limited common elements shall be deemed to be equivalent to a Lot or
Parcel created by the act of Land Division.
15
15.08 Land suitability.
(1) Suitability.
(a) No Land Division shall be allowed for residential, commercial or industrial
use which is held unsuitable for such use by the Town Board for reason of
flooding, inadequate drainage, unsuitable soil or rock formation,
unfavorable topography or any other feature likely to be harmful to the
health, safety, or welfare of future residents of the Town. The Town Board,
in applying the provisions of this section, shall in writing recite the
particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not
suitable for residential, commercial or industrial use and afford the Land
Divider an opportunity to present evidence regarding such unsuitability if
the Land Divider so desires. Thereafter, the Town Board may affirm,
modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.
(b) Except as provided herein, the Plan Commission shall preferably determine
land suitability at the time of the preliminary consultation, following review
and recommendation by the Town Engineer and comment by the Dane
County Soil and Water Conservation District. The Land Divider shall
furnish such maps, data and information as may be requested by the Town,
or as are necessary to make a determination of land suitability. In addition
to the data required to be submitted with the Preliminary Plat or Certified
Survey, the Land Divider may be required to submit some or all of the
following additional information for Development located in an area where
flooding or potential flooding may be a hazard:
(i) Two copies of an aerial photograph, or two maps prepared by a
professional land surveyor or engineer which accurately locate the
proposed development with respect to the floodplain zoning limits,
if present, channel or stream fill limits and elevations, and floodproofing
measures taken or proposed to be taken.
(ii) Two copies of a typical valley cross-section showing the channel or
stream, the floodplain adjoining each side of the channel or stream,
cross-sectional area to be occupied by the proposed development
and high-water information.
(iii) Two copies of a profile showing the slope of the bottom of the
channel or the flow line of the stream.
(iv) Such other data as may be requested or required.
(c) When a proposed Land Division is located in an area where flooding or
16
potential flooding may be a hazard, the Town Board may transmit to the
Department of Natural Resources, information provided by the Land
Divider and may request that the Department provide technical assistance
in determining whether the land is suitable or unsuitable for the use
proposed.
(d) Where a proposed Land Division is located wholly or partly in an area
where flooding or potential flooding may be a hazard, the applicable County
Ordinances shall apply.
(e) The Land Divider may, as part of the preliminary consultation procedures,
request a determination of land suitability providing that the Land Divider
shall provide all necessary maps, data and information necessary for such a
determination to be made.
(2) Existing flora. The Land Divider shall make every reasonable effort to protect and
retain all existing Native Trees, shrubbery, vines, and grasses not actually lying in
public roadways, drainage ways, building foundation sites, private driveways, soil
absorption waste disposal areas, paths and trails. Such vegetation is to be protected
and preserved during the construction in accordance with sound conservation plans
pursuant to a landscaping plan filed with the Town by the Land Divider and as
approved by the Town Board or Town Engineer. The Town may, at its discretion,
require the Land Divider to replace Native Canopy trees disturbed by subdivision
improvements with new Native Canopy trees located within the Land Division.
The Town may require up the following amount of trees to be planted in open space
or outlots at locations approved by the Town:
(a) For each Native Canopy tree removed with a diameter between 8” and 15”,
two (2) Native Canopy trees shall be installed.
(b) For each Native Canopy tree removed with a diameter between 15” and 36”,
three (3) Native Canopy trees shall be installed.
(c) For each Native Canopy tree removed with a diameter larger than 36”, four
(4) Native Canopy trees shall be installed.
(d) New Native Canopy trees shall meet the requirements of §15.13. The
required planting here shall be in addition to any required by the
requirements of §15-13.
(3) Additional considerations.
(a) The Land Divider shall make every effort to preserve and protect:
(i) Areas of archaeological and/or historical interest including, but not
limited to, those areas designated by the State Historical Society.
17
(ii) Areas of geological interest including, but not limited to, those areas
designated by the State Geological and Natural History Survey.
(b) In addition, the suitability of land for private sewerage systems shall be
determined in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes and Wisconsin Administrative Code, and all Land Divisions shall
satisfy the environmental assessment criteria of this chapter.
15.09 Condominium developments.
(1) Purpose.
(a) The Town Board hereby finds that certain issues arise in Condominium
developments that require limited applicability of this chapter to
Condominium Developments. The State Legislature has recognized that
Land Division ordinances may apply to Condominiums, but that
subdivision ordinances shall not impose burdens upon Condominiums that
are different from those imposed on other property of a similar character
not subject to a declaration of Condominium.
(b) The factor that makes this chapter applicable to a Condominium
Development is the creation of multiple, distinct property entities at or near
the ground surface, subject to property taxation as separate "Parcels" with
each property entity having different ownership and management. The
Town determines that this factor makes a Condominium Development
dissimilar, both physically and in ownership, from developments in which
the land and improvements are under unitary ownership, management and
control.
(c) Thus, the Town Board hereby finds that new Condominium Developments
can place impacts on community resources in the same manner as other new
developments that are characterized by Division of Land into Lots. These
impacts include:
(i) Additional population density;
(ii) Possibility of use of particular land in a manner unsuitable to the
land's characteristics;
(iii) Additional demands upon Town area parks, recreation programs and
areas, utility facilities and schools;
(iv) Additional traffic and street use.
(2) Portions of chapter Applicable to Condominium Developments. The following
18
Sections of this chapter shall apply to Condominium Developments:
(a) Section 15.08, relating to land suitability and construction practices;
(b) Sections 15.14 through 15.16, relating to Preliminary Plat approval. The
technical requirements for Preliminary Plats set forth in § 15.21 shall not
apply, since Condominiums have separate technical standards set forth in
Chapter 703, Wis. Stats.
(c) Section 15.12, relating to fees for review;
(d) Sections 15.23 through 15.39, relating to required improvements;
(e) Sections 15.40 through 15.44, relating to design standards for
improvements;
(f) Sections 15.45 through 15.50, relating to dedication requirements;
(g) Sections 15.51 through 15.52, relating to variances, penalties and
violations;
(h) Chapter 5, relating to impact fees.
(3) This section shall not apply to the following condominiums:
(a) Any Condominium Plat recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter;
(b) Any conversion of a structure or structures in existence on the effective date
of this chapter to a Condominium after the effective date of this chapter,
unless additional residential or commercial units are created.
(c) Any Condominium Plat where no actual Land Division results.
15.10 Dedication and reservation of land.
(1) Public ways. Whenever a tract of land to be divided within the Town encompasses
all or any part of a street, highway, trail, greenway, environmental corridor,
waterway, or a drainage or utility easement designated in the Town Land Use Plan,
Official Map or other duly adopted plan implementation device of the Town, the
Subdivider shall plat said public way in the locations and dimensions indicated on
said Land Use Plan or other plan implementation device. The Town Board shall
(with or without a recommendation from the Plan Commission) determine whether
said public way should be dedicated to the public or reserved by the Subdivider.
(2) Parks, conservancies, and schools. Whenever a tract of land to be divided within
the Town encompasses all or part of a park site, open space, conservancy,
19
Recreational Trail or other recreation area or school site designated in the Town
Land Use Plan, Recreational Trail Plan, Comprehensive Outdoor Recreation Plan,
Official Map or other duly adopted plan implementation device of the Town, the
Subdivider shall plat said public sites in the locations and dimensions indicated on
said plans, map, or other plan implementation device in accordance with Chapter 5
and §§ 15.45 through 15.50 of this chapter. The Town Board shall (with or without
a recommendation from the Plan Commission and/or Parks Commission)
determine whether said public sites should be dedicated to the public or reserved
by the Subdivider.
15.11 Hillside protection.
(1) Except if provided a variance by the Board, no Land Division for residential,
commercial, or industrial purposes shall be approved which would result in, or
authorize a use or disturbance of land, including the construction of private roads
and driveways, on hillsides with a natural slope of 20% or more. An exception will
be made for slopes in excess of 20% created as part of previously installed public
street or drainage improvement or other man-made slopes created by home
driveway or septic system construction, etc.
(2) Individual Lots containing some slopes in excess of 20% are not permitted, unless
the entire Building Envelope and areas to be disturbed by driveway and septic
system installation have no slopes in excess of 15%.
(3) The Town Board may approve a variance to this section provided that any one or
more of the following conditions exist, in substantial part:
(a) The area with slopes greater than 20% for which all or part of this area will
be disturbed is smaller than 2,500 square feet.
(b) It is necessary to cross the area with slopes greater than 20% to access
developable portions of the property or Lot.
(c) Other unusual situations exist.
15.12 Administrative fees.
(1) General. The Land Divider shall pay the Town all fees as hereinafter required and
at the times specified before being entitled to recording of a Plat or Certified Survey
map.
(2) Engineering fees. The Land Divider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the
Town for all engineering and technical assistance work incurred by the Town in
connection with the Preliminary Plat, Final Plat or Certified Survey map, including
inspections required by the Town to determine the quality and potential acceptance
of improvements and the compliance with provisions of the Developer Agreement
20
and Restrictive Covenants which the Town may have an interest in. The Land
Divider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the Town for such inspection as
the Town Board deems necessary to assure that the construction of the required
improvements is in compliance with the plans, specifications and ordinances of the
Town and any other governmental agency.
(3) Legal fees. The Land Divider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the Town
for all legal fees and costs incurred by the Town in connection with the Preliminary
Plat, Final Plat or Certified Survey map, including acceptance of improvements and
the compliance with provisions of the Developer Agreement and Restrictive
Covenants in which the Town may have an interest. Such legal services include,
but are not limited to, conferences, review and preparation of documents, and
consultations with the Land Divider or the Town.
(4) Administrative fees. The Land Divider shall pay a fee equal to the cost of any
administrative or fiscal work, publication and special meeting costs which may be
incurred or undertaken by the Town in connection with the Preliminary Plat, Final
Plat or Certified Survey map or acceptance of improvements and the compliance
with provisions of the Developer Agreement and Restrictive Covenants in which
the Town may have an interest.
(5) Preliminary plat and certified survey review and final plat review fees. The Land
Divider shall pay fees for Town review of Preliminary Plats, Final Plats, Replats,
special meetings and Certified Survey maps as established by resolution of the
Town Board.
(6) Escrow account.
(a) At the time of filing with the Town Office a Preliminary Plat or Certified
Survey map, the Land Divider shall deposit with the Town Office an escrow
fund amount of $10,000 for Plats which include fewer than 15 Lots, $15,000
for Plats which include 15 or more Lots, and $2,500 for Certified Surveys.
As required at the sole discretion of the Town Board, funds may be drawn
against such escrow accounts for the payment of engineering, legal,
administrative and other costs incurred by the Town in reviewing the
proposed Land Division.
(b) Monies not required for such engineering, legal, administrative and other
costs shall be returned to the Land Divider within 180 days of final
acceptance of all improvements required by the Town and compliance with
all provisions of the Developer Agreement and provisions of the Restrictive
Covenants to which the Town may be a party. If Town costs exceed the
initial amount deposited in the escrow account, the Town shall require the
Land Divider to deposit an additional amount in the escrow account.
(c) Escrow amounts may not reflect final costs for review, and in fact could
21
vary significantly based on the size and complexity of the proposed Land
Division.
(7) Digital mapping maintenance fees. The Land Divider shall provide electronic asbuilt
data for all new stormwater, trails, parks, and signage infrastructure installed
for a new land division in the format required by the Town.
(8) The Land Divider shall also pay a fee per each new lot created (pursuant to the
Town Fee Schedule) to cover Town costs to collect data and attribute information
on new infrastructure for use in updating the Town’s digital database.
15.13 Landscape requirements.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
(a) Develop new residential Major and Minor Subdivisions in the Town of
Middleton in a manner keeping with a rural landscape character.
(b) Preserve the rural character of the Town and to provide a regulatory
mechanism through which Development can occur without damaging the
natural characteristics of the environment.
(c) Set forth minimum requirements for landscaping of buffer areas of
residential developments adjacent to State and County Highways and
certain Town roads.
(2) Applicability. This section shall apply to all new Major and Minor Subdivisions
adjacent to State and County Highways and certain Town roads as noted below:
(a)
Airport Road RMA
Blackhawk Road RMIC
Bronner Road RMIC
Capital View Road RMIC
Koch Road RMIC
Meadow Road RMAC
Mid Town Road RMIC
Mineral Point Road RMA
Mound View Road RMIC
Old Sauk Road RMAC
Pioneer Road RMAC
Pleasant View Road RMAC
Rocky Dell Road RMAC
Timber Lane RMIC
Twin Valley Road RMIC
22
US Highway 14 RPA
Valley View Road RMIC
Vosen Road RMIC
Wayside Road RMIC
Functional Classifications
RPA: Rural Principal Arterial
RMAC: Rural Major Collector
RMA: Rural Minor Arterial
RMIC: Rural Minor Collector
(b) The functional classifications shall be used as indicated in this section and
shall be considered the official Town Road Functional Classification until
such time as the Town adopts a new Transportation Master Plan after
January 1, 2018. Following the adoption of the Transportation Master Plan,
the Transportation Master Plan shall then replace this section as the source
for the official Town Road Functional Classifications.
(i) Rural Principal Arterial: Principal arterials serve corridor
movements having trip length and travel density characteristics of
an interstate or interregional nature.
(ii) Rural Minor Arterial: Minor arterials, in conjunction with principal
arterials, serve moderate to large-sized places (cities, villages,
towns, and clusters of communities), and other traffic generators
providing intraregional and inter-area traffic movements.
(iii) Rural Major Collector: Major collectors provide service to smallerto-
moderate sized places and other intra-area traffic generators, and
link those generators to nearby larger population centers (cities,
villages, and towns) or higher function routes.
(iv) Rural Minor Collector: Minor collectors provide service to all
remaining smaller places, link the locally important traffic
generators with their rural hinterland, and are spaced consistent with
population density so as to collect traffic from local roads and bring
all developed areas within a reasonable distance of a collector road.
(3) Design standards.
(a) Major and Minor subdivisions. Landscaping for Major Subdivisions
(Cluster and Traditional) and Minor Subdivisions shall be designed in
accord with the following standards:
(i) Setback landscape areas. The setback landscape is the area reserved
for the placement of landscaping. This area, which may lie on an
23
Outlot or Lot, lies outside of and typically adjacent to the street
right-of-way. Structures are not allowed in the setback landscape
area unless approved by the Town Board. If the setback is at least
150 feet in a Major Subdivision and at least 100 feet in a Minor
Subdivision, there shall be no landscaping requirements. If the
setback is at least 80 feet, then the landscaping requirements listed
below shall apply. Upon approval of the Town Board, the setback
may be reduced to no less than 60 feet, but the density of the
landscaping requirements listed below will be increased by 50%.
(ii) Landscape requirements.
1. Planting shall be clustered and massed in natural groupings.
2. Clusters should be randomly spaced.
3. When appropriate, berms shall be designed in an intermittent
and undulating design and used only to supplement plantings
and not to be a substitute.
4. All landscape measurements are stated in terms of the
number of plant units required. One plant unit is equivalent
to a rectangular area of 50 feet by 80 feet. Plant unit
alternatives are identified as follows. A combination of the
two Alternatives is allowed.
Plant Unit Alternatives
Alternative 1 Minimum requirements:
1 Canopy tree (2-inch caliper) minimum
2 Understory trees (6-foot to 8-foot height)
10 Shrubs (18- to 24-inch or 3- to 4-foot
height/width)
Alternative 2 Minimum requirements:
1 Canopy tree (2-inch caliper) minimum
3 Understory trees (6-foot to 8-foot height)
6 Shrubs (18- to 24-inch or 3- to 4-foot
height/width)
5. Existing canopy trees only, four inches DBH (Diameter at
Breast Height) or greater, will fulfill 1/2 plant unit
measurement.
6. Acceptable plant species by canopy, understory, and shrub
classifications are identified in the Preferred Planting List
24
maintained and updated time to time by the Town. The
Preferred Planting List is available at the Town Hall.
(iii) Landscaped area must be completed in first phase of Development
or within 12 months after recording of Plat or Certified Survey
map or as approved by the Town Board.
(iv) Landscape plans are required at time of Preliminary Plat submittal
if requested by the Town Engineer. Otherwise landscape plans are
required at the time of Final Plat or Certified Survey map submittal.
(v) The Landscape Plan shall be submitted by a Landscape Designer
unless this requirement is waived by the Town Board.
(vi) If the existing topography, natural vegetation, screening or other
features promote the rural landscape character of the proposed
subdivision, then the Town Board may reduce the number of plant
units required.
(vii) When a required vision corner conflicts with the setback landscape
area, the vision corner area shall not be included in the area
considered when determining required plant units. Landscaping
plantings shall not be placed in vision corners unless approved by
the Town Board after it considers the effect of the plantings on the
intent of the vision corner.
(b) Developer agreement. All subdivision landscape requirements shall be a
part of the Developer Agreement, with cost allocations included in the letter
of credit.
15.14 Preliminary consultation.
(1) The Land Divider shall complete a preliminary consultation with Town staff
regarding general subdivision requirements before filing a Preliminary Plat. The
Land Divider may also hold a preliminary consultation with the Plan Commission.
The Land Divider shall inform the Town Office in writing of the proposed Land
Division and shall request information on meeting dates, agenda deadlines and
filing requirements. The Environmental Assessment Checklist, found in
Attachment 1,1 shall be provided to the Land Divider prior to the preliminary
consultation and shall be completed for submission with the Preliminary Plat. Such
information shall be obtained from the Town Office.
(2) The Land Divider shall, at the time of preliminary consultation, submit a location
map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to traffic arteries and
1. Editor's Note: Attachment 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
25
existing community facilities.
(3) The Preliminary Consultation is intended to inform the Land Divider of the purpose
and objectives of these ordinances, the Town Land Use Plan and duly adopted plan
implementation devices of the Town and to otherwise assist the Land Divider in
planning the proposed development. The preliminary consultation is also designed
to provide the Town with information regarding the potential impact of the
contemplated Land Division.
(4) If a preliminary consultation is held with the Plan Commission, the Plan
Commission and the Land Divider may reach non-binding mutual conclusions
regarding the general program and objectives of the proposed development and its
potential impact and effects on the neighborhood and community during the
preliminary consultation.
(5) If it is determined during preliminary consultation that the Town will incur out-ofpocket
expenses from the Town Engineer, Town Attorney or otherwise with regard
to review of the concept plan, the Land Divider shall submit to the Town a deposit
of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) to be applied to Town expenses. Should the
Town’s fees and expenses exceed the initial deposit during review of the concept
plan, the Land Divider shall submit an additional One Thousand Dollars ($1,000)
as a deposit. The Land Divider shall be responsible for all Town expenses, even if
they exceed the amount of the deposit(s). The Land Divider shall sign an
Agreement with the Town accepting responsibility for all said costs.
15.15 Submission of Preliminary Plat for major subdivisions.
(1) Submission.
(a) Before submitting a Final Plat for approval, the Land Divider shall prepare
a Preliminary Plat and an application. The Land Divider shall submit one
hard copy and one electronic copy of the Preliminary Plat, application and
all other submittal documents. The Preliminary Plat shall be prepared in
accordance with the provisions and requirements of this chapter and
Chapter 236, Wis. Stats. The Land Divider shall file the copies of the
Preliminary Plat and application with the Town Office at least 21 calendar
days prior to the regular meeting of the Plan Commission at which review
of the Preliminary Plat is desired.
(b) The application shall include the following:
(i) Written description. A written description of the proposed Land
Division;
(ii) Use statement. A statement of the proposed use of Lots stating the
type of residential buildings with the number of proposed Dwelling
26
Units; types of business or industry so as to reveal the effect of the
development on traffic, fire hazards, police services and congestion
of population;
(iii) Zoning changes. If any zoning changes are contemplated, the
proposed zoning plans for the areas, including dimensions;
(iv) Area plan. Where the Land Divider, Developer and/or Owner owns
property adjacent to the property which is being proposed for the
Land Division, the Land Divider shall submit a concept plan for the
remainder of the property so as to show the possible relationships
between the proposed Land Division and future Land Divisions. All
Land Divisions must be shown to be compatible and consistent with
existing or potential adjacent Land Divisions;
(v) Adjacent land divisions. A record of any adjacent Land Divisions
made within the last five years; and
(vi) Environmental assessment checklist. A completed copy of the
Environmental Assessment Checklist as shown in Attachment 1 to
this chapter.
(c) The Land Divider shall also submit with the Preliminary Plat two copies of
a current title commitment or registered property report and such other
evidence as the Town Board or Town Attorney may require showing title
or control in the Land Divider or Owner. With a Final Plat submittal and
prior to final sign-off of Final Plat documents, updated title information
shall be submitted to the Town Attorney.
(d) The Town Office shall submit a copy of the Preliminary Plat submittals to
the Plan Commission and the Town Engineer for review and comment. The
Town Engineer shall prepare and submit to the Plan Commission and Town
Board a written report regarding the review of the Preliminary Plat. The
report shall include observations and recommendations regarding the
Preliminary Plat.
(2) Engineering report.
(a) Simultaneously with the filing of the Preliminary Plat, the Land Divider
shall file with the Town Office one complete hard copy and one electronic
copy of engineering reports, specifically addressing sewer and water
feasibility, drainage facilities, traffic patterns, typical street cross-sections,
erosion control, pavement design and other improvements necessary in the
Land Division.
(b) The engineering report must include a summary of calculations and other
27
information necessary to provide preliminary sizing of all stormwater
facilities. Stormwater and Erosion Control designs shall meet the
requirements of Stormwater Management, Chapter 17 of this Code, and the
Town's "Design Requirements for Public Infrastructure."
(3) Affidavit. The surveyor preparing the Preliminary Plat shall certify on the
Preliminary Plat that it is a correct representation of all existing Land Divisions and
features and that the surveyor has fully complied with all provisions of this chapter.
(4) Street plans and profiles. The Land Divider shall provide the Town Office with one
complete hard copy and one electronic copy of street plans and profiles showing
existing ground surface, and proposed and established street grades, including
extensions for a minimum of 300 feet beyond the limits of the proposed Land
Division.
(5) Soil testing.
(a) Soil testing for suitability of Private On-Site Wastewater Treatment
Systems (POWTS) is not required by the Town. POWTS are regulated by
the Department of Public Health Madison and Dane County (PHMDC).
Land Dividers and Lot owners are required to work with PHMDC to
evaluate, permit and connect POWTS. The Town shall not be held
responsible by a Land Divider or Lot Owner if developed Lots are
unbuildable because they are unsuitable for on-site sanitary sewer collection
systems. Holding tanks shall not be considered an acceptable system in the
Town for septic systems.
(b) The Land Divider shall evaluate the site per Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources Technical Standard 1002- Site Evaluation for
Stormwater Evaluation if infiltration requirements are required by Dane
County.
(6) Environmental assessment and evaluation. The purpose of the Environmental
Assessment and Evaluation is to provide the basis for an orderly, systematic review
of the effects of the proposed Land Division upon the community environment in
accordance with the principles and procedures of § 236.45(1), Wis. Stats. The goals
of the community are to eliminate pollution and siltation or reduce them to
acceptable standards; assure ample living space per capita; preserve open space and
parks for recreation; to provide adequately for stormwater control; maintain scenic
beauty and aesthetic surroundings; administer to the economic and cultural needs
of the citizens; and, to provide for the effective and efficient flow of goods and
services.
(a) Determination of need for expanded environmental assessment. The Plan
Commission shall review the Environmental Assessment Checklist
following submittal and make its recommendation to the Town Board. The
28
Town Board may, for reasons stated in a written determination, decide that
the preliminary environmental assessment raises significant questions
regarding the effects of the proposed Land Division on the environment
and/or that a high level of citizen interest has resulted from the preliminary
assessment. Such a decision shall be made within 14 days of the review of
the Preliminary Plat by resolution of the Town Board and shall specifically
identify the questions and/or issues on which it requires additional research,
data, evaluation or input from the Land Divider, Developer, Owner, or other
governmental agencies or interested parties. The Town Board shall establish
a reasonable date for the return and review of the additional information
requested and may specify the format in which the information is to be
presented.
(b) Hearing on expanded environmental assessment. Following the return to the
Town Board of the additional information requested, the Town Board shall
make such information available for inspection by the Land Divider,
Owner, Town department(s), commission(s) and committee(s), and any
other interested parties who shall be given a minimum of 30 days to review
the information and submit written comments to the Town Board. The
Town Board shall schedule and hold a public hearing regarding the
expanded environmental assessment within 45 days of the deadline
established for submission of written comments. The public hearing shall
be preceded by a Class 1 notice under Chapter 985, Wis. Stats. Persons
attending the public hearing shall be afforded an opportunity to comment
on the report.
(c) Review. The Plan Commission and the Town Board shall review, as part of
the analysis and evaluation of the Preliminary Plat, any environmental
assessment reports, supporting data and information, and Town department,
commission and committee reviews as the Town Board may require for
determining the suitability of the proposed Land Division and subsequent
Development.
(7) Referral to other agencies.
(a) The Land Divider shall, within two days after filing of the Preliminary Plat
and application, transmit the necessary copies of the Preliminary Plat to the
appropriate agencies for approval or objection as specified in Chapter 236,
Wis. Stats. The Land Divider shall submit a letter to the Town Office
certifying that all necessary copies of the Preliminary Plat and related
documents have been submitted to the approving authorities, other than the
Town of Middleton, and the objecting agencies which are required by
statute to receive such Preliminary Plat and related documents.
(b) In lieu of the above Town procedure, the Land Divider may use any other
procedure for Preliminary Plat submittal provided for in Chapter 236, Wis.
29
Stats. The Land Divider shall specify which submittal procedure is being
used at the time the Preliminary Plat is submitted to the Town. If none is
specified, it is assumed that the Town procedure is being used.
(8) Drafting standards. The Land Divider shall submit to the Town Office and to those
agencies having the authority to object to Plats under provisions in Chapter 236,
Wis. Stats., copies of a Preliminary Plat based upon an accurate exterior boundary
survey by a professional land surveyor which shall show clearly the proposed
subdivision at a scale of no less detail than one inch per 100 feet having one foot
contour intervals, shall identify the improvements (grading, tree planting, paving,
installation of facilities and dedications of land), and Easements which the Land
Divider proposes to make and shall indicate by accompanying letter when the
improvements will be provided.
(9) Incomplete submission. All items and documents required by this section must be
submitted to the Town Office before the time requirements for review of Land
Divisions will legally commence. Failure to submit all items and documents
required by this section may constitute a reason for the Town Plan Commission to
recommend rejection, and the Town Board to reject a Preliminary Plat.
15.16 Preliminary plat review and approval.
(1) Notice
(a) The Town Clerk shall give notice of the Plan Commission's and Park
Commission’s review of the Preliminary Plat by listing it as an agenda item
in the Plan and Park Commissions’ posted meeting notices. The notice shall
include the name of the Land Divider, the address of the property proposed
to be divided and the requested action.
(b) The Land Divider shall obtain one or more sign posts from the Town Office
and place signs on the property that is the subject of the Preliminary Plat
review as provided in this section. A sign shall be placed on the sign post
that must list the times and locations of all meetings and public hearings to
consider the Preliminary Plat. The sign shall be posted at least seven (7)
days before any meeting that is not a public hearing and at least twenty-one
(21) days prior to any public hearing. The sign shall be located in a position
on the property so it can be read from the sidewalk or other public right-ofway.
If a property abuts more than one (1) right of way, a sign shall be
placed facing each public right-of-way. The sign shall be removed within
seven (7) days of the last public hearing listed on the sign and the sign post
returned to the Town Office. Failure to post the sign shall not invalidate
any action taken on the Preliminary Plat by the Plan Commission or the
Town Board.
(c) The Town Clerk shall give notice of the Town Board's review and public
30
hearing on the Preliminary Plat by listing it as an agenda item in the Board's
posted meeting notice. The Land Divider shall also be notified in writing.
The meeting notice shall include the name of the Land Divider, the address
of the property in question and the requested action. Abutting property
Owners and property Owners within 600 feet of the Land Divider's total
Parcel shall receive written notice of the public hearing.
(2) Plan Commission and Park Commission recommendations.
After the preliminary consultation, an initial review of the Preliminary Plat
submittals, and negotiations with the Land Divider regarding changes and the kind
and extent of Public Improvements which will be required, the Plan Commission
and Park Commission shall recommend to the Town Board disapproval, approval
or conditional approval of the Preliminary Plat.
(3) Town Board review; public hearing. The Town Clerk shall schedule a public
hearing on the Preliminary Plat before the Town Board.
(4) Town Board action. Within 90 days of the date the Preliminary Plat was filed with
the Town Office, the Town Board shall, taking into consideration the Plan
Commission's recommendations, if any, approve, approve conditionally or reject
such Preliminary Plat and shall state, in writing, any conditions of approval or
reasons for rejection, unless the time is extended by agreement with the Land
Divider. Failure of the Town Board to act within 90 days or extension thereof shall
constitute an approval of the Preliminary Plat, unless other authorized agencies
object to the Preliminary Plat. The Town Office shall communicate in writing to
the Land Divider the action of the Town Board. If the Preliminary Plat is approved,
the Town Clerk shall endorse it for the Town Board. [Note: An extension of time
may only be made by written agreement with the Land Divider. Section
236.11(1)(a), Wis. Stats.]
(5) Soil testing.
(a) Soil testing for suitability of Private On-Site Wastewater Treatment
Systems (POWTS) is not required by the Town. POWTS are regulated by
the Department of Public Health Madison and Dane County (PHMDC).
Land Dividers and Lot owners are required to work with PHMDC to
evaluate, permit and connect POWTS. The Town shall not be held
responsible by a Land Divider or Lot Owner if developed Lots are
unbuildable because they are unsuitable for on-site sanitary sewer collection
systems. Holding tanks shall not be considered an acceptable system in the
Town for septic systems.
(b) The Land Divider shall evaluate the site per Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources Technical Standard 1002- Site Evaluation for
Stormwater Evaluation if infiltration requirements are required by Dane
31
County.
(6) Determination of adequacy of public facilities and services.
(a) A Preliminary Plat shall not be approved unless the Town Board determines
that adequate public facilities and public services are available to meet the
needs of the proposed Land Division and that no public funds, other than
those already provided in an adopted capital budget or operating budget, are
required.
(b) The Land Divider shall furnish to the Town Office any data requested by
the Town Board or its designee, who shall transmit this information to the
appropriate Town commission(s) and committee(s) for review and shall act
as coordinator for their reports to the Plan Commission, Park Commission,
Sanitary District Commission and the Town Board on the adequacy of
water, sanitary and storm sewers, fire service, police, parks and open space
and recreational facilities, transportation facilities and schools.
(c) Public facilities and public services for a proposed Land Division may be
found to be adequate when the following conditions exist, if applicable:
(i) The proposed Land Division is located in an Urban Service Area
where mainline interceptor sewer service is presently available,
under construction, or designated by the Town Board or Sanitary
District Commission for extension of sewer service within the
current capital budget year and funds are specifically provided for
such extension either from public or private financing. The Plan
Commission and the Town Board shall also consider the
recommendations of the Town Board's designee and appropriate
committee(s) on the capacity of trunk lines and of sewerage
treatment facilities and any other information presented.
(ii) The proposed Land Division is located within an Urban Service
Area contingent to an arterial transmission water main of adequate
capacity for the proposed development or if the water distribution
system that is needed is under construction or scheduled for
construction within the current budget year, and funds, either public
or private, are available for the program. The Plan Commission and
the Town Board shall consider the recommendations of the Town
Board or its designee and the appropriate committee(s) on line
capacities, water sources and storage facilities as well as any other
information presented.
(iii) The Town Treasurer or his/her designee certifies to the Plan
Commission and the Town Board that adequate funds, either public
or private, are available to insure the installation of all necessary
32
stormwater management facilities.
(iv) The future residents of the proposed subdivision can be assured
park, recreation and open space facilities and services which meet
the standards of the "Comprehensive Outdoor Recreation Plan" and
any subsequent revisions or amendments thereto.
(v) The appropriate law enforcement agency, emergency medical
service and fire district verify that timely and adequate service can
be provided to the residents of the proposed subdivision.
(vi) The appropriate school district is provided an opportunity to review
and comment regarding the impact of the proposed subdivision on
school facilities and programs.
(vii) The proposed Land Division is accessible by existing publicly
maintained, all weather roads, adequate to accommodate both
existing traffic and that traffic to be generated by the proposed Land
Division, or necessary additional roads and road improvements are
budgeted in the current adopted budget for construction with public
or private financing.
(d) Where the Town Board determines that one or more public facilities or
services are not adequate for the proposed development, but that a portion
of the area could be served adequately, or that careful phasing of the
development could result in all public facilities and public services being
adequate, conditional approval may include only such portions or may
specify phasing of the development.
(7) Effect of Preliminary Plat approval. Approval or conditional approval of a
Preliminary Plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the Final Plat, except
that if the Final Plat is submitted within thirty-six (36) months after the last required
approval of the Preliminary Plat and conforms substantially to the Preliminary Plat
as approved, including layout, any conditions of that approval, and local plans and
ordinances that were in effect at the time the Preliminary Plat was submitted and
state laws, the Final Plat shall be entitled to approval with respect to such layout.
An approved or conditionally approved Preliminary Plat shall be deemed an
expression of approval or conditional approval of the layout submitted as a guide
to the preparation of the Final Plat, which will be subject to further consideration
by the Town Board at the time of its submission. If a Final Plat is not filed within
thirty six (36) months after the last required approval of the Preliminary Plat, the
Town Board may reject the Final Plat, and the Land Divider shall be required to
resubmit the Preliminary Plat and meet the requirements of § 15.16 and this section.
[Note that an extension of time may only be made by written agreement between
the Town Board and Land Divider.]
33
(8) Preliminary plat amendment. Should the Land Divider amend the Preliminary Plat
as approved, the Land Divider may submit an amended Preliminary Plat which shall
follow the same submittal procedure as described in § 15.15 and shall be subject to
the same approval and review procedures described in § 15.16, including the Town
having 90 days to approve, conditionally approve or reject the amended Preliminary
Plat. The Town Board may waive any of the requirements of § 15.15 and/or § 15-
16, including the fee deposit, if the amendment is, in the opinion of the Town Board,
of such minor scope that it is unnecessary to require that such requirements be met.
(9) Multi-Phase Plats. The Town Board may, in its sole discretion, approve a
Preliminary Plat for a Land Division that will be Final Platted all at once, but built
in multiple construction phases, or that will be Final Platted with multiple Final
Plats and built in multiple corresponding construction phases. The Town Board
finds it reasonable and necessary to require that a Land Division shall meet the
requirements for open space and parkland dedication, or fees in lieu of, and all other
requirements of this chapter within each construction phase or Final Plat of the
Land Division whether it is Final Platted all at once or with multiple Final Plats.
The Town Board also finds it reasonable and necessary to require, as conditions of
such approval, that the Land Divider and Owner shall, among other things, enter
into a Developer Agreement, record Deed Restrictions, and provide financial
guarantees as provided for in §§ 15.24(1) and 15-24(2). If a construction phase or
Final Plat of a Land Division does not meet the requirements for open space and
parkland dedication, or fees in lieu of, and all other requirements of this chapter,
the Land Divider and Owner may voluntarily Final Plat the entire Land Division
and enter into a Developer Agreement for the entire Land Division and provide
financial guarantees for the entire Land Division as provided for in §§ 15.24(1) and
15-24(2).
15.17 Final plat review and approval.
(1) Filing requirements.
(a) The Land Divider shall prepare a Final Plat and application in accordance
with this chapter and shall file one hard copy and one electronic copy of the
Final Plat and the application with the Town Office 21 days prior to the
meeting of the Plan Commission at which action is desired. One hard copy
and one electronic copy of all documents required on the Final Plat
submittal checklist shall be also be provided. The Town Office shall give
notice of the Plan Commission's meeting in the manner prescribed in § 15-
16.
(i) The letter of application shall include the following:
1. Written description. A written description of the proposed
Land Division; and
34
2. Update on Preliminary Plat conditions of approval. A written
description updating how conditions of Preliminary Plat
approval have been addressed with the Final Plat submitted
and/or a written description updating how conditions of
Preliminary Plat approval are not met, including a plan as to
how they will be met.
(ii) The Land Divider shall also submit with the Final Plat two copies
of a current title commitment or registered property report and such
other evidence as the Town Board or Town Attorney may require
showing title or control in the Land Divider or Owner. Prior to final
sign-off of Final Plat documents, updated title information shall be
submitted to the Town Attorney.
(b) The Land Divider shall, within two days after filing of the Final Plat and
application, transmit the necessary copies of the Final Plat to the appropriate
agencies for approval or objection as specified in Chapter 236, Wis. Stats.
The Land Divider shall submit a letter to the Town Office certifying that all
necessary copies of the Final Plat and related documents have been
submitted to the approving authorities, other than the Town of Middleton,
and to the objecting agencies which are required by statute to receive such
Final Plat and related documents. In lieu of the above Town procedure, the
Land Divider may use any other procedure for Final Plat submittal provided
for in Chapter 236, Wis. Stats. The Land Divider shall specify which
submittal procedure is being used at the time the Final Plat is submitted to
the Town. If none is specified, it shall be presumed that the Town procedure
is being used.
(c) The Land Divider shall also submit copies of the Final Plat to the telephone,
power, and all other applicable utility companies.
(d) The Final Plat shall conform to the Preliminary Plat as approved, including
layout, any conditions of that approval, and local plans and ordinances and
state laws, and shall be submitted by the Land Divider for certification of
those agencies having the authority to object as provided by § 236.12(2),
Wis. Stats.
(e) Simultaneously with the filing of the Final Plat, the Land Divider shall file
with the Town Office one hard copy and one electronic copy of the final
plans and specifications for Public Improvements required by this chapter
and one hard copy and one electronic copy of a driveway culvert map for
review and approval. All plans and maps shall meet the requirements of the
Town's "Design Requirements for Public Improvements." The Land
Divider shall also submit a Stormwater Management and Erosion Control
plan for the Development that meets the requirements of Stormwater
Management, Chapter 17 of this Code, and the Town's "Design
35
Requirements for Public Infrastructure." One hard copy and one electronic
copy of Property Owners Association and Restrictive Covenant/Easement
documents and one hard copy and one electronic copy of Landscape Plans
shall be submitted for review and approval.
(f) The Town Office shall provide copies of the Final Plat to the Park
Commission, Plan Commission, and Town Engineer. The title commitment
or registered property report shall be referred to the Town Attorney for
examination.
(i) The Town Office shall also refer the final plans and specifications
of Public Improvements to the Town Engineer for review prior to
the Town signing Final Plat documents. The Town Engineer and/or
Town Attorney shall examine the Final Plat, final plans and
specifications of Public Improvements, driveway culvert map, and
Association and Restrictive Covenants/Easement documents for
technical details and, if the Town Engineer and/or Town Attorney
finds them satisfactory, shall so certify in writing to the Town
Board.
(ii) If the Final Plat, plans and specifications of Public Improvements,
driveway culvert map, and Association and Restrictive
Covenants/Easement documents are not satisfactory, the Town
Engineer and/or Town Attorney shall return them to the Land
Divider and advise the Town Board, in writing, as to the items which
are not satisfactory.
(iii) The recommendations of the Town Engineer shall be made within
30 days of the filing of the Final Plat.
(2) Incomplete submission. All items and documents required by this section must be
submitted to the Town Office before the time requirements for review of Land
Divisions will legally commence. Failure to submit all items and documents
required by this section may constitute a reason for the Town Board to reject a Final
Plat.
(3) Plan Commission and Park Commission review. The Plan Commission and Park
Commission shall examine the Final Plat as to its conformance with the approved
Preliminary Plat, any conditions of approval of the Preliminary Plat, this chapter
and all applicable ordinances, rules, regulations, comprehensive plans and
comprehensive plan components which may affect it and shall recommend
approval, conditional approval or rejection of the Final Plat to the Town Board. The
Plan Commission and Park Commission may recommend rejection of the Final Plat
if there is incomplete or inadequate information.
(4) Town Board review and approval.
36
(a) The Town Board shall, within 60 days of the date of filing the original Final
Plat with the Town Office, approve, conditionally approve, or reject such
Final Plat unless the time is extended by written agreement with the Land
Divider. If the Final Plat is rejected, the reasons shall be stated in the
minutes of the Town Board meeting and a written statement of the reasons
for rejection shall be forwarded to the Land Divider. The Town Board may
not inscribe its approval on the Final Plat unless the Town Office certifies
on the Final Plat that the copies were forwarded to objecting agencies as
required herein, the date thereof and that no objections have been filed
within the time required, or if filed, such objections have been met. Such
certification shall be based, in part, upon the Land Divider's certified letter
under § 15.15(6) and Subsection (1)(b) of this section. The Town Engineer,
or other person designated by the Town Board to review Plats shall
determine if a Final Plat substantially conforms to the Preliminary Plat. The
determination shall be given to the Town Board along with a
recommendation for approval/denial of the Final Plat. The conclusion and
recommendation are not required to be in writing but must be made part of
the public record at the Town Board meeting where the Final Plat is being
considered.
(b) Failure of the Town Board to act within 60 days, the time having not been
extended and no unsatisfied objections having been filed, the Final Plat shall
be deemed approved.
(c) After the Final Plat has been approved by the Town Board, and all
conditions of approval have been resolved to the Town's satisfaction and
required improvements either installed or a contract and sureties insuring
their installation are filed, the Town Office shall cause the certificate
inscribed upon the Final Plat attesting to such approval to be duly executed
and the Final Plat shall be returned to the Land Divider for recording with
the County Register of Deeds. The County Register of Deeds cannot record
the Final Plat unless it is offered within the time frame specified in the
Wisconsin Statutes. In addition, the Town Clerk shall not sign the Final Plat
if it is presented to the Clerk for signature after resolution of all outstanding
conditions of approval, if more than 36 months have passed since the date
the Town Board approved or conditionally approved the Final Plat. [Note
that an extension of time may only be made by written agreement between
the Town Board and Land Divider.]
(d) If the Final Plat is not submitted within 36 months after the date of the last
required approval of the Preliminary Plat, the Town Board may reject the
Final Plat. [Note that an extension of time may only be made by written
agreement between the Town Board and Land Divider.]
(e) The Land Divider shall file one electronic, three full-size and three reduced
37
size (11 inches by 17 inches maximum) copies of the recorded Final Plat
with the Town Office. The Clerk will forward one copy each to the Town
Attorney and Town Engineer. One full-size copy for the Town shall be
laminated (minimum five mil).
(5) Partial Platting and Multi-Phase Plats. The Final Plat may, if permitted by the
Town Board in its sole discretion, constitute only a portion of the approved
Preliminary Plat which the Land Divider proposes to record at that time. The Town
Board finds it reasonable and necessary to require that a Land Division shall meet
the requirements for open space and parkland dedication, or fees in lieu of, and all
other requirements of this chapter within each construction phase or Final Plat of
the Land Division whether it is Final Platted all at once or with multiple Final Plats.
The Town Board also finds it reasonable and necessary to require, as conditions of
such approval, that the Land Divider and Owner shall, among other things, enter
into a Developer Agreement, record Deed Restrictions, and provide financial
guarantees as provided for in §§ 15.24(1) and 15-24(2)(a). If a construction phase
or Final Plat of a Land Division does not meet the requirements for open space and
parkland dedication, or fees in lieu of, and all other requirements of this chapter,
the Land Divider and Owner may voluntarily Final Plat the entire Land Division
and enter into a Developer Agreement for the entire Land Division and provide
financial guarantees for the entire Land Division as provided for in Sections §§
15.24(1) and 15.24(2)(a).
15.18 Replat.
(1) Except as provided in § 70.27(1), Wis. Stats., when it is proposed to Replat a
recorded subdivision, or part thereof, so as to alter areas dedicated to the public, the
Land Divider shall simultaneously vacate or alter the recorded Plat as provided in
§§ 236.40 through 236.44, Wis. Stats. The Land Divider shall then proceed, using
the procedures for Preliminary and Final Plats contained in this chapter.
(2) The Town Clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the Town Board when a
Preliminary Plat of a Replat of lands within the Town is filed, and shall cause
notices of the proposed Replat and public hearing to be mailed to the Land Divider
and to the Owners of all properties within the limits of the exterior boundaries of
the proposed Replat, to all abutting property Owners, and to the Owners of all
properties within 600 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed Replat. The
Land Divider shall obtain one or more sign posts from the Town Office and place
signs on the property that is the subject of the proposed Replat as provided in this
section. A sign shall be placed on the sign post that must list the time and location
of the public hearing. The sign shall be posted at least twenty-one (21) days prior
to the public hearing. The sign shall be located in a position on the property so it
can be read from the sidewalk or other public right-of-way. If a property abuts
more than one (1) right of way, a sign shall be placed facing each public right-ofway.
The sign shall be removed within seven (7) days of the public hearing and
the sign post returned to the Town Office. Failure to post the sign shall not
38
invalidate any action taken on the Replat by the Town Board.
(3) Where Lots are more than double the minimum size required for the applicable
zoning district, the Town Board may require that such Lots be arranged so as to
allow the resubdivision of such Parcels into smaller Lots in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
15.19 Assessor's plat.
Assessor's Plat under § 70.27, Wis. Stats., may be ordered by the Town at the expense of the Land
Divider when a subdivision is created by successive divisions.
15.20 Technical requirements for Preliminary Plats.
(1) General. When a Land Divider proposes to create a Major Subdivision, the Land
Divider shall provide a Preliminary Plat prior to submitting a Final Plat. It shall be
clearly marked "Preliminary Plat" and shall be in sufficient detail to determine
whether the Final Plat will meet layout requirements. The Preliminary Plat shall be
based upon a survey by a professional land surveyor, prepared on durable white
media, with permanent nonfading black image at a scale of no less detail than 100
feet to the inch and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Chapter
236, Wis. Stats., and this chapter.
(2) Plat data. All Preliminary Plats shall show correctly on their face the following
information:
(a) Title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded.
(b) Location of the proposed subdivision by government Lot, quarter-quarter
section, section, township, range, county, and state.
(c) Date, scale, and North point.
(d) Names and addresses of the Owner, Land Divider, and land surveyor
preparing the Preliminary Plat.
(e) Entire area contiguous to the proposed Preliminary Plat owned or controlled
by the Land Divider or Owner shall be included on the Preliminary Plat
even though only a portion of such area is proposed for immediate
Development. The Town Board may waive this requirement where it is
unnecessary to fulfill the purposes and intent of this chapter and undue
hardship would result from strict application thereof.
(f) Proposed Land Division phasing, if any, including proposed schedule for
completing the improvements for each phase of the Land Division.
39
(g) Exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed
subdivision referenced to a corner established in the U.S. Public Land
Survey and the total acreage encompassed thereby.
(h) Locations of all existing property boundary lines, structures, drives, streams
and watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, railroad tracks,
and other significant features within the tract being subdivided or
immediately adjacent thereto.
(i) Location, right-of-way width, and names of all existing streets, Alleys or
other public ways, Easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way and all
section and quarter section lines within the exterior boundaries of the
Preliminary Plat or immediately adjacent thereto.
(j) Location and names of any adjacent subdivisions, parks and cemeteries and
Owners of record of abutting unplatted lands.
(k) Type, width, elevation and centerline profile grade of any existing street
pavements within the exterior boundaries of the Preliminary Plat or
immediately adjacent thereto, together with any legally established center
line elevations.
(l) Location, size, and invert elevation of any existing sanitary or storm sewers,
culverts and drain pipes, the location of manholes, catch basins, hydrants,
electric and communication facilities, whether overhead or underground,
and the location and size of any existing water and gas mains within the
exterior boundaries of the Preliminary Plat or immediately adjacent thereto.
If no sewers or water mains are located on or immediately adjacent to the
tract, the nearest such sewers or water mains that might be extended to serve
the tract shall be indicated by the direction and distance from the tract, size,
and invert elevations.
(m) Corporate limit lines within the exterior boundaries of the Preliminary Plat
or immediately adjacent thereto.
(n) Existing zoning on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
(o) Contours within the exterior boundaries of the Preliminary Plat and
extending to the center line of adjacent public streets to National Map
Accuracy Standards based upon the North American Vertical Datum of
1988 (or future National Vertical Datums) at vertical intervals of not more
than one foot. At least two permanent bench marks shall be located in the
immediate vicinity of the Preliminary Plat; the location of the bench marks
shall be indicated on the Preliminary Plat; together with their elevations
referenced to North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (or future National
Vertical Datums) and the monumentation of the bench marks clearly and
40
completely described.
(p) Ordinary high-water elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages, and
Wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the Preliminary Plat or located
within 100 feet therefrom.
(q) Water elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages, and Wetlands within
the exterior boundaries of the Preliminary Plat or located within 100 feet
therefrom at the date of the survey.
(r) Floodplain and Shoreland boundaries and the contour line lying a vertical
distance of two feet above the elevation of the one-hundred-year recurrence
interval flood or, where such data is not available, two feet above the
elevation of the maximum flood of record within the exterior boundaries of
the Preliminary Plat or within 100 feet therefrom.
(s) Soil types and their boundaries, as shown on the operational soil survey
maps prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service.
(t) Location, width, and names of all proposed streets and public rights-of-way
such as Alleys and Easements.
(u) Approximate dimensions of all Lots and Outlots together with proposed
Lot, Outlot and Block numbers. The area in square feet of each Lot and
Outlot shall be provided.
(v) Location and approximate dimensions of any sites to be reserved or
dedicated for parks, playgrounds, conservancy areas, Recreational Trails,
drainage ways, or other public uses or which are to be used for group
housing, shopping centers, church sites, or other nonpublic uses.
(w) Location of Building Envelopes within each Lot if non-standard.
(x) Identification of the land area that is to be deed restricted, dedicated, or
otherwise protected from future Development in order to meet the definition
of a Cluster Subdivision.
(y) Radii of all curves.
(z) Any proposed lake and stream access with a small drawing clearly
indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to access.
(aa) Any proposed lake and stream improvement or relocation, and notice of
application for approval by the Department of Natural Resources, when
applicable.
41
(bb) Identification of land that has a slope of 20% or more.
(cc) A tree survey for all or part of the proposed development shall be required
if requested by the Town Plan Commission or Town Board. Location of all
Native Canopy Trees eight inches DBH (Diameter at Breast Height) or
larger located in proposed street right-of-ways, Building Envelopes, or in
areas proposed to be used for stormwater management or other subdivision
improvements shall be shown.
(dd) Location of proposed subdivision entrance signs and associated lighting.
(ee) Location of Clustered Mailbox Units (CBUs) if CBUs are required by the
United States Post Office.
(ff) Where the Plan Commission, Town Board or Town Engineer finds that it
requires additional information relative to a particular problem presented by
a proposed development in order to review the Preliminary Plat, it shall have
the authority to request in writing such information from the Land Divider.
15.21 Technical requirements for final plats.
(1) General. A Final Plat prepared by a professional land surveyor shall be required for
all Major Subdivisions. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of §
236.20, Wis. Stats., and this chapter. If a Land Divider chooses to Final Plat only
a portion of the area approved within a Preliminary Plat, the area contained within
that Final Plat shall also meet the requirements of §236.20, Wis. Stats., and this
chapter.
(2) Additional information. The Final Plat shall show correctly on its face, in addition
to the information required by § 236.20, Wis. Stats., the following:
(a) Exact street width along the line of any obliquely intersecting street.
(b) Exact location and description of street lighting and lighting utility
Easements.
(c) When determined by the Town Engineer, minimum lowest window or door
openings for proposed Lots shall be identified on the Final Plat and shall be
detailed in Restrictive Covenants. In general, the lowest opening for any
structure on a Lot adjacent to a major drainage way, or other stormwater
management improvement shall be two feet above the calculated water
elevation in a one-hundred-year rainfall event.
(d) Railroad rights-of-way within and abutting the Plat.
(e) All lands reserved for future public acquisition or reserved for the common
42
use of property Owners within the Plat.
(f) Special restrictions required by the Town Board relating to access control
along public ways or to the provision of planting strips.
(g) Location of Building Envelopes within each non-standard Lot.
(h) Identification of all land outside a Building Envelope as deed restricted to
prohibit construction of any structures.
(i) Identification of land that is to be deed restricted, dedicated, or otherwise
protected from future Development in order to meet the definition of a
"Cluster Subdivision."
(j) Identification of restrictions required at intersections that will provide for
the proper Intersection Sight Distance and Vision Corner, as detailed in §
8.02 of this Code.
(k) Location of proposed subdivision entrance signs and associated lighting.
(l) Location of Clustered Mailbox Units (CBUs) if CBUs are required by the
United States Post Office and if the CBUs are located outside a public rightof-
way.
(3) Stormwater maintenance agreement requirements.
(a) At the discretion of the Town Board, or its designee, a Stormwater
Maintenance Agreement or Plan may be waived for any water quality or
quantity facilities required by the Town of Middleton or other regulatory
agency.
(b) The Stormwater Maintenance Agreement must describe the entity
responsible for long-term upkeep of water quality or quantity facilities and
the type of maintenance required. The Stormwater Maintenance Agreement
must be deed recorded prior to recording the Plat, or later, as determined by
the Town Board.
(4) Property owners association; restrictive covenants. One hard copy and one
electronic copy of the legal instruments and rules for proposed property Owners
associations or Lot Owners, and proposed deed restrictions and/or covenants, shall
be submitted at the time of filing of the Final Plat with the Town Office. The Town
Board may require that those provisions that impact or affect the Town may not be
amended or terminated without the written approval of the Town Board. (Note:
Deed restrictions and Restrictive Covenants in subdivisions may be private
contractual agreements not enforceable by the Town.)
43
(5) Survey accuracy.
(a) Examination. The Town Board may examine all Final Plats within the Town
and may check for the accuracy and closure of the survey, the proper kind
and location of monuments, and legibility and completeness of the drawing.
(b) Maximum error of closure. Maximum error of closure shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 236, Wis. Stats.
(c) Street, block, and lot dimensions. All dimensions shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 236, Wis. Stats.
(d) Plat location. All Plats shall be referenced to the Wisconsin County
Coordinate System, Dane County Zone.
(6) Surveying and monumenting.
(a) All Final Plats shall meet all the surveying and monumenting requirements
of § 236.15, Wis. Stats.
(b) In addition, Land Dividers shall be required to monument trail Easements
with permanent monumentation, as required by the Town Engineer.
(7) Coordinate system. The Plat shall be tied directly to two (2) section or quarter
corners within the section the Plat is located. The exact bearing and distance of
such tie shall be determined by field measurements, and the material and coordinate
values of the monuments marking the section corner or quarter corner to which the
Plat is tied shall be indicated on the face of the Plat. All bearings, distances and
coordinate values shall be referenced to the Wisconsin County Coordinate System,
Dane Zone, NAD83, current adjustment (2011 adjustment), or as modified by
subsequent adjustments.
(8) Certificates. All Final Plats shall provide all the certificates required by § 236.21,
Wis. Stats.; and in addition, the surveyor shall certify on the Final Plat that he has
fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter.
(9) AutoCAD drawing file. The Land Divider shall provide a file that is either an
AutoCAD drawing file in model space or a file that is compatible with AutoCAD
such that it can be converted by AutoCAD into an AutoCAD drawing file.
15.22 Technical requirements for certified survey land divisions; review and approval.
(1) Certified survey requirements. When a Land Divider proposes to create a Minor
Subdivision, the Land Divider shall subdivide by use of a Certified Survey map,
prepared in accordance with § 236.34, Wis. Stats., and this chapter.
44
(2) Preliminary consultation.
(a) Before filing a Certified Survey map, the Land Divider shall consult with
the Town staff regarding requirements for certified surveys. Information on
meeting dates, agenda deadlines and filing requirements may be obtained
from the Town Office. This consultation is intended to inform the Land
Divider of the purpose and objectives of these regulations, the Town Land
Use Plan, and duly adopted plan implementation devices of the Town and
to otherwise assist the Land Divider in planning the development. In so
doing, both the Land Divider and the Town may reach mutual conclusions
regarding the general program and objectives of the proposed development
and its possible effects on the neighborhood and community, and the Land
Divider may gain a better understanding of the subsequent required
procedures.
(b) If it is determined during the preliminary consultation that the Town will
incur out-of-pocket expenses from the Town Engineer, Town Attorney, or
otherwise, with regards to review of the concept plan, the Land Divider shall
submit to the Town a One Thousand Dollar ($1,000.00) deposit to be
applied for Town expenses. Should the Town’s fees and expenses exceed
the initial deposit during review of the concept plan, the Land Divider shall
submit an additional One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) as a deposit. The
Land Divider shall be responsible for all Town expenses, even if they
exceed the amount of the deposit(s). The Land Divider shall sign an
Agreement with the Town to be responsible for all said costs.
(3) Submission and review.
(a) Following consultation, one hard copy and one electronic copy of the final
map in the form of a Certified Survey map and application shall be
submitted to the Town Office 21 days prior to the Town Plan Commission
meeting at which action is desired. In addition one hard copy and one
electronic copy of submittal documents required on the Certified Survey
map submittal checklist shall be provided. The Certified Survey shall be
reviewed by the Plan Commission and Park Commission, and their
recommendations, if any, made to the Town Board. The Town Board shall
approve, conditionally approve or reject the Certified Survey. Town review
and action shall be completed within 90 days of filing with the Town Office.
(b) The application shall include the following:
(i) Written description. A written description of the proposed Land
Division;
(ii) Use statement. A statement of the proposed use of Lots stating the
type of residential buildings with the number of proposed Dwelling
45
Units; types of business or industry so as to reveal the effect of the
development on traffic, fire hazards, police services and congestion
of population;
(iii) Zoning changes. If any zoning changes are contemplated, the
proposed zoning plans for the areas, including dimensions;
(iv) Area plan. Where the Land Divider, Developer, and/or Owner owns
property adjacent to the property which is being proposed for the
Land Division, the Land Divider shall submit to the Plan
Commission a concept plan for the remainder of the property so as
to show the possible relationships between the proposed Land
Division and future Land Divisions. All Land Divisions must be
shown to be compatible with and to be consistent with existing or
potential adjacent Land Divisions;
(v) Adjacent land divisions. A record of any adjacent Land Divisions
made within the last five years;
(vi) Street plan and profiles. When made necessary by the Certified
Survey, the Land Divider shall provide street plan and profiles
showing existing ground surface, and the proposed and established
street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond
the limits of the proposed Land Division when requested by the Town
Engineer or the Town Board. Where requested by the Town Engineer,
cross sections depicting the existing and proposed street surfaces shall
be provided at an interval frequency appropriate to the scale of the
project and at such locations where needed to evaluate the proposed
road design.
(vii) Soil testing.
1. Soil testing for suitability of Private On-Site Wastewater
Treatment Systems (POWTS) is not required by the Town.
POWTS are regulated by the Department of Public Health
Madison and Dane County (PHMDC). Land Dividers and
Lot owners are required to work with PHMDC to evaluate,
permit and construct POWTS. The Town shall not be held
responsible by a Land Divider or Lot Owner if developed
Lots are unbuildable because they are unsuitable for on-site
sanitary sewer collection systems. Holding tanks shall not be
considered an acceptable system in the Town for septic
systems.
2. The Land Divider shall evaluate the site per Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources Technical Standard 1002
46
– Site Evaluation for Stormwater Evaluation if infiltration is
required by Dane County.
(viii) Environmental assessment checklist. A completed copy of the
Environmental Assessment Checklist as shown in Attachment 1 of
this chapter.2
(ix) Title requirements. The Land Divider shall also submit with the
Certified Survey map two copies of a current title commitment or
registered property report and such other evidence as the Town
Board or Town Attorney may require showing title or control in the
Land Divider or Owner. Prior to final sign-off of Certified Survey
map documents, updated title information shall be submitted to the
Town Attorney.
(c) The Town Clerk shall give notice of the Plan Commission's and Park
Commission’s review of the Certified Survey by listing it as an agenda item
in the Plan and Park Commissions’ meeting notices. The notices shall
include the name of the Land Divider, the address of the property in
question and the requested action. Abutting property Owners and property
Owners within 600 feet of the Land Divider's total Parcel shall receive
written notice of the public hearing.
(d) The Town Clerk shall schedule a public hearing on the Certified Survey
before the Town Board. The Town Clerk shall give notice of the Town
Board's review and public hearing on the Certified Survey by listing it as an
agenda item in the Board's posted meeting notice. The Land Divider shall
also be notified. The notice shall include the name of the Land Divider, the
address of the property in question and the requested action. Abutting
property Owners and property Owners within 600 feet of the Land Divider's
total Parcel shall receive written notice of the public hearing.
(e) The Land Divider shall obtain one or more sign posts from the Town Office
and place signs on the property that is the subject of the Certified Survey
review as provided in this section. A sign shall be placed on the sign post
that must list the times and locations of all meetings and public hearings to
consider the Certified Survey. The sign shall be posted at least seven (7)
days before any meeting that is not a public hearing and at least twenty-one
(21) days prior to any public hearing. The sign shall be located in a position
on the property so it can be read from the sidewalk or other public right-ofway.
If a property abuts more than one (1) right of way, a sign shall be
placed facing each public right-of-way. The sign shall be removed within
seven (7) days of the last public hearing listed on the sign and the sign post
returned to the Town Office. Failure to post the sign shall not invalidate
2. Editor's Note: Attachment 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
47
any action taken on the Cerified Survey by the Plan Commission or the
Town Board.
(4) Additional map information. The Certified Survey map shall show correctly on its
face, in addition to the information required by § 236.34, Wis. Stats., the following:
(a) All existing buildings, watercourses, drainage ditches and other features
pertinent to property division.
(b) Setbacks or building lines required by the Town Ordinances and the Dane
County Zoning Code if non-typical.
(c) All lands reserved for future public acquisition.
(d) Date of the map.
(e) Graphic scale.
(f) Name and address of the Owner, Land Divider, and surveyor.
(g) Square footage of each Parcel.
(h) Location of Building Envelopes within each Lot if non-standard.
(i) Identification of all land outside a Building Envelope as deed restricted to
prohibit construction of any structures.
(j) Notification that shall read as follows: "Further Land Divisions by Certified
Survey may be restricted for a period of up to five years under the provision
of § 15.22 of the Town of Middleton Land Division and Subdivision
Ordinance.”
(k) Identification of land that has a slope of 20% or more.(12) Identification
of restrictions required at intersections, if any, that will provide for the
proper Intersection Sight Distance and Vision Corner, as detailed in § 8.02
of this Code.
(l) A tree survey shall be required as determined by the Town Plan Commission
or Town Board. Location of all Native Canopy Trees exceeding eight inches
DBH (Diameter at Breast Height) located in proposed street right-of-ways,
Building Envelopes, or in areas proposed to be used for stormwater
management or other subdivision improvements.
(m) When determined by the Town Engineer, minimum lowest window or door
openings for proposed Lots shall be identified on the Certified Survey map,
and shall be detailed in Restrictive Covenants. The lowest opening for any
48
structure on a Lot adjacent to a major drainageway or other stormwater
management improvement shall be two feet above the calculated water
elevation in a one-hundred-year rainfall event.
(5) Stormwater requirements. Land Development activities involving Certified Survey
map (CSM) approval shall meet the requirements for Stormwater and Erosion
Control and the Town's "Design Requirements for Public Infrastructure" under
Chapter 17 of this Code.
(6) Property owners association; restrictive covenants. When a Land Divider proposes
common property within a Certified Survey will be either owned or maintained by
an organization of property Owners or the Town, or if the Certified Survey contains
areas of interest, such as, but not limited to stormwater management areas, parks or
landscape buffers, the Land Divider shall provide the Town with one hard copy and
one electronic copy of the legal instruments and rules for proposed property Owners
associations or Lot Owners, and proposed deed restrictions or Restrictive
Covenants/Easements for Town Board approval. The Town Board may require that
those provisions which impact or affect the Town may not be amended or
terminated without the written approval of the Town Board. (Note: Deed
restrictions and Restrictive Covenants in subdivisions may be private contractual
agreements not enforceable by the Town.)
(7) Environmental assessment checklist.
(a) Submission. The Environmental Assessment Checklist, found in
"Attachment 1," shall be provided to the Land Divider for a Certified Survey
map, before the preliminary consultation conference, to be completed for
submission with the Certified Survey map.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of the Environmental Assessment and Evaluation is
to provide the basis for an orderly, systematic review of the effects of the
proposed Land Division upon the community environment in accordance
with the principles and procedures of § 236.45(1), Wis. Stats. The goals of
the community are to eliminate pollution and siltation or reduce them to
acceptable standards, assure ample living space per capita, preserve open
space and parks for recreation, to provide adequately for stormwater
control; maintain scenic beauty and aesthetic surroundings, administer to
the economic and cultural needs of the citizens; and to provide for the
effective and efficient flow of goods and services.
(c) Determination of need for expanded environmental assessment. The Plan
Commission shall review the Environmental Assessment Checklist
following submittal and make its recommendation to the Town Board. The
Town Board may, for reasons stated in a written determination, decide that
the preliminary environmental assessment raises significant questions
regarding the effects of the proposed Land Division on the environment
49
and/or that a high level of citizen interest has resulted from the preliminary
assessment. Such a decision shall be made within 14 days of the review of
the Certified Survey map by resolution of the Town Board and shall
specifically identify the questions and/or issues on which it requires
additional research, data, evaluation or input from the Land Divider,
Developer, Owner, or other governmental agencies or interested parties.
The Town Board shall establish a reasonable date for the return and review
of the additional information requested and may specify the format in which
the information is to be presented.
(d) Hearing on expanded environmental assessment. Following the return to the
Town Board of the additional information requested, the Town Board shall
make such information available for inspection by the Land Divider,
Owner, Town department(s), commission(s) and committee(s), and any
other interested parties who shall be given a minimum of 30 days to review
the information and submit written comments to the Town Board. The
Town Board shall schedule and hold a public hearing regarding the
expanded environmental assessment within 45 days of the deadline
established for submission of written comments. The public hearing shall
be preceded by a Class 1 notice under Chapter 985, Wis. Stats. Persons
attending the public hearing shall be afforded an opportunity to comment
on the report.
(e) Review. The Plan Commission and the Town Board shall review, as part of
the analysis and evaluation of the Certified Survey map, any environmental
assessment reports, supporting data and information, and Town staff, Town
Engineer, commission and committee reviews as the Town Board may
require for determining the suitability of the proposed Land Division and
subsequent Development.
(8) Drafting standards. The Land Divider shall submit to the Town Office copies of a
Certified Survey map which shall identify the improvements (grading, tree
planting, paving, installation of facilities and dedications of land) and Easements
which the Land Divider or Owner proposes to make and shall indicate by
accompanying letter when the improvements will be provided.
(9) Coordinate system. The Certified Survey Map shall be tied directly to two (2)
section or quarter corners within the section the Certified Survey Map is located.
The exact bearing and distance of such tie shall be determined by field
measurements, and the material and coordinate values of the monuments marking
the section corner or quarter corner to which the Certified Survey Map is tied shall
be indicated on the face of the Certified Survey Map. All bearings, distances and
coordinate values shall be referenced to the Wisconsin County Coordinate System,
Dane Zone, NAD83, current adjustment (2011 adjustment), or as modified by
subsequent adjustments.
50
(10) Certificates. All Certified Survey maps shall provide all the certificates required by
§ 236.34, Wis. Stats.; and in addition, the surveyor shall certify on the Certified
Survey map that he has fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter.
(11) Street dedication. Dedication of streets and other public areas shall require, in
addition, the Owner's certificate and the mortgagee's certificate in substantially the
same form as required by § 236.21(2)(a), Wis. Stats.
(12) Incomplete submission. All items and documents required by this section must be
submitted to the Town Office before the time requirements for review of Land
Divisions will legally commence. Failure to submit all items and documents
required by this section may constitute a reason for the Town Board to reject a
Certified Survey map.
(13) Town Board review and approval.
(a) Within 90 days of the date the Certified Survey map was filed with the
Town Office, the Town Board shall, taking into consideration the Plan
Commission's recommendation, if any, approve, approve conditionally, or
reject such Certified Survey and shall state in writing any conditions of
approval or reasons for rejection, unless the time is extended by written
agreement with the Land Divider. The Town Clerk shall communicate in
writing to the Land Divider the action of the Town Board.
(b) After the Certified Survey map is approved by the Town Board and the
required improvements, if any, including street, stormwater management
facilities, sewer, water main, etc., are either installed or a contract and
sureties insuring their installation is filed, and all conditions of approval
have been resolved, including payment of any fees or charges under this
chapter, the Town Clerk shall sign the Certified Survey map.
(c) The County Register of Deeds cannot record the Certified Survey map
unless it is offered within the time frame specified in the Wisconsin Statutes.
In addition, the Town Clerk shall not sign the Certified Survey map if it is
presented to the Clerk for signature after resolution of all outstanding
conditions of approval, if more than 24 months have passed since the date
the Town Board approved or conditionally approved the Certified Survey
map. [Note that an extension of time may only be made by written
agreement between the Town Board and Land Divider.] Failure to do so
shall necessitate a new filing and review and approval of the Certified
Survey map by the Town Board.
(d) The Land Divider shall file three full-size and three reduced size (11 inches
by 17 inches maximum) copies of the recorded Certified Survey map with
the Town Office. The Clerk will forward one copy each to the Town
Attorney and Town Engineer. One full-size copy for the Town shall be
51
laminated (minimum five mil).
(14) Requirements. To the extent reasonably practicable, the Land Divider with a
Certified Survey shall comply with the provisions of this chapter relating to general
requirements, design standards, and required improvements prescribed in Articles
VI, VII and VIII of this chapter. Conveyance by metes and bounds shall be
prohibited where the Lot(s) involved is less than 35 acres.
(15) AutoCAD drawing file. The Land Divider shall provide a file that is either an
AutoCAD drawing file in model space or a file that is compatible with AutoCAD
such that it can be converted by AutoCAD into an AutoCAD drawing file.
15.23 Cost of improvements; general standards.
(1) Payment for improvements. The improvements prescribed in this chapter are
required as a condition of approval of a Land Division. The required improvements
described in this chapter shall be installed, furnished and financed at the sole
expense of the Land Divider. However, in the case of required improvements in a
commercial or industrial area, the cost of such improvements may, at the sole
discretion of the Town Board, be financed through special assessments.
(2) General standards.
(a) The following required improvements in this chapter shall be designed and
installed in accordance with the engineering standards and specifications
that have been adopted or approved by the Town Board. Where standards
and specifications have not been adopted, the improvements shall be made
in accordance with good and accepted engineering practices. All
engineering designs, standards and specifications must be approved by the
Town Engineer prior to the start of any construction and shall meet the
requirements of the Town’s “Design Requirements for Public
Improvements.”
(b) All features, amenities, and improvements that are depicted, shown, or
referred to in or on any documents, drawings, or maps shall be considered
to be part of the plan to divide the land and shall be the responsibility of the
Land Divider to provide and/or install unless specifically noted in the
documents, drawings, or maps to the contrary.
15.24 Required agreement providing for proper installation of improvements.
(1) Contract. Prior to installation of required improvements, if any, and prior to the
Town signing the Final Plat or Certified Survey map, the Land Divider and Owner
shall enter into a written contract, termed a "Developer Agreement," with the Town
requiring the Land Divider to furnish and construct said improvements at his or her
sole cost and in accordance with plans and specifications and usual contract
52
conditions, which shall include provision for inspection and approval of
construction details by the Town Engineer. If it is determined by the Town Board
that the Land Divider or Owner is in default under the Developer Agreement during
installation of the improvements, the Town may issue a cease and desist order
stopping all activities until the issue(s) has been satisfactorily addressed in the
opinion of the Town Board.
(2) The Land Divider and Owner shall be required to enter into a Developer Agreement
for each phase of construction of a Land Division at the time the Final Plat is
approved, whether it is Final Platted all at once or with multiple Final Plats. The
Town Board finds it reasonable and necessary to require the following:
(a) For a Land Division that is Final Platted with multiple Final Plats by
construction phase, the requirements for open space and parkland
dedication, or fees in lieu of, and all other requirements of this chapter must
be met within each construction phase and Final Plat for the Land Division.
(b) For a Land Division that is Final Platted with one Final Plat, the
requirements for open space and parkland dedication, or fees in lieu of, and
all other requirements of this chapter must be met within each construction
phase of the Final Plat.
(3) Alternatively, if a construction phase or Final Plat of a Land Division does not meet
the requirements for open space and parkland dedication, and all other requirements
of this chapter, the Land Divider and Owner may voluntarily Final Plat the entire
Land Division and enter into a Developer Agreement for the entire Land Division.
(4) If the Town Board approves a Land Division that will be Final Platted all at once,
but built in multiple construction phases, or is Final Platted with multiple Final
Plats and built in multiple corresponding construction phases, the Town Board finds
it reasonable and necessary to require the Land Divider and Owner to:
(a) Enter into a Developer Agreement for construction of the first phase of
improvements, and
(b) Record a Deed Restriction that prevents the sale of any Lots outside of the
first phase of construction until the Land Divider and Owner have entered
into a Developer Agreement and have posted surety for improvement of the
lots in the particular construction phase and Final Plat of the development.
(5) Financial guarantees.
(a) The Developer Agreement shall require the Land Divider and Owner to
make a cash escrow deposit or furnish a letter of credit or bond, the amount
of such surety to be equal to one hundred and twenty (120) percent of the
estimate of the total cost of the improvements. The amount of the deposit
53
shall be determined as provided under §236.13(2)(am)1d., Wis. Stats. For
purposes of this section, at a minimum, Improvements shall include street
and stormwater infrastructure, Public Recreational Trails, Invasive Species
Management, and Lot corner monumentation. Improvements do not
include any fees charged by the Town for land disturbing activities that are
necessary to achieve the desired subgrade for public improvements. Letters
of credit are to be provided in the form available from and approved by the
Town. Bonds shall be provided in a form that meets the requirements of
§236.13(2)(am)1m.c., Wis. Stats. The Town Board finds it reasonable and
necessary to require that the Land Divider and Owner shall provide financial
guarantees for the first phase of construction of a Land Division, at the time
the Final Plat is approved, whether it is Final Platted all at once or with
multiple Final Plats, and prior to each subsequent construction phase.
(b) The Town Board also finds it reasonable and necessary to require that a
Land Division shall meet the requirements for open space and parkland
dedication, or fees in lieu of, and all other requirements of this chapter
within each construction phase or Final Plat of the Land Division whether
it is Final Platted all at once or with multiple Final Plats. If a construction
phase or Final Plat of a Land Division under consideration does not meet
the requirements for open space and parkland dedication, and all other
requirements of this chapter, the Land Divider and Owner may voluntarily
Final Plat the entire Land Division and enter into a Developer Agreement
for the entire Land Division and provide financial guarantees for the entire
Land Division.
(c) On request of the Land Divider, the Developer Agreement may provide for
completion of all or part of the improvements covered thereby prior to the
approval of the Land Division, and in such event the amount of the deposit
or letter of credit or bond shall be reduced in a sum equal to the estimated
costs of the improvements so completed prior to approval of the Final Plat
or Certified Survey map.
(d) On request of the Land Divider and upon recommendation by the Town
Engineer, the Board may accept improvements and allow a reduction in the
letter of credit or bond upon completion of all or a portion of required
improvements. A one-year warranty period is required for all improvements
except stormwater. Stormwater improvements shall be under warranty
until: 80% of the Lots in the subdivision have been sold and the Developer's
engineer has certified that the facilities are functioning properly; required
plantings are adequate and well established; and all necessary maintenance
has been properly performed. At its discretion, the Town Board could waive
the 80% requirement but still require the certification on other requirements.
If any defects appear during the warranty period, the Land Divider shall
make the required replacement or acceptable repair as directed by the Town
Board at the Land Divider's expense. During the warranty period for such
54
completed portions of the required improvements, the Town may lower the
letter of credit or bond to 15% of the cost of the improvements completed.
In addition, the letter of credit or bond should also include 120% of the
estimated cost of unfinished required improvements until that work is
complete.
(e) If the required improvements are not completed within the period specified
within the Developer Agreement, all amounts held under deposit or letters
of credit or bonds shall be turned over to the Town and applied to the cost
of the required improvements. Any balance remaining after such
improvements have been made shall be returned to the Land Divider.
(f) The Town Board, at its option, may require extension of the deposit or letter
of credit or bond period for additional periods not to exceed two years for
each additional period.
(g) The time for completion of the required improvements, and the several parts
thereof, shall be determined by the Town Board upon recommendation of
the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall consult with the Land Divider
regarding the establishment of the time for completion of the required
improvements. The completion date shall be a component of the Developer
Agreement. The Town Board may, in its sole discretion, provide such
penalties as it deems appropriate to ensure the timely completion of the
required improvements.
(h) The Land Divider shall pay the Town for all costs incurred by the Town for
review, approval and inspection of the Subdivision and Development
thereof. Such costs shall include, but not be limited to, the review, and
preparation at the Town Board's sole discretion, of plans and specifications
by the Town Engineer, special studies or projects undertaken by the Town
Engineer or other Persons at the direction of the Town Board; the review,
and preparation at the Town Board's sole discretion, of legal documents,
plans and specifications by the Town Attorney; as well as all other costs of
a similar nature which are related to the review, approval and inspection of
the Subdivision and Development thereof. The Land Divider shall also be
responsible for all engineering costs associated with the design, review, and
construction observation of Recreational Trails, and all other required
improvements.
15.25 Required construction plans; Town Review; inspections.
(1) Engineering reports, construction plans, and specifications.
(a) At the Final Plat stage, or when necessary for a Minor Subdivision, upon
the filing of a Certified Survey map, construction plans, and specifications
for the required improvements conforming in all respects with the standards
55
established by the Town Engineer and the Ordinances of the Town shall be
prepared at the Land Divider's expense by a professional engineer who is
registered in the State of Wisconsin, and such plans shall contain the
professional engineer's seal. Such plans, together with the quantities of
construction items, shall be submitted to the Town Engineer for his approval
and for his estimate of the total costs of the required improvements.
Approval of such plans shall be as required by the Developer Agreement;
the approved plans shall become a part of the Developer Agreement.
(b) Simultaneously with the filing of the Final Plat with the Town Office, or
when necessary, upon the filing of a Certified Survey map, copies of the
construction plans and specifications, where applicable, shall be furnished
for the following Public Improvements, with a copy sent to the appropriate
sanitary district:
(i) Street plans and profiles showing existing and proposed grades,
elevations and cross sections of required improvements.
(ii) Sanitary sewer plans and profiles showing the locations, grades,
sizes, elevations and materials of required facilities.
(iii) Storm sewer and open channel plans and profiles showing the
locations, grades, sizes, cross-sections, elevations and materials of
required facilities.
(iv) Water main plans and profiles showing the locations, sizes,
elevations and materials of required facilities.
(v) Stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control plans
showing those structures required to retard the rate of runoff water
and those grading and excavating practices that will prevent erosion
and sedimentation. Such plans shall comply with the requirements
of Chapter 17 of this Code. Such plans shall be accompanied by a
stormwater management report that provides the technical support
to the proposed design, and that details the ongoing maintenance
required to maintain stormwater management improvements.
Evidence that Dane County has approved the stormwater
management plan shall be submitted to the Town. The plan
approval letter from Dane County, and a copy of the plans approved
by Dane County, shall be provided to the Town, in both hard copy
and electronic formats, prior to the Town approving the stormwater
management plan and final construction plans.
(vi) Planting plans showing the location, age, caliper, species and time
of planting of any required grasses, vines, shrubs and trees.
56
(vii) Additional special plans or information required by the Town Board,
own Engineer or other parties designated by the Town Board.
(2) Action by the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall review or cause to be
reviewed the plans and specifications for conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and other pertinent Town ordinances and design standards recommended
by the Town Engineer and approved by the Town Board. If the Town Engineer
rejects the plans and specifications, the Town Engineer shall notify the Land
Divider, who shall modify the plans or specifications, or both, accordingly. When
the plans and specifications are corrected, the Town Engineer shall approve the
plans and specifications. If construction of any development or phase of a
development does not commence within six months of construction plan approval,
plans for the development or phase of development shall be resubmitted for review
and approval by the Town Engineer. The development or phase of development
subject to a new review shall be subject to any new ordinances approved by the
Town Board.
(3) Construction and inspection.
(a) Prior to starting any work covered by the plans approved above, written
authorization to start the work shall be obtained from the Town Engineer
upon receipt of all necessary permits and in accordance with Town
Ordinances. Building permits shall not be issued until all improvements
required by this chapter are satisfactorily completed. No land surface
disturbance or construction shall commence within a development prior to
the Land Divider providing surety for the improvements.
(b) Construction of all improvements required by this Title shall be
substantially completed within two (2) years from the date of the Developer
Agreement and fully completed within thirty (30) months from the date of
the Developer Agreement, unless good cause can be provided to and
approved by the Town Board to grant an extension or a different schedule
is negotiated with the Town in the Developer Agreement. These timeframes
shall not apply to the placement of the final surface layer of asphalt and
associated final shouldering, which shall be completed within three (3)
years from the date of the Developer Agreement unless good cause can be
provided to and approved by the Town Board to grant an extension or a
different schedule is negotiated with the Town in the Developer Agreement.
Any request for an extension of the construction completion date shall be
made in writing to the Town Office and shall state the reasons for the
requested extension. The Town Board may, in its sole discretion, grant such
an extension.
(c) During the course of construction, the Town Engineer shall make such
inspections as the Town Board or the Town Engineer deems necessary to
ensure compliance with the plans and specifications as approved. The Land
57
Divider shall pay the actual costs incurred by the Town for such inspections.
This fee shall be the actual costs to the Town of inspectors, engineers and
other parties necessary to insure satisfactory work.
(4) Record plans. After completion of all Public Improvements and prior to final
acceptance of such improvements, the Land Divider shall make or cause to be
made, one hard copy and one electronic copy of record plans showing the actual
location of all valves, manholes, stubs, sewers and water mains, stormwater culverts
and other stormwater improvements, and such other facilities as the Town Engineer
may require. These plans shall be prepared on durable white media, with permanent
nonfading black image and shall bear the signature and seal of a professional
engineer registered in the State of Wisconsin. The presentation of the record plans
shall be a condition of final acceptance of the improvements and the release of the
surety assuring their completion. The hard copy shall be retained by the Town
Office.
15.26 Street improvements.
The Land Divider shall construct streets, roads, and alleys as outlined on the approved plans based
on the requirements of this chapter:
(1) Street construction standards.
(a) The design and construction of all roads, streets and alleys in the Town shall
fully comply with the requirements and specifications of § 8.02. After
applicable sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water, and other necessary utilities
have been installed, where required by the Town, the Land Divider shall
construct and dedicate streets as part of the Subdivision.
(b) In the event that private roads, streets, and/or alleys (which are all Private
Improvements) are proposed by the Land Divider, the Town shall determine
which standards the road, street, and/or alley shall meet. If the Town allows
said private road, street, and/or alley to be constructed to other standards,
an agreement shall be recorded between the Town and Landowner that
covers maintenance provisions.
(2) Completion of street construction.
(a) Prior to any building permits being issued on lands adjacent to streets,
required street construction in conformance with the Developer Agreement
shall be completed by the Land Divider and inspected and approved by the
Town Engineer.
(b) The Town Board may issue a waiver of these requirements in unusual or
special circumstances such as excessively severe weather conditions, heavy
construction temporarily in the area, or construction material shortages (i.e.,
58
cement, asphalt). The issuance of a waiver shall be at the sole discretion of
the Town Board.
(c) The Land Divider requesting a waiver shall do so in writing, presenting such
information and documentation as required by the Town Board. The waiver
shall be in written form and shall detail which improvement requirements
are temporarily waived and for what period of time.
15.27 Curb and gutter.
After the installation of all required utility and stormwater drainage improvements, the Land
Divider, when required by the Town Board and where determined to be necessary by the Town
Engineer, shall construct concrete curbs and gutters in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Town Engineer. Wherever possible, provision shall be made at the time of
construction for driveway access curb cuts.
15.28 Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks may be required by the Town Board in high traffic areas and areas in the
vicinity of schools, commercial areas and other areas of public assemblage. The
Town Board may require the construction of sidewalks if such walks are necessary,
in its sole discretion and opinion, for safe and adequate pedestrian circulation.
(2) ADA Compliance. All new sidewalks shall comply with the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA). The Town requires facilities to meet design standards set
forth under the Wisconsin Guide to Pedestrian Best Practices and applicable (ADA)
or ABA guidelines or regulations.
15.29 Park and trail improvements.
The Land Divider shall construct parks and trails as outlined on the approved plans based on the
requirements of this chapter.
(1) Mini-parks.
(a) The Land Divider may be required by the Town Board to construct, and
dedicate to the Town, mini-park(s) or pay the equivalent fee in lieu of
dedication specified in Chapter 5.
(b) Mini-parks shall be developed at locations identified by the Town Board
consistent with the Town’s Comprehensive Plan and Comprehensive
Outdoor Recreation Plan (“CORP”). Mini-parks shall be approximately
one acre in area and shall have facilities appropriate for a mini-park as
specified by the CORP. The Town may require development of mini-parks
in developments whose location meets the needs and goals identified by the
CORP. Other developments shall be assessed a fee in lieu of dedication
59
pursuant to Chapter 5.
(c) If the Town Board requires a Land Divider to construct a mini-park rather
than pay the fees in lieu of dedication, the fees otherwise owed by the Land
Divider for the development shall be reduced by the cost of playground
equipment specified by the Town Board, plus the value of the land dedicated
as determined by the Town’s dedication calculation pursuant to Chapter 5
and § 15.45(3). If the cost of the mini-park exceeds the fees owed by the
Land Divider for the development, the Town shall pay the remaining cost.
(2) Secondary Recreational Trails. The Land Divider may be required by the Town
Board to provide Easements or dedication for and to construct, at the Land Divider's
cost, Secondary Recreational Trails at a ratio of up to 20 feet per Lot. The Land
Divider may be required to clear, grade, establish base course, and install final
surface appropriate for the type of trail and use based on the design standards set
out in § 15.49(1)(b). The Land Divider may be required to provide a surface up to
and including a five-foot wide, 3/4 inch crushed stone base eight inches thick or an
eleven-foot-wide grass trail. If the Town desires higher standards and/or an asphalt
path, the improvements over and above these standards shall be paid for according
to §§ 15.45 through 15.50 of this chapter.
(a) Secondary Recreational Trails may be located within utility Easements or
along drainage ways if they will not interfere with their intended function,
and if approved by the Town Board. Secondary Recreational Trails may be
located within road rights-of-way only when necessary and with the
approval of the Town Board.
(b) Secondary Recreational Trails shall also be located and constructed in
keeping with any goals and locations established by the official Town trails
map and Comprehensive Outdoor Recreation Plan.
(3) Other Park and Recreational Trail improvements. Any additional park or Primary
and Secondary Recreational Trail improvements required by this chapter shall be
planned, improved and paid for according to Chapter 5 and §§ 15.45 through 15.50
of this chapter.
15.30 Sanitary sewerage system.
(1) The size, type and installation of all sanitary sewers proposed to be constructed
shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the appropriate
sanitary district. Service laterals shall be provided to all Lots served by public sewer
systems.
(2) The Land Divider shall pay all the costs of all public sanitary sewer work including
the bringing of sanitary sewer from where it exists to the proposed subdivision as
well as providing all sanitary sewer work within the subdivision. The size, type and
60
installation of all sanitary sewers proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance
with the plans and specifications approved by the appropriate sanitary district
serving the area.
(3) Private sewage disposal systems shall comply with the appropriate provisions of
Chapter 17 of the Town Ordinances.
(4) Holding tanks shall not be considered an acceptable system for septic systems,
unless an exception is made at the sole discretion of the Town Board.
15.31 Stormwater drainage facilities.
Pursuant to § 15.43, the Land Divider shall provide stormwater drainage facilities which may
include curb and gutter, catch basins and inlets, storm sewers, roadway culverts, road ditches, and
open channels. All stormwater drainage facilities shall be designed per the Town of Middleton's
"Design Requirements for Public Improvements" and those specified in Chapter 17 of these
Ordinances. Stormwater drainage facilities shall be so designed as to minimize hazards to life or
property, and the size, type and installation of all stormwater drainage facilities proposed to be
constructed shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the Town Board,
upon the recommendation of the Town Engineer. All Land Divisions shall follow current federal,
state and county stormwater requirements and shall follow the recommendations of the Stormwater
Master Plan – Town of Middleton (2017) and adhere to on-going WPDES permit requirements as
described in the Stormwater Master Plan.
15.32 Other utilities.
(1) The Land Divider of a Major Subdivision shall cause gas, electrical power,
telephone, and cable television facilities to be installed in such a manner as to make
adequate service available to each Lot in the subdivision.
(2) All new electrical distribution lines, television cables and telephone lines from
which Lots are individually served shall be underground unless the Town Board
specifically allows overhead poles for the following reasons:
(a) Topography, soil, water table, solid rock, boulders, or other physical
conditions would make underground installation unreasonable or
impractical; or
(b) The Lots to be served by said facilities can be served directly from existing
overhead facilities.
(3) Plans indicating the proposed location of all gas, electrical power, television cables,
and telephone distribution and transmission lines required to service the Land
Division shall be approved by the Town Engineer and such plans shall be filed with
the Town Office.
61
15.33 Street signs and lighting.
(1) The Land Divider shall furnish and install street signs in the subdivision in such
locations as the Town Board may determine. Such signs include traffic control
signs. The Town Board or its designee shall determine the design and construction
standards for all such street signs.
(2) The Town Board, in its sole discretion, may require the Land Divider to furnish and
install streetlights in such locations as the Town Board may determine. The Town
Board or its designee shall determine the design and construction standards for all
such streetlights.
(3) If a Land Divider is allowed to install street signs or posts that vary from the Town
standard, the Town will, if necessary, replace signs or posts with signs meeting
Town standards, unless other arrangements have been made and approved by the
Town Board.
(4) In no case, however, shall the signs that vary from Town standards compromise
safety standards as determined by the Town Board or its designee.
15.34 Erosion control.
Pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes, Dane County Ordinances and the Town's Erosion and Stormwater
Runoff Control Ordinance (Chapter 17 of this Code), the Land Divider shall cause all grading,
excavations, open cuts, side slopes, and other land surface disturbances to be mulched, seeded,
sodded or otherwise protected so that erosion, siltation, sedimentation, and washing are prevented.
The Land Divider shall submit an erosion control plan that specifies measures that will be taken
to assure compliance and the minimization of erosion problems within the Land Division.
15.35 Partition fences.
When the land included in a Subdivision Plat or Certified Survey map abuts upon or is adjacent to
land used for agriculture, farming or grazing purposes, the Land Divider and Lot Owner shall erect,
keep, and maintain partition fences, satisfying the requirements of the Wisconsin Statutes for a
legal and sufficient fence, between such land and the adjacent land. A covenant binding the Land
Divider and/or Owner, its grantees, heirs, successors, and assigns to erect and maintain such
fences, without cost to the adjoining property Owners, so long as the land is used for agriculture,
farming or grazing purposes, shall be included upon the Final Plat or Certified Survey map.
15.36 Easements.
(1) Utility easements. The Town Board, on the recommendation of the appropriate
agencies serving the Town, shall require utility Easements for poles, wires,
conduits, stormwater management facilities, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water
and head mains, or other utility lines. It is the intent of this chapter to protect all
established Easements so as to assure proper grade, assure maintenance of the
62
established grade, prohibit construction of permanent fences or retaining walls over
underground installation and prevent the planting of trees and shrubbery in the
Easement area.
(2) Stormwater/drainage easements.
(a) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel,
stream or any other condition requiring a stormwater/drainage Easement:
(i) There shall be provided a stormwater Easement or drainage rightof-
way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse,
and the Easement shall have a width that contains stormwater runoff
within its limits as required by the Design Requirements for Public
Improvements document, as well as allows for maintenance; or
(ii) The watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream may be relocated
in such a manner that the maintenance of adequate drainage will be
assured and the same provided with a stormwater Easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming to the lines of the relocated
watercourse, and the same width requirements are adhered to.
(iii) Easement widths for Major and Minor Drainage Ways. The
Easement width for a Minor Drainage Way shall be large enough to
contain the runoff from a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. The
easement width for a Major Drainage Way shall be large enough to
continue the runoff from a 100-year, 24-hour rainfall event.
(b) Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open
channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential
volume flow. In all cases, such watercourse shall be of a minimum width
established at the high-water mark or, in the absence of such specification,
not less than 20 feet. If, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, the Easement
will be for a major drainage swale, the Easement shall be of sufficient width
to contain a one-hundred-year frequency storm. If the drainage Easement is
located in an established floodway or flood fringe district, the entire
floodplain area shall be included within the drainage Easement.
(c) Construction of permanent or temporary fences or retaining walls or the
planting of trees and shrubbery or changing the grade in the Easement area
is prohibited. Construction of structures including septic drain fields,
patios, swimming pools, etc. in the easement area is also prohibited.
(d) Additional requirements, if any, are included in the Town of Middleton's
"Design Requirements for Public Improvements".
(3) Easement locations. Telephone, electric, gas, and cable television Easements shall
63
be at least 12 feet wide and sewer Easements shall be at least 20 feet wide.
Combined use Easements shall be at least 30 feet wide. The Town Board may
require Easements to be wider where recommended by the Town Engineer.
Easements may run across Lots or along rear Lot Lines. Such Easements should
preferably be located along rear Lot Lines. Evidence shall be furnished to the Town
Board that Easements and any Easement provisions to be incorporated in the Plat
or in deeds have been reviewed by the individual utility companies or the
organization responsible for furnishing the services involved.
15.37 Buffer strips.
When required by the Town Board as a condition of Final Plat or Certified Survey map approval,
a buffer strip shall be located along the Plat line or Certified Survey line or property line of Parcels
that have incompatible uses, differing zoning, or differing development. The preferable plantings
are spruce or fir trees. The trees shall be a minimum of five feet in height when planted and
staggered with spacing as determined by the Landscape Designer and approved by the Town. In
whatever case, the minimum number of plantings required will be equal to the length of the lot
line(s) separating the incompatible uses, different zoning or different development, divided by 15
feet. Alternatively, large shrubs, fences, and berms may be required in addition to, or in lieu of,
trees, on a case by case basis as determined by the Town. The buffer strip shall be located in an
Outlot or on Easements, each with a minimum width of 20 feet or greater as determined by the
Town. Maintenance of the buffer strip shall be the responsibility of the Land Divider, homeowners'
association, or Lot Owner.
15.38 Greenways.
Greenways included within a Land Division shall be evaluated according to the following
standards:
(1) The Land Divider shall be responsible for an acceptable continuous drainage way
through the proposed Land Division as determined by the Town Engineer. The
Land Divider shall furnish the Town Board or its designee a plan outlining the
Greenway boundaries and the location of existing drainage ways. In addition, the
Land Divider shall furnish to the Town Board or its designee a set of cross-sections,
based on fifty-foot stations, of the Greenway, based on Town datum oriented upon
a base line as prescribed by the Town Board or its designee.
(a) Where a natural drainage way exists which has acceptable hydraulic
capacities, including alignment and grade, as determined by the Town
Board or its designee, construction will not be required and the existing
natural growth shall be preserved. Where such natural growth is destroyed
or damaged by action of the Land Divider or his agents, the Land Divider
shall be responsible for repairing the disturbed area by sodding.
(b) Where the Town Board or its designee determines that the hydraulic
capacities, including alignment and grade, are not acceptable, then such
64
alignment, grade and slopes shall be improved by the Land Divider to the
cross-section specified by the Town Board or its designee.
(2) The Land Divider shall install permanent pipes or culverts at a grade designated by
the Town Board or its designee under all streets crossing a Greenway or drainage
way. Such installation shall be in accordance with the State of Wisconsin Standard
Specifications for Highway and Structure Construction (latest version). Culverts
required across intersections for temporary street drainage shall be furnished and
installed by the Land Divider. All temporary culverts installed by the Land Divider
shall be completely removed when the streets are constructed to Town standards,
and the area restored to as nearly original condition as possible, as determined by
the Town Board or its designee.
(3) In order to assure proper drainage, the ground elevation along any Lot Line
common with the boundary of a Greenway shall be to an elevation established by
the Town Board or its designee. All Lot grading and building elevations shall
provide for positive drainage. Grading or filling within the Greenway limits is
prohibited except as authorized by the Town Board or its designee.
(4) Greenways shall be limited to public uses.
15.39 Vegetation in right-of-way.
The Land Divider shall be responsible for the removal of all obstructions on streets adjacent to the
development following review by the Town Board or its designee as per Chapter 8. For those
existing trees and vegetation that are allowed to remain in the public street right-of-way with the
initial construction of the development, explicit rights shall be given to the Town as to the possible
removal of this vegetation at a future date. Specifically, all Lots adjacent to public street rights-ofways
shall include language in their property deeds that shall explicitly allow the Town to remove
existing vegetation in the public street right-of-way in the future as deemed necessary by the Town
without compensation to the Owner or Owners of said adjacent Lot.
15.40 General street design standards.
Street design standards to be followed shall be those prescribed in Chapter 8.
15.41 Pedestrian pathways.
Pedestrian Pathways, not less than 12 feet wide, may be required by the Town Board, through the
center of a Block more than 900 feet long, where deemed essential to provide circulation or access
to schools, playgrounds, public recreation areas, shopping centers, transportation, and other
community facilities.
15.42 Lot design standards.
(1) General requirements.
65
(a) Size. Lot sizes shall be appropriate for the location, zoning, type of
sewerage or septic system to be utilized, and for the type of Land Division
contemplated.
(b) Maximum development density for Major Subdivisions. There shall be a
ratio of one Dwelling Unit per 75,000 square feet of land for Traditional
Subdivisions and one Dwelling Unit per 60,000 square feet of land for
Cluster Subdivisions inclusive of public streets (including up to the center
line of abutting roads but counting only one lane of divided highways),
dedicated parkland, and open space if included within the limits of the
proposed subdivision. These ratios shall not be exceeded.
(c) Minimum lot sizes; open space.
(i) Sewered subdivisions.
1. In areas to be served by public sewers, the minimum Lot
sizes shall be 12,000 square feet, with an additional 2,000
square feet required for each additional Dwelling Unit.
2. In areas to be served by public sewers, which are also Cluster
Subdivisions, the open space required per Lot shall be
60,000 square feet, minus the Lot size.
3. Regardless of Lot size, any Lot containing multiple
Dwelling Units shall be considered a Cluster Lot. The open
space required per Dwelling Unit for Lots with more than
one Dwelling Unit shall be 60,000 square feet minus (Lot
size divided by the number of Dwelling Units on the Lot)
outside of the Transition Area.
4. In areas to be served by public sewers, which are also Cluster
Subdivisions within the boundaries of the Transition Area,
the open space required per Lot is listed under §
15.06(2)(a)(i) -§ 15.06(2)(a)(v).
(ii) Unsewered traditional subdivisions.
In unsewered Traditional Subdivisions, minimum Lot sizes shall be
65,000 square feet. In its discretion if the Town Board finds a
variance to be in the best interest of the Town, it may allow a
variance to this minimum Lot size if, in addition to meeting the
criteria in § 15.51 all the following conditions are met:
1. The Owners of a minimum of 51% of the abutting Lots, built
66
on or buildable, agree to permit the Land Division if the
average size of the proposed Lots is less than 85% of the
average size of the abutting Lots. Each abutting Lot shall
receive one vote.
2. In the event a rezoning is necessary, the land shall be rezoned
to SFR-08.
3. There shall be a maximum density of one Dwelling Unit per
75,000 square feet (60,000 square feet in the Transition Area
defined in § 15.06) of land inclusive of public streets
(including up to the center line of abutting roads but counting
only one lane of divided highways), dedicated parkland, and
open space if included within the limits of the proposed
subdivision.
4. There shall not be any privately owned Outlots unless
required by the Town.
5. The proposed Land Division includes all of the abutting
property of the Land Divider, or Owner of the property
within the proposed Land Division, and related parties.
6. The proposed Land Division receiving a variance shall be
restricted so that no Lot is smaller than 40,000 square feet
with no more than a 2:1 ratio between the largest and
smallest Lots.
(iii) Unsewered cluster subdivisions.
1. In unsewered Cluster Subdivisions, minimum Lot sizes shall
be 25,000 square feet. Cluster Subdivisions may only be
permitted on Parcels 15 acres or more in size and the
maximum development density over the entire Parcel may
not exceed one Dwelling Unit per 60,000 square feet of area,
inclusive of dedicated parkland, outlots, and public streets
(including internal road right-of-ways and right-of-ways up
to the center line of abutting roads but only counting one lane
of divided highways, provided the area has not been
previously used to meet open space requirements, and the
area is located within the proposed boundary of the Land
Division, and the Land Divider pays to bring the roads up to
all relevant current Town standards including but not limited
to road pavement width, shoulder width and slope and ditch
slope and depth, as determined by the Town Engineer and
Town Board).
67
2. Open space for Cluster Subdivision Lots shall be determined
according to the following (except in Transition Area as
defined and detailed in § 15.06 of this chapter):
a. For Lots containing a minimum of 25,000 square
feet, but less than 40,000 square feet, an associated
minimum open space of 60,000 square feet, minus
the Lot size, shall be provided.
b. For Lots containing between 40,000 square feet and
65,000 square feet, an associated open space of
20,000 square feet shall be provided. This Lot size is
preferred when private septic systems require larger
Lot sizes to accommodate the drain fields.
c. Regardless of Lot size, any Lot containing multiple
Dwelling Units shall be considered a Cluster Lot.
For Lots of any size that contain multiple Dwelling
Units, the open space required per Dwelling Unit
shall be 60,000 square feet minus (Lot size divided
by the number of Dwelling Units on the Lot).
3. At least 50% of the required open space must be area that is
not existing or proposed street right-of-way. At least 50% of
all Lots must be adjacent to non-street right-of-way open
space that is a minimum of 50 feet wide. Such non-street
right-of-way open space shall be fully contained within the
subject land division. Private sanitary systems are allowed in
non right-of-way open spaces if:
a. Proper Easements for such are recorded;
b. The system exists prior to the Land Division;
c. Systems do not interfere with proposed uses of open
space; and
d. Such locations are approved by the Town Board.
4. The Land Divider shall make every reasonable effort to
develop an interconnected network of open space both
within the development and with neighboring properties.
5. Cluster development allows for natural drainage, reduced
pavement, and less need for underground construction (i.e.,
68
water, sanitary, storm sewer) if required in the future.
6. The permanent open space shall be provided through deed
restrictions and Protective Covenants.
7. Sewered Lots, unsewered traditional Lots and unsewered
cluster Lots may be mixed within a plat. It is further intended
that a Cluster Subdivision is an alternative to a Traditional
Subdivision and does not preclude the use of Traditional
Subdivisions. When Lots are mixed within a plan, the more
restrictive rules for each type of development will be used to
determine if proper open space requirements and/or densities
are met. In addition, when traditional and cluster Lots are
mixed within a development, 10,000 square feet of open
space shall be provided for each traditional Lot (Lots in
excess of 65,000 square feet).
(iv) Minor subdivisions. In Minor Subdivisions created by Certified
Survey maps, minimum Lot sizes shall be not less than 65,000
square feet. In its discretion, if the Board finds a variance to be in
the best interest of the Town, it may allow a variance to this
minimum Lot size if, in addition to the criteria under § 15.51, all the
following conditions are met;
1. Conditions in Subsection (1)(c)(ii)1. through 6.
2. For all new Certified Survey maps having one or more Lots
smaller than five acres and one or more Lots five acres or
larger, the Lots five acres or larger in size shall at a minimum
be subject to the restrictions of either “rural residential”
zoning or a deed restriction to limit the Lot to no more than
one animal unit per acre.
(v) Depth. Residential Lots within each Block shall have a minimum
average depth of 100 feet. Excessive depth in relation to width shall
be avoided and a proportion of two to one (2:1) shall be considered
a desirable ratio under normal conditions. Flag lots shall not be
allowed, unless approved by the Town Board. A flag lot typically
has a narrow width near the street right-of way and widens to meet
minimum lot width standards some distance from the street right-of
way. A lot is not a flag lot if the pole portion of the lot is less than
100 feet in length.
(vi) Frontage. Every Lot shall front or abut for a distance of at least 66
feet on a public street, or 30 feet if on a Cul-de-sac.
69
(vii) Width. Width of Lots shall conform to the requirements of the Dane
County Zoning Code, but in no case shall an unsewered Lot be less
than 90 feet in width at the building setback line. The minimum
width shall be at least 60 feet for sewered lots. Each Lot shall be
located only within one zoning district.
(viii) Setbacks. Building envelopes for all lots shall be restricted as
follows:
1. Front set back a minimum of 50 feet from all public road
rights-of-way.
2. Set back a minimum of 20 feet from all Recreational Trail
Easements and dedicated Recreation Trails.
(2) Outlots. Every outlot shall front or abut a public street. The frontage shall be of a
width that is adequate to provide proper access for maintenance as determined at
the sole discretion of the Town Board.
(3) Commercial lots. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial
or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and
parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated, as
required by the Dane County Zoning Code.
(4) Lots which abut major thoroughfare/railroad right-of-way.
(a) Major thoroughfare. Residential Lots fronting on a Major Thoroughfare
shall be platted with extra depth or design to alleviate the effect of Major
Thoroughfare on residential occupancy.
(b) Treatment of railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways.
Whenever the proposed Land Division contains or is adjacent to a railroad
right-of-way or limited access highway, the Land Divider shall proceed as
follows:
(i) In residential districts, a buffer strip at least 30 feet in depth, in
addition to the normal Lot depth required, shall be provided adjacent
to the right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be a
part of the Lots, but the following restriction shall be written on the
Plat: "This strip reserved for the planting of trees or shrubs by the
Lot Owner. The building of structures hereon is prohibited and this
strip shall not be counted as any required yard. Maintenance of this
strip is a responsibility of the Lot Owner."
(ii) Location of Local Streets immediately adjacent and parallel to
railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided.
70
(5) Corner lots. Corner Lots for residential use shall have extra width of 10 feet to
permit building setback from both streets, or more if required by the Dane County
Zoning Code.
(6) Side lots. Side Lot Lines shall be substantially at right angles to or radial to abutting
street lines. Lot Lines shall follow Town boundary lines.
(7) Through lots and reversed frontage lots. Through Lots and reversed frontage Lots
shall be avoided for residential Lots, except where necessary to provide separation
of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation.
(8) Natural features. In the subdividing of any land, regard shall be shown for all
natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic sites or similar
conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed
development.
(9) Land remnants. All remnants of land below minimum Lot and/or dimension size
left over after Land Division of a larger tract must be added to adjacent Lots, or a
plan shown as to future use rather than allowed to remain as unusable Parcels.
(10) Building envelope placement. The Land Divider shall meet the following standards
with respect to location of the Building Envelopes:
(a) All Building Envelopes shall be located within a Lot such that all minimum
setback, side yard, or rear yard requirements of the Dane County Zoning
Code and any applicable restrictions or requirements of the Land Use Plan
or Ordinances adopted by the Town Board are met.
(b) No Building Envelope may be located on steep slopes as outlined in § 15.11,
Hillside protection.
15.43 Drainage system.
(1) Drainage system required. As required by this Code of Ordinances, and/or where
recommended by the Town Engineer, a drainage system shall be designed and
constructed by the Land Divider to provide for the proper drainage of the surface
water of the Subdivision and the drainage area of which it is a part. A Final Plat or
Certified Survey map shall not be approved until the Land Divider shall submit
plans, profiles and specifications as specified in this section, which have been
prepared by a registered professional engineer and approved by the Town Engineer.
At the discretion of the Town Board or its designee, preparation and approval of
plans for future phases in multi-phase developments may be deferred until a later
date.
71
(2) Drainage system plans.
(a) The Land Divider shall submit to the Town at the time of filing a
Preliminary Plat or Certified Survey map a preliminary drainage plan or
engineering report on the ability of existing watercourse channels, storm
sewers, culverts and other improvements pertaining to drainage or flood
control within the Land Division to handle the additional runoff which
would be generated by the Development of the land within the Land
Division. Additional information shall be submitted to adequately indicate
that provision has been made for disposal of surface water without any
damage to the developed or undeveloped land downstream or below the
proposed Land Division. The report shall also include items required per
the "Town of Middleton Design Requirements for Public Improvements"
checklist.
(b) A grading plan for the streets, Blocks and Lots shall be submitted by the
Land Divider for the area within the Land Division.
(c) The design criteria for storm drainage systems shall be based upon the
requirements of the "Town of Middleton Design Requirements for Public
Improvements" checklist, as well as information provided by the Town
Engineer.
(d) Material and construction specifications for all drainage projects (i.e., pipe,
culverts, seed, sod, etc.) shall be in compliance with the requirements of the
"Town of Middleton Design Requirements for Public Improvements"
checklist, and with specifications provided by the Town Board, upon the
recommendation of the Town Engineer.
(3) Grading. The Land Divider shall grade each Subdivision in order to establish street,
Block, and Lot grades in proper relation to each other and to topography. The Land
Divider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of all proposed streets in
accordance with the approved plans.
(4) Drainage system requirements. The Land Divider shall install all the storm drainage
facilities indicated on the plans required in Subsection (2) of this section.
(a) Street drainage. All streets shall be provided with an adequate storm
drainage system. The street storm system shall serve as the primary drainage
system and shall be designed to carry street, adjacent land and building
stormwater drainage. No stormwater shall be permitted to run into a sanitary
sewer system within the proposed subdivision.
(b) Off-street drainage. The design of the off-street drainage system shall
include the watershed affecting the subdivision and shall be extended to a
watercourse or ditch adequate to receive the storm drainage. When the
72
drainage system is outside of the street right-of-way, the Land Divider shall
make provisions for dedicating an Easement to the Town to provide for the
future maintenance of said system if the Owner and/or homeowners'
association fails to maintain said system. Easements shall be a minimum of
20 feet wide, but the Town may require larger Easements if more area is
needed due to topography, size of watercourse, etc.
(5) Protection of drainage systems. The Land Divider shall adequately protect all
ditches to the satisfaction of the Town Board and Town Engineer. Ditches and open
channels shall be seeded, sodded, paved or otherwise protected depending upon
grades and soil types as determined by the Town Engineer.
15.44 Nonresidential land divisions.
(1) General.
(a) If a proposed Land Division includes land that is zoned for commercial or
industrial purposes, the layout of the Land Division with respect to such
land shall make such provisions as the Town may require.
(b) A nonresidential Land Division shall also be subject to all the requirements
of site plan approval set forth in the Town Building Code. A nonresidential
Land Division shall be subject to all the requirements of this chapter, as well
as such additional standards required by the Town and shall conform to the
proposed land use standards established by any Town Master or Land Use
Plan or the Dane County Zoning Code.
(2) Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in this chapter, which are
appropriate to the planning of all Land Divisions, the Land Divider shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town Board that the street, Parcel and Block
pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into
account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be
observed:
(a) Proposed industrial Parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the
types of industrial development anticipated.
(b) Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the
type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon.
(c) Special requirements may be imposed by the Town Board with respect to
street, curb, gutter and sidewalk design and construction.
(d) Special requirements may be imposed by the Town Board with respect to
the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and stormwater
drainage.
73
(e) Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from
potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial Land Division,
including the provision of extra depth in Parcels backing up on existing or
potential residential development and provisions for permanently
landscaped buffer strips when necessary.
(f) Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not
normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential
residential areas.
15.45 General park, conservancy area, recreational trail, and public land dedication
requirements.
(1) Dedication requirement. In order that adequate open spaces and sites for public uses
may be properly located and reserved and in order that the cost of providing public
facilities, such as but not limited to, parks, playgrounds, land for athletic fields, and
recreation areas may be equitably apportioned on the basis of additional need
created by the Land Division, each Land Divider shall be required to dedicate land
or pay fees in lieu of land for park or other public uses.
(2) Findings.
(a) The Town finds that additional residential development directly produces a
need for more open space, recreational facilities, athletic fields, parks, and
playgrounds.
(b) The Town has been advised that there exist nationally recognized standards
for community parkland, recreational space and facilities, and capital
investment in athletic fields and parkland. Pursuant to these standards, and
with additional input from the public, the Town has created a plan for future
park and recreational facilities, and has projected the cost of realizing those
facilities. The Town finds that a substantial portion of the capital costs and
land acquisition expenses will be incurred by the Town in order to meet the
needs created by new Development in the Town.
(c) The Town finds that there is a direct causal relationship between additional
Development and the need for additional public parks, recreational land,
playgrounds, and athletic fields. The extent of the demand for such
additional facilities has been reasonably estimated in the Town's plans, and
the dedications or fees imposed under this ordinance are proportional to the
impact of the developments.
(d) The Town has determined to impose a park impact fee and/or a requirement
for land dedication in accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stat. §
66.0617 and Chapter 5 of this Code for land to be developed in the Town.
74
(3) Dedication calculation. When land within the Town of Middleton is divided, a
parkland and/or conservancy area dedication of 1,500 square feet of land per Lot or
Dwelling Unit created, whichever is greater, shall be required.
(4) Fee in lieu of dedication. In areas where land dedication is not desired by the Town,
a fee established pursuant to Chapter 5 of this Code and incorporated in the Town
fee schedule times the number of Lots or number of approved Dwelling Units,
whichever is greater, shall be required. Where the land dedication desired by the
Town is less than 1,500 square feet of land per Lot or Dwelling Unit, a pro rata fee
will be required. Where the Land Division does not specify the number of Dwelling
Units to be constructed, the land dedication shall be based upon the maximum
number of units permitted by the Dane County Zoning Ordinance and this chapter.
(5) Collection of fee; security. The fee imposed in Chapter 5 of this Code and
referenced in Subsection (4) above shall be the responsibility of the Developer. As
surety, the letter of surety required by the Developer Agreement shall be increased
as necessary to cover the balance of outstanding park fees at the time the Developer
Agreement and Final Plat are signed by the Town. The Town may make a demand
on the surety, including interest, if payment is more than 15 days late. On an annual
basis, the surety can be reduced as additional park fees are paid.
(6) Land dedication or fee in lieu of dedication determination. The determination of
whether land dedication, fees in lieu of land dedication or a combination thereof
will be required shall be at the sole discretion of the Town Board, with the advice
of the Park Commission.
(7) General design. In the design of a Land Division, planned unit development, or
development project, provision shall be made for suitable sites of adequate area for
parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, open spaces, drainage ways, Recreational Trails,
conservancy areas, and other public facilities. Such sites are to be shown on the
Preliminary Plat and Final Plat or Certified Survey map, and shall comply with the
Town of Middleton Master Plan, Comprehensive Outdoor Recreation Plan,
Recreational Trails Plan and any other plan affecting public areas adopted by the
Town Board, or components of said plans. Consideration shall be given to the
preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands of trees, marshes, lakes, ponds,
streams, watercourses, watersheds, ravines and woodlands, prairie and Wetlands,
and plant and wildlife communities. The Town may also consider the feasibility of
a site providing reasonable access pursuant to applicable ADA standards.
15.46 Parkland, conservancy areas, and recreational trail dedication.
(1) Identification of land for dedication.
(a) Whenever a proposed playground, park, athletic field, conservancy area,
75
Recreational Trail, or other public area, other than streets or drainage ways,
designated in the Land Use Plan, Recreational Trail Plan, or Comprehensive
Outdoor Recreation Plan of the Town of Middleton is embraced, all or in
part, in the tract of land to be divided, these lands shall be made part of the
required dedication. The Town Board shall have authority to determine the
suitability and adequacy of parkland, conservancy areas, and Recreational
Trails or other public areas proposed for dedication. Drainage ways,
Wetlands, or areas reserved for streets shall not be considered as satisfying
land dedication requirements.
(b) The Land Divider shall meet with the Town Parks Commission and the
Town Board during Preliminary Plat review and approval and during
Certified Survey review and approval. Any resolution by the Parks
Commission or Town Board regarding proposed playground, park, athletic
field, conservancy area, Recreational Trail, or other public area plan shall
be subject to staff review at this stage.
(c) After staff has reviewed the conditionally approved playground, park,
athletic field, conservancy area, Recreational Trail, or other public area
plan, the Land Divider shall seek confirmation of the plan as originally
proposed or as modified by Parks Commission review, staff review, or
review by the designee from the Parks Commission and Town Board during
Final Plat review and approval or, in the case of a Certified Survey, at a
second set of meetings if determined by the Town Parks Commission Chair
or Town Board Chair.
(2) Shoreland/lake and stream shore plats. All Land Divisions abutting on a navigable
lake or stream shall comply with the requirements of § 236.16(3) and (4), Wis.
Stats.
(3) Deeded to the Town. Land dedicated for public purposes shall be deeded to the
Town at the time the Final Plat or Certified Survey map is approved.
(4) Access to dedicated land. All dedicated land shall have frontage on a public streets
and shall have unrestricted public access, unless restrictions are required by the
Town Board.
(5) Utility extensions. The Land Divider shall install or provide for installation of water
and sanitary sewer lines to the property line of all dedicated land, where such
services are to be provided to the adjacent properties.
15.47 Reservation of additional land.
When public parks and sites for other public areas as shown on the Master Plan, or Master Plan
component, lie within the proposed area for development and are greater in area than the land
dedication required by § 15.45, the Land Divider and Owner shall reserve for acquisition by the
76
Town, through agreement, purchase or condemnation, the remaining greater public area for a
period of one year after the Final Plat or Certified Survey map approval unless extended by mutual
agreement.
15.48 Development of park area.
(1) Parkland dedication. When parklands are dedicated, the Land Divider is required
to:
(a) Properly grade and contour for proper drainage;
(b) Provide surface contour suitable for anticipated use of area; and
(c) Cover areas to be restored with topsoil, seed, fertilizer, and mulch per
requirements of the Town Engineer.
(d) Remove all non-native and invasive species and develop a long-term master
plan to maintain the parklands to remain free of non-native and invasive
species. The master plan will require Town Board approval.
(2) Certificate of compliance. The Town Board may require certification of compliance
by the Town Engineer. The cost of such inspection and report shall be paid by the
Land Divider.
(3) Noncompliance. If the Land Divider fails to satisfy the requirements of this section,
the Town Board may contract said completion and bill such costs to the Land
Divider, following a public hearing and written notice to the Land Divider of
noncompliance. Failure to pay such costs may result in the immediate withholding
of all building permits until such costs are paid.
(4) Mini-park Development. At the discretion of the Town Board, the Land Divider
may be required either to pay the fees in lieu of dedication of park land or to develop
mini-park(s) in accordance with Section 15.29(1) of this Chapter.
15.49 Development of trails.
(1) Design standards. When Recreational Trails, trails accessing dedicated parklands
or conservancy areas, or other public trails, walkways, or pathways are dedicated, or where
Easements are obtained, the Land Divider may be required to clear, grade, establish base
coarse, and final surface appropriate for the type of trail and use based on the following
design standards:
(a) Primary Recreational Trails.
(i) Width of right-of-way or easement: 30 feet (20 feet may be allowed
if trail is adjacent to a Public street right-of-way).
77
(ii) Width of trail: 10 feet if paved, 10 feet if crushed stone or crushed
limestone screenings, or 11 feet if mowed grass.
(iii) Vertical clearing: 10 feet.
(iv) Horizontal clearing: 14 feet.
(v) Minimum turning radius: To be determined by the Town Parks
Commission after consideration of desired design standards.
(vi) Surfacing: six-inch thick crushed stone with two inches of crushed
limestone screenings, or eight-inch thick crushed stone with two
inches asphalt, compacted earth, mowed grass, or wood chips.
(b) Secondary Recreational Trails.
(i) Width of right-of-way or easement: 15 feet.
(ii) Width of trail: five feet.
(iii) Vertical clearing: eight feet.
(iv) Horizontal clearing: 11 feet.
(v) Surfacing: Typically compacted earth, mowed grass (11 feet wide),
or wood chips (3/4 inch crushed stone, five feet wide, eight inches
thick may also be used or combined with five-foot wide, two-inch
thick asphalt.)
(2) ADA Compliance. All new Primary and Secondary Public Recreational Trails shall
comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). All existing Primary and
Secondary Public Recreational Trails shall comply with the ADA when the
centerline profile or horizontal alignment are modified. The Town requires
facilities to meet design standards set forth under Chapter 2: Scoping Requirements
and Chapter 10: Recreation Facilities of the Architectural Barriers Act (ABA). All
Shared Use Paths must comply with the design standards applicable under the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or ABA guidelines.
(3) Invasive Species Management. The Land Divider shall remove all non-native and
invasive species and develop a long-term master plan to maintain the Public
Recreational Trail easements to remain free of non-native and invasive species. The
master plan will require Town Board approval.
(4) Maintenance. The Land Divider shall be responsible for removing all non-native
and invasive species within the Recreational Trail easements and develop a long78
term master plan to maintain the trail easements to remain free of non-native and
invasive species. In the event of trails being built within a wide easement, all nonnative
and invasive species shall be removed from an area 100-feet wide centered
on the Recreational Trail. The master plan will require Town Board approval.
(a) Dedicated Lands – The Town shall be responsible for the maintenance of
all Town trails on lands that have been dedicated to the Town.
(b) Easements – The owner of the property on which the easements exist shall
be responsible for the maintenance of trail and surrounding area.
Construction of permanent or temporary fences or retaining walls or the
planting of trees and shrubbery or changing the grade in the Easement area
is prohibited. Construction of structures including septic drain fields,
patios, swimming pools, etc. in the Easement area is also prohibited.
(5) Exceptions. The Town Board, with the advice of the Plan Commission and Parks
Commission, may require Land Dividers to develop trails that differ in their design
characteristics based on the type of trail and the level of projected use. In those
instances where the Town requires a Land Divider to deviate from the design
standards, the trail shall be constructed to the standards approved by the Town
Parks Commission and Town Board as modified from time to time.
(6) Improvement expense reimbursement. Section 15.29 of this chapter outlines park
and trail improvements that must be made at the Developer's expense. In instances
where the Town Board requires the Land Divider to provide additional trail
improvements at the Land Divider's expense, such expenses shall be reimbursed
after the improvements are accepted by the Town Board upon the recommendation
of the Town Engineer, and all lien waivers are received. Note that Engineering,
legal, and administrative design and review fees are to be paid for by the Land
Divider and are not reimbursable as noted in § 15.24(2) of this chapter.
15.50 Preservation of conservancy areas.
(1) Dedicated conservancy areas. When conservancy areas are dedicated to the Town
by Land Dividers, the Town shall be responsible for imposing and enforcing all use
restrictions based on the general ordinances of the Town of Middleton.
(2) Privately owned conservancy areas. When a conservancy area or other open space
is to be preserved as permanent open space through deed restrictions or Protective
Covenants in order to meet the requirements of a Subdivision, the Land Divider
shall provide the Town with a copy of such deed or Certified Survey map
restrictions, or Protective Covenants at the time that application for a Preliminary
Plat or Certified Survey map is submitted.
15.51 Variances and exceptions.
79
(1) Where, in the sole judgment of the Town Board, it would be inappropriate to apply
literally the provisions of this chapter because exceptional or undue hardship would
result, the Town Board may waive or modify any requirements to the extent deemed
just and proper by the Town Board.
(2) Application for any such variance shall be made in writing by the Land Divider on
a form prescribed by the Town. Such application for variance shall be made at the
time when the Preliminary Plat or Certified Survey map is filed with the Town
Office for consideration, stating fully all facts relied upon by the Land Divider, and
shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data which may aid the
Town Board and the Plan Commission in the analysis and evaluation of the
requested variance.
(3) The Town Board shall not grant variations or exceptions to the regulations and
provisions of this chapter unless it determines based upon the evidence presented
to it in each specific case that all of the following apply:
(a) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety,
health or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements;
(b) The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to
the property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property;
(c) Because of the particular surroundings, shape or topographical conditions
of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the Owner or Land
Divider would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, financial
hardship or self-imposed hardship, if the regulations contained in this
chapter were strictly enforced.
(4) Such relief shall be granted without detriment to the public good, without impairing
the intent and purpose of this chapter or the desirable general development of the
Town in accordance with any Town Master or Land Use Plan or component thereof,
this chapter, or Zoning Code of Dane County. In determining whether a variance
is in the best interest of the Town, the Town will consider impacts of the proposed
Land Division to the following. The Town will review its Land Use Plan and
approved neighborhood plans in reviewing the impacts to these areas of concern.
(a) Public safety.
(b) Public infrastructure.
(c) Adequacy of access to parcel.
(d) Adequacy of access to adjoining parcels.
80
(e) Potential future development of adjacent parcels.
(f) Building setbacks.
(g) Land use (including connectivity to adjoining Parcels or conformance to
approved neighborhood plans).
(h) Aesthetics (proposed development should be consistent with surrounding
development in terms of Lot dimensions, building placement, and building
spacing).
(5) The Plan Commission shall forward any recommendation regarding a requested
variance or exception to the Town Board. The Town Board, if it approves of the
request for variance, shall do so by resolution. The Town Office shall notify the
Land Divider of the action of the Town Board.
(6) A majority vote of the entire membership of the Town Board (3 votes) shall be
required to grant any variance of this chapter. Such vote shall be by roll call of the
members present and the reasons for granting or denying the variance from the
requirements of this chapter shall be entered in the minutes of the Board.
(7) The Town Board may waive the placing of monuments, required under §
236.15(1)(b), (c) and (d), Wis. Stats., for a reasonable time on condition that the
Land Divider execute a letter of credit to ensure the placing of such monuments
within the time required.
15.52 Violations and penalties; appeals.
(1) Violations. It shall be unlawful to build upon, divide, convey, record, or monument
any land in violation of this chapter or the Wisconsin Statutes, and no Person shall
be issued a building permit by the Town authorizing the building on, or
improvement of, any Land Division or Replat within the jurisdiction of this chapter
not of record as of the effective date of this chapter until the provisions and
requirements of this chapter have been met. The Town may institute appropriate
action or proceedings to enjoin violations of this chapter or the applicable
Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) Penalties.
(a) Any Person or entity that fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit no less than $200 nor more than
$2,000 and the costs of prosecution for each violation, and in default of
payment of such forfeiture costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until
payment thereof, but not exceeding 90 days. Each day a violation exists or
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
81
(b) Any Person or entity causing improper recording of a Final Plat shall be
subject to forfeiture as provided in § 236.30, Wis. Stats..
(c) Except as otherwise provided in § 236.31, Wis. Stats., any Land Divider, or
his/her/its agent, who offers or contracts to convey, or conveys, any
Subdivision or any Lot or Parcel in any Subdivision in an unrecorded Plat
shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 236.31, Wis. Stats.
(d) Any Person or entity that violates § 236.32, Wis. Stats., relating to the
removal, disturbance and placement of monuments shall be subject to the
penalties provided in § 236.32, Wis. Stats.
(e) Any Person or entity who makes or causes a division of a Lot or Parcel in a
recorded Plat for purposes of sale or building development resulting in Lots
or Parcels which do not conform to this chapter, to Chapter 236, Wis. Stats.,
or to the rules of the Department of Commerce under § 236.13, Wis. Stats.,
shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 236.335, Wis. Stats..
(3) Appeals. Any Person aggrieved by an objection to a Plat or a failure to approve a
Plat may appeal therefrom, as provided in §§ 236.13(5) and 62.23(7)(e)10,14 and
15, Wis. Stats., within 30 days of notification of rejection of the Plat. Where failure
to approve is based on an unsatisfied objection, the agency making the objection
shall be made a party to the action. The court shall direct that the Plat be approved
if it finds the action of the approving or objecting agency is arbitrary, unreasonable
or discriminatory.
82
ATTACHMENT 1
Preliminary Checklist for
Environmental
Assessment of Land Divisions
and Community Development
Plans
Approved 2/25/2019
Town of Middleton
7555 W. Old Sauk Road
Verona, WI 53593-9700
Phone: 608-833-5887
Fax: 608-833-8996
info@town.middleton.wi.us
Contact Information
Applicant/Owner:
Address:
Phone (Home): Phone (Cell): Phone (Business):
Fax: E-mail:
Project Location:
Name or Site Description: Type: ___Plat ___Replat ___ CSM ___ Site
Plan
Comments: Comments:
A Land Resources- Yes No Uncertain
Does this project site involve:
1) Changes in relief and drainage patterns? ____ ____ _______
2) A landform or topographical feature of local
or regional interest? ____ ____ _______
3) An area having importance for wild plants and
animals of community interest? ____ ____ _______
4) An area of soil instability--greater than 12% slope or
organic soils, peats or mucks at or near the surface? ____ ____ _______
5) An area of bedrock within 6 feet of the surface? ____ ____ _______
6) An area with the groundwater table within 10 feet of
the soil surface? ____ ____ _______
7) An area with fractured bedrock within 10 feet of the soil
surface? ____ ____ _______
83
8) A drainage way for 5 or more acres of land? ____ ____ _______
9) More than 50% impermeable surface? ____ ____ _______
10) Prime agricultural land? ____ ____ _______
11) Wetlands (including wetland indicators) and marshes? ____ ____ _______
12) Removal of over 25% of the present trees or removal of
any native canopy tree(s) in excess of 8" in diameter? ____ ____ _______
B Water Resources. Yes No Uncertain
Does the proposed project involve:
1) Location within an area traversed by a navigable stream,
intermittent stream or dry run? ____ ____ _______
2) Greater than 10% change in the capacity of a water storage
facility or flow of a waterway within one mile? ____ ____ _______
3) The use of septic tank-soil absorption fields for
on-site waste disposal? ____ ____ _______
4) Lowering of water table by pumping or drainage? ____ ____ _______
5) Raising of water table by altered drainage patterns? ____ ____ _______
C Biological Resources. Yes No Uncertain
Does the site involve:
1) Critical habitat for plants and animals of community interest? ____ ____ _______
2) Endangered, unusual or rate species of:
a. Land animals? ____ ____ _______
b. Birds? ____ ____ _______
c. Plants? ____ ____ _______
3) Any land described in the Kailing and Zimmerman Report
as a sensitive site? ____ ____ _______
If "Yes", please attach additional materials with this description.
D Human and Scientific Interest. Yes No Uncertain
Does the project site involve:
1) An area of archaeological interest? ____ ____ _______
2) An area of geological interest? ____ ____ _______
3) An area of hydrological interest? ____ ____ _______
4) An area of historical interest? ____ ____ _______
a. Historic buildings or monuments? ____ ____ _______
b. Buildings or monuments of unique architecture? ____ ____ _______
5) An area of identified community recreational use? ____ ____ _______
84
6) An area adjacent or near planned or
established parks or trails? ____ ____ _______
E Energy, Transportation and Communications. Yes No Uncertain
1) Does the development increase the traffic flow in
any collector system by more than 10%? ____ ____ _______
2) Is the development traversed by an existing or planned
utility corridor (gas, electricity, water, sewer interceptor,
communications, storm sewer)? ____ ____ _______
3) Is safe access and exit provided? ____ ____ _______
F Population. Yes No Uncertain
Is the proposed development likely to increase the population
of any school serving the development by more than 10%? ____ ____ _______
G Private Water Systems. Yes No
New wells required to serve this development with water are
regulated by Public Health Madison & Dane County Division of
Environmental Health, and the Department of Natural Resources.
The Town requires the applicant for a land division to contact
these agencies to evaluate proposed wells systems.
Have Public Health Madison & Dane County Division of
Environmental Health been contacted? ____ ____
Has the DNR confirmed the proposed Land Division
contains any lands that require Special Well Casing Requirements? ____ ____
H Supporting Material.
Please attach any additional materials you feel may be pertinent.
I Comments.
Add comments on any of the above items which may have a significant environmental impact.
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
1
CHAPTER 16
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
16.01 Title; purpose.
16.02 Definitions.
16.03 State Uniform Dwelling Code adopted.
16.04 State Uniform Commercial Building Code Adopted.
16.05 Construction standards; codes adopted.
16.06 Building permits and inspections.
16.07 Electrical and plumbing permits.
16.08 Building construction bond, letter of credit or cash deposit.
16.09 Unsafe buildings.
16.10 Garages.
16.11 Basements; excavations.
16.12 New methods and materials.
16.13 Disclaimer on inspections.
16.14 Regulations for moving buildings.
16.15 Swimming pools.
16.16 Regulation and permit for razing buildings.
16.17 Fees.
16.18 Violations and penalties.
16.19 Severability.
16.20 Outdoor Lighting.
16.21 Outdoor furnaces regulated.
16.01 Title; purpose.
(1) Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Building Code of the Town of Middleton"
and will be referred to in this chapter as "this code," "this chapter," or "this
ordinance."
(2) Purpose. This chapter provides certain minimum standards, provisions and
requirements for the safe and stable design, methods of construction and uses of
materials in buildings and/or structures hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged,
altered, repaired, moved, converted to other uses or demolished and regulates the
equipment, maintenance, use and occupancy of all such buildings and/or structures.
Its purpose is to protect and foster the health, safety and well-being of persons
occupying or using such buildings and the general public.
16.02 Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable to this chapter:
(1) ADDITION — New construction performed on a dwelling that increases the
outside dimensions of the dwelling.
2
(2) ALTERATION — A substantial change or modification, other than an addition or
minor repair, to a dwelling or to systems involved within a dwelling including, but
not limited to, plumbing, electrical, gas service, decks, and structural changes.
(3) APPLICANT – A Person or his or her representative that submits an application
for a Building permit.
(4) BUILDING INSPECTOR — The person appointed or employed by the Town
Board of the Town of Middleton for the purpose of administering and enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. Such person shall have such qualifications, experience
and certifications as the Town Board determines are necessary.
(5) DEPARTMENT — The Department of Safety and Professional Services, State of
Wisconsin, also referred to throughout this chapter as “SPS.”
(6) DWELLING
(a) Any building, the initial construction of which is commenced on or after the
effective date of this chapter which contains one or two dwelling units; or
(b) An existing structure, or that part of an existing structure, which is used or
intended to be used as a one- or two-family dwelling.
(7) DWELLING UNIT --- a structure or that part of a structure which is used or
intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one person or by 2 or
more persons maintaining a common household, to the exclusion of all others.
“Dwelling” and “dwelling unit” do not include a primitive rural hunting cabin.
Each separate living unit authorized to be constructed on a parcel of land is a
Dwelling Unit (e.g., a single family residence shall be considered one Dwelling
Unit; a duplex shall be considered two Dwelling Units, etc.).
(8) HVAC — Heating, ventilating and air conditioning.
(9) MANUFACTURED HOME has the meaning given in Wisconsin Statute section
101.91(2).
(10) MINOR REPAIR — Repair performed for maintenance or replacement purposes
on any existing one- or two-family dwelling which does not affect the room
arrangement or decrease light and ventilation, access to or efficiency of any existing
stairways or exits or fire protection and which does not increase an existing
occupancy and use. No building permit is required for work to be performed that is
deemed minor repair by the Building Inspector or the Building Inspector's designee.
(11) MODULAR DWELLING --- a modular home as defined in Wisconsin Statute
section 101.71(6)
3
(12) MODULAR DWELLING CODE -- Wisconsin Statute section 101.70, et seq., and
those existing Administrative Code provisions and any future amendments,
revisions or modifications thereto, promulgated by the SPS which apply to modular
dwellings.
(13) ONE- OR TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building structure which contains
one or separate households intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping
place by an individual or by two or more individuals maintaining a common
household to the exclusion of all others. To the extent required by law, “one- or
two-family dwelling” shall be construed to include modular and manufactured
homes.
(14) OWNER — Includes the plural as well as the singular and may mean either a
natural Person, firm, association, partnership, limited liability company, private
corporation, public or quasi-public corporation, or a combination of these that has
title to a Parcel of real estate.
(15) PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm or corporation.
(16) SPS --- The Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services.
(17) UNIFORM DWELLING CODE — Wisconsin Statute section 101.60, et seq., and
those existing Administrative Code provisions and any future amendments,
revisions or modifications thereto, promulgated by the SPS which apply to one- and
two-family dwellings.
16.03 State Uniform Dwelling Code adopted.
(1) State Code adopted. The Administrative Code provisions, promulgated by the SPS,
describing and defining regulations with respect to one- and two-family dwellings
in the Wisconsin Administrative Code are hereby adopted and by reference made a
part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or
prohibited by an Administrative Code provision incorporated herein by reference
is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or
modifications of the Administrative Code provisions incorporated herein are
intended to be made part of this chapter to secure uniform statewide regulation of
one- and two-family dwellings in the Town of Middleton. A copy of these
Administrative Code provisions and any future amendments, revisions or
modifications shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector for the
Town of Middleton.
(2) Existing buildings. The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code shall also apply to the
following buildings and conditions:
(a) An existing building to be occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling, which
building was not previously so occupied.
4
(b) An existing structure that is altered or repaired, when the cost of such
alteration or repair during the life of the structure exceeds 50% of the
equalized value of the structure, said value to be determined by the Building
Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee.
(c) Additions and alterations, regardless of the cost, made to an existing
building when deemed necessary in the opinion of the Building Inspector,
or the Building Inspector's designee, shall comply with the requirements of
this chapter for new buildings. The provisions of § 16.05 shall also apply.
(d) Whenever more than 25% of the roof covering of a building is replaced in
any twelve-month period, all of the roof covering shall be in conformity
with the applicable sections and provisions of this chapter.
(e) Any addition or alteration, regardless of cost, made to a building shall be
made in conformance with the applicable sections and provisions of this
chapter.
(3) Method of enforcement.
(a) Certification. The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee,
shall be certified for inspection purposes by SPS in each of the categories
specified under the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(b) Duties. The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, shall
administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter, Wisconsin Statutes
and applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(c) Inspection powers. The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's
designee, may, at all reasonable hours, enter upon any public or private
premises for inspection purposes and may require the production of the
permit for any building, plumbing, electrical, HVAC or heating work. No
person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises
to the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, while in the
performance of the duties of the office of the Building Inspector. If
authorized Town Building Inspectors are denied access to property for
inspection purposes, they are empowered to seek an inspection warrant
pursuant to § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
(d) Records. The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, shall
perform all administrative tasks required by the Department under the
Uniform Dwelling Code. In addition, The Building Inspector, or the
Building Inspector's designee, shall keep a record of all applications for
building permits in a book or electronic file for such purposes and shall
5
regularly number each permit in the order of issuance. Also, a record
showing the number, description and size of all buildings erected indicating
the kind of material used and the cost of each building and aggregate cost
of all one- and two-family dwellings shall be kept. The Building Inspector,
or the Building Inspector's designee, shall make a written annual report to
the Town Board relative to these matters.
16.04 State Uniform Commercial Building Code Adopted.
(1) State Code adopted. The Administrative Code provisions, promulgated by the SPS,
describing and defining regulations with respect to commercial buildings in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set
forth herein. In addition to any other applicable Administrative Code provisions, Chapters SPS
361-366, Wisconsin Commercial Building Code (The Wisconsin Commercial Building Code
adopts with additions, deletions, insertions and changes, the 2015 International Building Code,
2015 International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 International Mechanical Code, 2015
International Fuel Gas Code and 2015 International Existing Building Code as published by the
International Code Council, Inc.) are specifically incorporated herein. The State Plumbing Code,
Chapters SPS 381 and 382 are also made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act
required to be performed or prohibited by an Administrative Code provision incorporated herein
by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or
modifications of the Administrative Code provisions incorporated herein are intended to be made
part of this chapter to secure uniform statewide regulation of commercial buildings in the Town of
Middleton. A copy of these Administrative Code provisions and any future amendments, revisions
or modifications shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector for the Town of
Middleton.
(2) Existing buildings. The Wisconsin Uniform Commercial Building Code shall also
apply to the following buildings and conditions:
(a) An existing building to be occupied as a commercial building, which
building was not previously so occupied.
(b) An existing structure that is altered or repaired, when the cost of such
alteration or repair during the life of the structure exceeds 50% of the
equalized value of the structure, said value to be determined by the Building
Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee.
(c) Additions and alterations, regardless of the cost, made to an existing
building when deemed necessary in the opinion of the Building Inspector,
or the Building Inspector's designee, shall comply with the requirements of
this chapter for new buildings. The provisions of § 16.06 shall also apply.
(d) Whenever more than 25% of the roof covering of a building is replaced in
any twelve-month period, all of the roof covering shall be in conformity
with the applicable sections and provisions of this chapter.
6
(e) Any addition or alteration, regardless of cost, made to a building shall be
made in conformance with the applicable sections and provisions of this
chapter.
(3) Method of enforcement.
(a) Certification. The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee,
shall be certified for inspection purposes by SPS in each of the categories
specified under the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(b) Duties. The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, shall
administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter, Wisconsin Statutes
and applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(c) Inspection powers. The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's
designee, may, at all reasonable hours, enter upon any public or private
premises for inspection purposes and may require the production of the
permit for any building, plumbing, electrical, HVAC or heating work. No
person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises
to the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, while in the
performance of the duties of the office of the Building Inspector. If
authorized Town Building Inspectors are denied access to property for
inspection purposes, they are empowered to seek an inspection warrant
pursuant to § 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
(d) Records. The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, shall
perform all administrative tasks required by the Department under the
Uniform Dwelling Code. In addition, The Building Inspector, or the
Building Inspector's designee, shall keep a record of all applications for
building permits in a book or electronic file for such purposes and shall
regularly number each permit in the order of issuance. Also, a record
showing the number, description and size of all buildings erected indicating
the kind of material used and the cost of each building and aggregate cost
of all one- and two-family dwellings shall be kept. The Building Inspector,
or the Building Inspector's designee, shall make a written annual report to
the Town Board relative to these matters.
16.05 Construction standards; codes adopted.
(1) Administrative Code adopted. All applicable provisions of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter with
respect to those classes of buildings to which this Building Code specifically
applies. Any future amendments, revisions and modifications of said chapters of
the Administrative Code incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this
Code. A copy of these Administrative Code provisions and any future amendments,
7
revisions or modifications shall be kept on file in the office of the Building
Inspector for the Town of Middleton.
(2) Conflicts. If, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's
designee, and the Town Board, the provisions of the State Building Code adopted
by Subsection (1) of this section shall conflict with the provisions of the Federal
Housing Administration standards in their application to any proposed building or
structure, the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, shall apply
the most stringent provisions in determining whether or not the proposed building
meets the requirements of this section.
16.06 Building permits and inspections.
(1) Permit required.
(a) General permit required. No building of any kind shall be moved within or
into the Town of Middleton and no new building, structure or exterior deck,
or any part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, or ground broken for the
same, or enlarged, altered, moved, demolished, razed or used within the
Town, except as herein provided, until a permit therefor shall first have been
obtained by the Owner, or the Owner's authorized representative or agent,
from the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee.
(b) Alterations and repairs. The following provisions shall apply to buildings
and structures altered or repaired:
(i) Alterations. When not in conflict with any regulations, alterations to
any existing building or structure accommodating a legal occupancy
and use, but of substandard type of construction which involves
either beams, girders, columns, bearing or other walls, room, heating
and air condition systems, arrangement, light and ventilation,
changes in the location of exit stairways or exits, or any or all of the
above, then such existing affected construction shall be made to
conform to the minimum requirements of this chapter applicable to
such occupancy and use and given type of construction.
(ii) Repairs. Repairs for purposes of maintenance, or replacements in
any existing building or structure which do not involve the structural
portions of the building or structure or which do not affect room
arrangement or decrease light and ventilation, access to or efficiency
of any exit stairways or exits, fire protection, or exterior aesthetic
appearance and which do not increase a given occupancy or use,
shall be deemed minor repairs. No building permit is required for
work to be performed that is deemed minor repair by the Building
Inspector or the Building Inspector's designee.
8
(iii) Alterations, when not permitted. When any existing building or
structure has deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to an extent
greater than 50% of the assessed value of the building or structure
as determined by the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's
designee, who may consult with the Town Assessor or such other
individuals as may be appropriate, no alterations or moving of such
building or structure shall be permitted. Any such building or
structure shall be considered to be a menace to public safety and
welfare and shall be ordered vacated and thereafter demolished and
debris removed from the premises as permitted by Wis. Stat. sec.
66.0413.
(iv) Alterations and repairs required. When any of the structural
members of any building or structure have deteriorated from any
cause whatsoever to less than their required strength, the Owner of
such a building or structure shall cause such structural members to
be restored to their required strength; failing in which the building
or structure shall be considered to be a menace to public safety and
welfare and shall be ordered vacated and thereafter no occupancy or
use of the same shall be permitted until the regulations of this
chapter are complied with.
(v) Extent of deterioration. The Building Inspector shall determine the
amount and extent of deterioration of any existing building or
structure, or the Building Inspector's designee, who may consult
with the Town Assessor or such other individuals as may be
appropriate.
(2) Application. Application for a building permit shall be made upon a form furnished
by the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, and shall state the
name and address of the Owner of the land and also the Owner of the building, if
different, the legal description of the land upon which the building is to be located,
the name and address of the designer, the use to which said building is to be put
and such other information as the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's
designee, may require.
(a) The Permit shall be either:
(i) Presented to the Town in person by the Owner, or
(ii) Presented by an Applicant with a signed affidavit by the Owner that
the Applicant can apply for the permit on their behalf.
(b) Electronic filing of Building Permits for One- and two-family dwellings:
(i) As of January 2, 2018, the standard building permit application form
9
created by SPS shall be used by all applicants for building permits
for new one- and 2-family dwellings, unless SPS has approved the
Town’s use of a different application form.
(ii) Not later than the 15th day of the first month beginning after
issuance of each building permit, the Building Inspector shall
electronically file a copy of the permit with the department. If the
Building Inspector fails to file with the department an electronic
copy of an issued permit not later than the last day of the first month
beginning after the issuance of the permit, the Building Inspector
shall refund to the person to whom the building permit was issued
an amount equal to the difference between the amount paid by that
person to the Town for that permit and the portion of the permit fee
remitted by the Town to SPS, if any. This subsection first applies
beginning on the date the city, village, town, or county begins
implementation of the system required under subp. (a).
(3) Site plan.
(a) Site plan approval. [Amended 9-11-2006; Amended 5-3-2021 by Ord. No.
20210503-1]
(i) All applications for building permits for any construction,
reconstruction, expansion or conversion, except for one and two
family residences or agricultural structures, shall require site plan
approval by the Town Plan Commission and the Town Board, in
accordance with the requirements of this section. All applications
for building permits for any construction, reconstruction, expansion
or conversion for one and two family residences and agricultural
structures that include site changes exterior to the building shall
require a staff level site plan approval if the site contains a public
stormwater easement of Public Recreational Trail easement.
Adherence to this section for a detached garage can be waived by
the Town if the use and location of such is determined to have no
significantly greater impact than if the garage was attached. The
Applicant shall submit one hard copy and one electronic copy of a
site plan and sufficient plans and specifications of proposed
buildings, machinery and equipment and operations to enable the
Town Plan Commission and the Town Board, and its expert
consultants, to determine whether the application meets all the
requirements applicable thereto in this Chapter. The Applicant shall
submit plans to the Town and the Town Engineer no less than 21
days prior to the meeting of the Plan Commission at which action is
desired. At the time of filing a site plan with the Town, the Applicant
shall deposit with the Town an escrow fund amount pursuant to
Town fee schedule. As required at the sole discretion of the Town
10
Board, funds may be drawn against such escrow accounts for the
payment of engineering, legal, administrative, planning and other
costs incurred by the Town in reviewing the proposed site plan.
(ii) Monies not required for such engineering, legal, administrative and
other costs shall be returned to the Applicant within 180 days of final
acceptance of all improvements required by the Town and
compliance with all provisions of site plan approval. If Town costs
exceed the initial amount deposited in the escrow account, the Town
shall require the Applicant to deposit an additional amount in the
escrow account. The Town Board shall determine what additional
deposits should be made into the escrow account. Payment shall be
made to the Town prior to occupancy permit issuance or as
determined by the Town Board or its designee.
(b) Administration. [Amended 9-11-2006; Amended 5-3-2021 by Ord. No.
20210503-1]
(i) The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, shall
make a review of the application and plans requiring site plan review
and refer them with a report of findings to the Plan Commission or
staff as provided under subs. 16.06(3)(a)(i). The Middleton Fire
District will be consulted, as necessary, to review and assess the
proposed site plan to determine if adequate access to proposed
structures is provided. The Plan Commission shall review the
application and shall make advisory determination as to whether the
application and plans meet all the requirements applicable thereto in
this Chapter.
(ii) Within 60 days of its receipt of the application, the Town Board,
acting upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission, shall
authorize the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's
designee, to approve or refuse to approve the site plan.
(iii) Requirements. In acting on any site plan, the Town Board and Plan
Commission shall consider the following: [Amended 9-11-2006]
1. The appropriateness of the site plan and buildings in relation
to the physical character of the site and the usage of the
adjoining land areas.
2. The layout of the site with regard to entrances and exits to
public streets; the arrangement and improvement of interior
roadways; the location, adequacy and improvement of areas
for parking and for loading and unloading; and shall, in this
connection, satisfy itself that the traffic pattern generated by
11
the proposed construction or use shall be developed in a
manner consistent with the safety of residents and the
community, and the Applicant shall so design the
construction or use as to minimize any traffic hazard created
thereby. Parking areas shall meet the requirements of the
Dane County Zoning Ordinance for Off-Street Parking and
Loading.
3. The adequacy of the proposed water supply, drainage
facilities, sanitary, waste disposal, and erosion control
measures will also be reviewed. Existing and proposed
contour elevations and critical elevations (Building first
floor or low opening elevations, etc.) shall be included in the
site plan.
4. The landscaping and appearance of the completed site.
Those portions of all front, rear and side yards not used for
off-street parking shall be attractively planted, to the Town’s
sole satisfaction, with trees, shrubs, plants or grass lawns.
The site shall be effectively screened so as not to impair the
value of adjacent properties nor impair the intent or purposes
of this section. The landscape plan shall be submitted by a
Landscape Designer. Specific requirements include:
a. For every one acre of lot area, and proportionately
thereafter, the Applicant must provide both 4 canopy
trees, 2” diameter and 8 ornamental or evergreen
trees, 4’ tall.
b. Foundation plantings will be required along building
walls fronting on public streets. A minimum of
twenty-five (25) percent of the building frontage
(minus paved areas at building entrances) shall be
planted with shrubs and/or perennials.
c. New plantings shall conform to minimum plant sizes
listed in § 15.14.
d. Acceptable plant species by canopy, understory, and
shrub classifications are identified in the Preferred
Planting List maintained and updated time to time by
the Town. The Preferred Planting List is available at
the Town Hall.
e. Credit towards planting requirements may be
provided where the retention and protection of
12
existing trees are included in the landscape plan.
f. These requirements may be waived or modified in
the discretion of the Board.
g. When the proposed site plan is on a parcel that has a
different zoning than adjacent parcels, the Town may
require additional landscape screening and/or
berming to limit impacts on adjacent parcels.
5. The proposed lighting in relation to the adjoining land area.
This will include specifications for proposed light fixtures
and resulting photometrics. All lighting shall consist of full
cutoff fixtures that are dark sky compliant. All new outdoor
lighting shall be compliant with section 16.placed so as to
eliminate trespass greater than 0.5 footcandles on the ground
at the lot line.
6. Proposed signage and location, including any specifications
for proposed sign lighting.
7. Hours of operation.
(4) Stormwater requirements. Land development activities involving Site Plan
approval which the Town of Middleton determines may significantly increase
downstream runoff volumes, flooding, soil erosion, water pollution or property
damage, or significantly impact a lake, stream, wetland area, or area with existing
stormwater-related problems will be required to provide water quality facilities,
water quantity facilities, and/or additional erosion control measures. Water quality
and quantity facility designs and required erosion control measures shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 17 of these ordinances and the requirements of the Town
of Middleton’s Design Requirements for Public Improvements. A Stormwater
Maintenance Agreement will be required.
(5) Effect on public services. Before granting any site approval, the Town Board and
the Plan Commission may, besides obtaining advice from consultants, secure such
advice as may be deemed necessary from the Building Inspector, or the Building
Inspector's designee, with special attention to the effect of such approval upon
existing municipal services and utilities. Should additional facilities be needed, the
Town Board shall not issue the final approval until the Town has entered into an
agreement with the Applicant regarding the development of such facilities and
surety for the installation of public infrastructure is provided as necessary.
(6) Required Agreement Providing for Proper Installation of Improvements.
(a) Contract. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the Applicant and/or
13
Owner shall enter into a written contract, termed a “Site Plan Agreement”
with the Town requiring the Applicant and/or Owner to furnish and
construct all required site improvements (public and private) at their sole
cost and in accordance with plans and specifications and usual contract
conditions, which shall include provision for inspection and approval of
construction details by the Town Building Inspector and/or Town Engineer.
If it is determined by the Town Board that the Applicant and/or Owner is in
default under the Site Plan Agreement during installation of site
improvements, the Town may issue a cease and desist order stopping all
activities until the issue(s) has been satisfactorily addressed in the opinion
of the Town.
(b) Financial Guarantees.
1. The Site Plan Agreement shall require the Applicant/Owner to make
a cash escrow deposit or furnish a letter of credit or bond, the amount
of the deposit and the penalty amount equal to -one hundred and
twenty percent (120%) of the Town Engineer’s estimate for the total
cost of the site improvements to be furnished under the contract.
Performance Bonds or Letters of credit are to be provided in the
form available from and approved by the Town. Unless the Town
Board demonstrates that a bond form does not sufficiently ensure
performance in the event of default, the Town Board shall accept a
performance bond under this subdivision if the person submitting
the performance bond demonstrates that the performance bond is
consistent with a standard surety bond form used by a company that,
on the date the bond is obtained, is listed as an acceptable surety on
federal bonds in the most recent circular 570 published by the
federal department of the treasury, as required under 31 CFR
223.16, and the performance bond is issued by a surety company
licensed to do business in this state.
2. In general, the surety provided must cover the cost of any
landscaping improvements, stormwater improvements, and
improvements to public infrastructure. It may also include other
improvements as determined at the sole discretion of the Town
Board.
3. On request of the Applicant/Owner and upon recommendation by
the Town Engineer, the Board may accept improvements and allow
a reduction in the letter of credit upon completion of all or a portion
of required improvements. A one-year warranty period is required
for all improvements. If any defects appear during the warranty
period, the Applicant/Owner shall make the required replacement or
acceptable repair as directed by the Town Board at the
Applicant/Owner’s expense. During the warranty period for such
14
completed portions of the required improvements, the Town may
lower the surety to 10% of the cost of the improvements completed.
In addition, the surety should also include 120% of the estimated
cost of unfinished required improvements until that work is
complete.
4. If the required site plan improvements are not completed within the
period specified within the Site Plan Agreement, all amounts held
under deposit or surety shall be turned over to the Town and applied
to the cost of the required improvements. Any balance remaining
after such improvements have been made shall be returned to the
Applicant/Owner.
5. The Town Board, at its option, may require extension of the deposit
or surety period for additional periods not to exceed fourteen (14)
months for each additional period.
6. The time for completion of the required improvements, and the
several parts thereof, shall be determined by the Town Board upon
recommendation of the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall
consult with the Applicant/Owner regarding the establishment of the
time for completion of the required improvements. The completion
date shall be a component of the Site Plan Agreement. The Town
Board may, in its sole discretion, provide such penalties as it deems
appropriate to ensure the timely completion of the required
improvements.
7. The Applicant/Owner shall pay the Town for all costs incurred by
the Town for review, approval and inspection of the site plan and
improvements thereof. Such costs shall include, but not be limited
to, the review and preparation, at the Town Board’s sole discretion,
of plans and specifications by the Town Engineer, special studies or
projects undertaken by the Town Engineer or other Persons at the
direction of the Town Board; the review, and preparation at the
Town Board’s sole discretion, of legal documents, plans and
specifications by the Town Attorney; as well as all other costs of a
similar nature which are related to the review, approval and
inspection of the site plan and improvements thereof.
(c) Waiver. The requirement to enter into a Site Plan Agreement may be
waived by the Town Board on a case by case basis.
(7) Dedicated street and approved subdivision required. Unless the Town Board,
following a recommendation from the Building Inspector, or the Building
Inspector's designee, grants a waiver no building permit shall be issued unless the
property on which the building is proposed to be built abuts a right-of-way that has
15
been dedicated for street purposes.
(8) Plans.
(a) With applications for new detached structures or additions, there shall be
submitted two complete sets of plans and specifications, including a plot
plan showing the location and dimensions of all buildings and
improvements on the lot, both existing and proposed, dimensions of the lot,
dimensions showing all setbacks of all buildings on the lot, proposed grade
of the proposed structure (to Town datum), grade of lot and of the street
abutting the lot, grade and setback of adjacent buildings (if adjacent lot is
vacant, submit elevation of nearest building on same side of street), type of
monuments at each corner of lot, watercourses or existing drainage ditches,
easements or other restrictions affecting such property, the signature of the
Applicant and, if necessary due to the nature of the project, a construction
erosion control plan setting forth proposed information and procedures
needed for the control of soil erosion, surface water runoff and sediment
deposition at the building site.
(b) Minimum opening elevations (MOE) for any door or window on a lot or
parcel are frequently indicated on a recorded subdivision plat or certified
survey pap (CSM), and/or are documented in a recorded deed restriction.
At the Building Inspector’s of designee’s sole discretion, when an MOE is
not already required by a subdivision plat, CSM or recorded deed
restriction, permit applications for structures that are adjacent to or near
ponds, swales, waterways or drainage easements shall include stormwater
calculations prepared by a professional engineer for the adjacent ponds,
swales, waterways or drainage easements. The calculations shall provide
the stormwater elevations for the 100-year rainfall event adjacent to the
proposed structure. The MOE for any door or window for the proposed
structure shall be a minimum of 2 feet above the calculated 100-year
stormwater surface elevation. The approved MOE shall be shown on the
site plan. The Applicant shall also be required to record a deed restriction
that maintains the MOE requirement for any future or modified replacement
structure on the lot or parcel. The Applicant shall be responsible for the
cost to provide the calculations and the Town’s cost to have the Town
Engineer review the calculations. The Applicant shall also be responsible
for the costs to prepare the deed restriction including any expenses or fees
incurred by the Town for review done by the Town Attorney or Town
Engineer.
(c) The plans shall include an erosion control plan and a landscape plan. The
erosion control plan shall detail what measures will be installed to prevent
sediment from leaving the site and entering the Town right-of-way, or
adjacent parcels. The plans shall be provided to a scale of not more than 1
inch = 20 feet when printed on 24 inch x 36 inch (Arch D) size paper and 1
16
foot = 40 feet when printed on 11 inch x 17 inch (ledger) size paper.
Exceptions may be granted for contour frequency and plan scale by the
Town Engineer or Building Inspector. The landscape plan shall indicate:
1. Easement locations
2. Existing contours (1 foot vertical intervals)
3. Proposed grading (contours at 1 foot vertical intervals, or spot
elevations, and drainage arrows)
4. Locations of all plantings and/or landscape structures
5. Timing of work
(d) Plans, specifications and plot plans shall be drawn to a minimum scale of
1/4 inch to one foot (fireplace details to 3/4 inch to one foot). One set of
plans shall be returned after approval as provided in this chapter. The second
set shall be filed in the office of the Building Inspector, or the Building
Inspector's designee, in the Town Hall.
(e) Plans for buildings shall bear the appropriate stamp or stamps of approval.
One plan shall be submitted which shall be filed in the office of the Building
Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, in the Town Hall. All plans
and specifications shall be signed by the designer.
(9) Waiver of plans; minor repairs.
(a) Waiver. If the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee,
finds that the character of the work is sufficiently described in the
application, the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee,
may waive the filing of plans for alterations, repairs or moving, provided
the cost of the work does not exceed $5,000.
(b) Minor repairs. The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee,
may authorize minor repairs or maintenance work on any structure or to
heating, ventilating or air conditioning systems installed which, in the
opinion of the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, are
valued at less than $1,000, including the fair market value of labor and
materials, which do not change the occupancy area, structural strength, fire
protection or exits or decrease light or ventilation of the building or structure
without issuance of a building permit.
(10) Approval of plans.
(a) If the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, determines
17
that the building will comply with this Building Code and with other
applicable Ordinances and orders of the Town, a building permit shall be
issued which states the use to which said building is to be put. This building
permit shall be kept and displayed at the site of the proposed building in a
location that is clearly visible from the street. After being approved, the
plans and specifications shall not be altered in any respect which involves
any of the above-mentioned Ordinances, laws or orders, or which involves
the safety of the building or the occupants, except with the written consent
of the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee.
(b) In case adequate plans are presented for part of the building only, the
Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, may issue a permit
for that part of the building before receiving the plans and specifications for
the entire building.
(11) Inspection of work.
(a) The contractor shall notify the Building Inspector, or the Building
Inspector's designee when a building is ready for inspections, and the
Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, may commence
inspection after completion of the following states of construction:
(i) Footings and foundation. Prior to pouring of the foundation, the
builder shall supply an adequate site plan;
(ii) General framing, rough electrical, plumbing and heating;
(iii) Insulation; and
(iv) Completion of the structure.
(b) Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Building Inspector, or the Building
Inspector's designee, from conducting other inspections at any time the
Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, determine
appropriate or necessary. No contractor or Owner shall, at any time, refuse
access to the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, to any
building or structure for which a building permit has been issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter.
(c) If the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, finds the
work conforms to the provisions of this chapter, the Building Inspector, or
the Building Inspector's designee, shall issue a certification of occupancy
which shall contain the date and the result of such inspection, a duplicate of
which shall be filed in the office of the Building Inspector, or the Building
Inspector's designee, in the Town Hall.
18
(12) Driveway permit and installation. [Amended 5-3-2021 by Ord. No. 20210503-1]
No construction activity shall occur on any parcel in the Town until a valid
driveway permit has been obtained from the Town and the driveway, including
culvert and end walls if required, and construction erosion control measures, if
required have been installed. Construction vehicles shall not use any access to the
construction site on the property except the approved driveway access.
(13) Construction waste and materials disposal. The disposal of construction waste and
excess construction materials is the responsibility of the property Owner and
contractor.
(a) No person shall dispose of construction waste or excess construction
materials by burning of such waste or materials.
(b) No person shall dispose of construction waste or excess construction
materials in any public property, road right-of-way, recreational trail or
recreational easement.
(c) Any person who shall violate any provision of this Subsection (13) shall,
upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $200 or more than $400 for
the first offense together with the costs of prosecution.
(d) Any person who violates this Subsection (13) more than once in any twelvemonth
period shall be issued a citation and fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000 for each violation in excess of one together with the costs of
prosecution.
(14) Littering on construction site. All construction sites must be maintained free and
clear of litter and trash. The maintenance of the construction site free and clear of
litter and trash is jointly and severally the responsibility of the property Owner and
contractor. Each construction site shall be maintained on a daily basis.
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this Subsection (14) shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $200 nor more than $400 for the
first offense together with the costs of prosecution.
(b) Any person who violates this Subsection (14) more than once in any twelvemonth
period shall be issued a citation and fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000 for each violation in excess of one together with the costs of
prosecution.
(15) Permit lapses. A building permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall lapse and be void unless building operations are commenced within six
months, or if construction has not been completed within two years from the date
of issuance thereof.
19
(16) Revocation of permits.
(a) The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, may revoke
any building, plumbing or electrical permit, certificate of occupancy, or
approval issued under the regulations of this chapter, and may stop
construction or use of approved new materials, equipment, methods of
construction, devices or appliances for any of the following reasons:
(i) Whenever the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's
designee, shall find at any time that applicable Ordinances, laws,
regulations, orders, plans and specifications are not being complied
with and that the holder of the permit refused to conform after
written warning or construction order has been issued to the permit
holder.
(ii) Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes dangerous
to life or property.
(iii) Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provisions of
the application for the building permit or the building permit.
(iv) Whenever, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, or the Building
Inspector's designee, there is inadequate supervision provided on the
job site.
(v) Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been made
in the application for the building permit, plans, drawings, data
specifications or certified lot or lot plan on which the issuance of the
building permit or approval was based.
(vi) Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of approval
or occupancy given by the Building Inspector, or the Building
Inspector's designee, for the use of all approved materials,
equipment, methods of construction, devices or appliances.
(b) The notice revoking a building permit, plumbing, HVAC or electrical
certificate of occupancy or approval shall be in writing and may be served
upon the permit Applicant, Owner of the premises or the Owner's agent, if
any, and on the person having charge of the construction.
(c) A revocation placard shall also be posted upon the building, structure,
equipment or premises in question by the Building Inspector, or the
Building Inspector's designee.
(d) After the notice is served upon the persons as aforesaid and posted, it shall
be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any construction
20
operation whatsoever on the premises, and the permit that has been so
revoked shall be null and void. Before any construction or operation is again
resumed, a new permit, as required by this chapter, shall be procured and
fees paid therefor, and thereafter the resumption of any construction or
operation shall be in compliance with the regulations and provisions of this
chapter.
(e) Notwithstanding subp. (d), such work as the Building Inspector, or the
Building Inspector's designee, may order as a condition precedent to the
reissuance of the building permit may be performed, or such work as the
Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, may require for the
preservation of life and safety.
(17) Report of violations. Town officers shall report at once to the Building Inspector,
or the Building Inspector's designee, any building or activity that is being carried
on without a permit as required by this chapter.
(18) Display of permit. Building permits shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on
the premises where the authorized building or work is in progress at all times during
construction or work thereon. Such building permit shall be visible from the street.
(19) Toilet facilities required. [Added 1-7-2008]
(a) No building or structure, or any part thereof, shall be erected, or ground
broken for the same, enlarged, altered, moved, demolished, or razed within
the Town of Middleton until on-site toilet facilities are provided by the
builder. Such facilities may be toilet facilities located in an existing building
where work is being performed under the building permit. However, if
workers are not allowed to use existing toilet facilities, or there are no
existing toilet facilities, portable toilets must be provided.
(b) A portable toilet may be shared by more than one site, but not more than
one builder, provided the toilet is within 500 feet of all sites being served
and serves no more than six sites.
(c) All toilet facilities shall be kept in clean and working order and be readily
accessible to all those permitted and invited to work on-site, at all hours and
on all days work is performed, starting the day the building permit is posted
until such time as all work is completed.
16.07 Electrical and plumbing permits.
(1) Electrical permits.
(a) Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, all installations of electrical
equipment shall conform to and comply with the State Electrical Code, the
21
Wisconsin Statutes, this chapter and any orders, rules and regulations issued
by authority thereof, and with approved electrical standards for safety to
persons and property. Where no specific standards for safety are prescribed
by this chapter or by the State Electrical Code, conformity with the
regulations set forth in the National Electrical Code and in the National
Electrical Safety Code shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with
approved standards for safety to persons and property.
(b) No electrical wiring or other equipment shall be installed or altered without
first securing a permit therefor from the Building Inspector, or the Building
Inspector's designee, except that minor repairs or replacements of defective
sockets, switches, or base receptacles may be made without a permit. The
application for such permit shall be on a form furnished by the Building
Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, and shall state clearly the
work planned, alterations to be made, and the equipment and materials to
be used, and all later deviations from such plan must be submitted to and
approved by the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee.
(c) After roughing in the wiring of any building and before any such work is
covered up, or upon the completion of any outside wiring construction
work, it shall be the duty of the person doing such work to notify the
Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, who shall inspect,
or cause to be inspected, the same as soon as practicable. Upon completion
of such wiring, the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee,
shall be notified and shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, the finished
wiring as soon as practicable.
(d) The Wisconsin Electrical Code, Ch. SPS 316 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code and all amendments thereto, is adopted and
incorporated by reference.
(2) Plumbing permits.
(a) The construction, reconstruction, installation and alteration of all plumbing,
drainage, and plumbing ventilation shall conform to the State Plumbing
Code, the Wisconsin Statutes, this chapter and any orders, rules and
regulations issued by authority thereof.
(b) No plumbing or drainage of any kind shall be installed or altered, except
that leakage or stoppage repairs may be made, or replacement of fixtures
without modification to piping, without first securing a permit therefor from
the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee. The application
for such permit shall be on a form furnished by the Building Inspector, or
the Building Inspector's designee, and shall state clearly the work planned,
alterations to be made, and the equipment and materials to be used. All later
deviations from such plan must be submitted to and approved by the
22
Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee.
(3) Licensed plumber required. All plumbing work not exempted under Subsection (2)
shall be done only by a plumber licensed by the State of Wisconsin, except that a
property Owner may make repairs or installations in a single-family building owned
and occupied by him as his home, provided that a permit is issued and the work is
done in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
16.08 Building construction bond, letter of credit or cash deposit.
(1) Construction bond, letter of credit or cash deposit required.
(a) The Building Inspector shall require a bond from every general contractor
wherein the issuance of the Building Permit will result in the construction
of a new dwelling or building, or wherein the construction activity included
in the Building Permit will result in the disturbance of the ground,
excavation activity, use of motorized equipment including but not limited
to vehicles in excess of 20,000 pounds, backhoes, bobcats, caterpillars and
earth movers, tractors, etc., or wherein landscape equipment will be utilized.
(b) The Building Inspector may require a Construction Bond, Letter of Credit
or Cash Deposit from both the general contractor and the property Owner
in instances wherein the property Owner has assumed direct responsibility
for a portion of the construction activity such as landscaping.
(c) The purpose of the construction bond, letter of credit or cash deposit is to
provide a surety against damage to Town roads, road right-of-way, utilities
and other property not owned or controlled by the Owner of the parcel on
which the construction activity is permitted or occurring. It shall also
provide surety against illegal obstructions being placed in easements and
right-of-ways, and soil erosion on-site and downstream of the site. Said
bond, letter of credit or cash deposit shall among other things, provide
indemnification to the Town for any costs or expenses incurred by it in
connection with any claims for damages to any persons or property, and the
payment of any judgment together with the costs and expenses incurred by
the Town in connection therewith arising out of the construction activity for
which the permit is issued. A bond shall be executed by a corporate surety
or two personal sureties to be approved by the Town Board or designated
agent.
(i) Bond, letter of credit or cash deposit amount. The Building
Construction Bond, letter of credit or cash deposit shall be issued in
favor of the Town in an amount determined by the Town Board from
time to time as established in the Town fee schedule.
(ii) Waiver of bond, letter of credit or cash deposit. The Town shall have
23
the authority to direct the Building Inspector to waive the Building
Construction Bond, letter of credit or cash deposit in instances
wherein the building activity will have no impact or inconsequential
impact on Town roads, road right-of-way, utilities and other
property not owned or controlled by the Owner of the parcel on
which the construction activity is permitted or occurring.
(iii) Call of bond, letter of credit or cash deposit.
1. The Town of Middleton, in its sole discretion, may call all
or any portion of a Building Construction Bond, letter of
credit or cash deposit to repair damage to Town roads, road
right-of-way, utilities and other property not owned or
controlled by the Owner of the parcel on which the
construction activity is permitted or occurring.
2. The Town shall notify the property Owner and general
contractor identified on the Building Permit of the damages
incurred and give written notice of the right to correct or
repair such damages. Failure of the property Owner and
general contractor to complete such repairs to the Town's
satisfaction within 30 calendar days shall be deemed
sufficient cause to call the Building Construction Bond,
letter of credit or cash deposit.
(2) Insurance. The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, shall
require, in addition to said bond, letter of credit or cash deposit above indicated,
public liability insurance covering injury to one person in the sum of not less than
$500,000 and for one accident in a sum of not less than $500,000, together with
property damage insurance in a sum of not less than $500,000, or such other
coverage as deemed necessary by the Town of Middleton in its sole discretion.
16.09 Unsafe buildings.
Whenever the Town Board, upon the inspection and report of the Building Inspector, or the
Building Inspector's designee, finds any building or part thereof within the Town to be, in its
judgment, so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise
unfit for human occupancy or use and so that it would be unreasonable to repair the same, the
Town Board may order the Owner to raze and remove such building or part thereof or, if it can be
made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to raze and remove it at the Owner's
option. The Town Board shall provide, in writing, specific reasons for its determination. Such
order and proceedings shall be as provided in § 66.0413, Wis. Stats.
16.10 Garages.
Private garages shall be built in accordance with the general construction standards established in
24
the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code.
16.11 Basements; excavations.
(1) Basement subflooring. First floor subflooring shall be completed within 90 days
after the basement is excavated.
(2) Fencing of excavations. The Owner of any premises on which there exists an
opening or excavation which is located in close proximity to a public sidewalk or
street right-of-way as to constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall
erect a fence, wall or railing at least four feet high between such opening or
excavation and the public right-of-way.
(3) Closing of abandoned excavations.
(a) Any excavation for building purposes or any uncovered foundation which
shall remain open for more than three months shall be deemed abandoned
and a nuisance. The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's
designee, shall order that unless the erection of the building or structure on
the excavation or foundation shall commence or continue forthwith, suitable
safeguards shall be provided to prevent accidental injury to children or other
frequenters or that the excavation or foundation be filled to grade.
(b) Such order shall be served upon the Owner of record or the Owner's agent,
where an agent is in charge of the premises, and upon the holder of an
encumbrance of record in the manner provided for service of a summons in
the circuit court. If the Owner or the holder of an encumbrance of record
cannot be found, the order may be served by posting it on the premises and
making publication in the official newspaper for two consecutive
publications at least 10 days before the time for compliance stated in the
order commences to run. Such time shall be not less than 14 or more than
20 days after service.
(c) If the Owner of the land fails to comply with the order within the time
required, the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, shall
cause the excavation or foundation to be filled to grade. The cost of such
abatement shall be charged against the real estate and entered on the next
succeeding tax roll as a special charge and shall bear interest at a rate
established by the Town Board from the date of the report of the Building
Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, on the cost thereof, pursuant
to the provisions of § 66.0627, Wis. Stats.
16.12 New methods and materials.
(1) All materials, methods of construction and devices designed for use in buildings or
structures covered by this chapter and not specifically mentioned in or permitted by
25
this chapter shall not be used until approved in writing by SPS.
(2) Such materials, methods of construction and devices, when approved, must be
installed or used in strict compliance with the manufacturer's specifications and any
rules or conditions of use established by SPS.
16.13 Disclaimer on inspections.
The purpose of the inspections under this chapter is to improve the quality of housing in the Town
of Middleton. The inspections and the reports and findings issued after the inspections are not
intended as, nor are they to be construed as, a guarantee. In order to so advise Owners and other
interested persons, the following disclaimer shall be applicable to all inspections: "These findings
of inspection contained herein are intended to report conditions of noncompliance with code
standards that are readily apparent at the time of inspection. The inspection does not involve a
detailed examination of the mechanical systems or the closed structural and nonstructural elements
of the building and premises. No warranty of the operation, use or durability of equipment and
materials not specifically cited herein is expressed or implied."
16.14 Regulations for moving buildings.
(1) General requirements.
(a) Every permit issued by the Town Board for the moving of a building shall
designate the route to be taken, the conditions to be complied with and shall
limit the time during which said moving operations shall be continued.
(b) A report shall be made by Town employees with regard to possible damage
to trees. The estimated cost of trimming, removal and replacement of public
trees, as determined by the Town, shall be paid to the Building Inspector,
or the Building Inspector's designee, prior to issuance of the moving permit.
(c) Issuance of a moving permit shall further be conditioned on approval of the
moving route by the Town Board and on the Town Board's approval of the
compatibility of the building or structure to be moved with the buildings
and structures in the area surrounding the proposed location in the Town of
the building or structure being moved as provided in Subsection (7) below.
(2) Continuous movement. The movement of buildings shall be by a continuous
operation during all hours of the day and night, until such movement is fully
completed. All such operations shall be performed with the least possible
obstruction to thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed to remain overnight
upon any street crossing or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent easy access
to any fire hydrant or any other public facility. Lights shall be kept in conspicuous
places at each end of the building during the night.
(3) Street repair.
26
(a) The permittee shall notify the Town a minimum of three business days prior
to the time of moving. Before the moving of the building occurs, a Town
representative shall inspect the moving route in order to ascertain preproject
road conditions. Every person receiving a permit to move a building
shall, within one day after said building reaches its destination, report that
fact to the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, who
shall arrange for a Town official to inspect the streets or roads over which
said building has been moved and ascertain their condition.
(b) If the removal of said building has caused any damage to any street or
highway, the person to whom the moving permit was issued shall forthwith
place them in as good repair as they were before the permit was granted. On
the failure of said permittee to do so within 10 days thereafter to the
satisfaction of the Town Board, the Town shall repair the damage done to
such streets and hold the person obtaining such moving permit and the
sureties on the person's bond responsible for the payment of same.
(4) Conformance with Code.
(a) No permit shall be issued to move a building within or into the Town and
to establish it upon a location within the said Town until the Building
Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, has made an investigation
of such building at the location from which it is to be moved and is satisfied
from such investigation that said building is in a sound and stable condition
and of such construction that it will meet the requirements of the Building
Code contained in this chapter in all respects.
(b) A complete plan of all further repairs, improvements and remodeling with
reference to such building shall be submitted to the Building Inspector, or
the Building Inspector's designee, and the Building Inspector, or the
Building Inspector's designee, shall make a finding of fact to the effect that
all such repairs, improvements and remodeling are in conformity with the
requirements of the Building Code contained in this chapter and that, when
the same are completed, the building will so comply with said Building
Code.
(c) In the event a building is to be moved from the Town to some point outside
the boundaries thereof, the provisions with respect to the furnishing of plans
and specifications for proposed alterations to such building may be
disregarded.
(5) Bond.
(a) Before a permit is issued to move any building over any public way in the
Town, the person applying therefor shall give a bond to the Town of
27
Middleton in a sum to be fixed by the Town Board, said bond to be executed
by a corporate surety or two personal sureties to be approved by the Town
Board or designated agent conditioned upon, among other things, the
indemnification to the Town for any costs or expenses incurred by it in
connection with any claims for damages to any persons or property, and the
payment of any judgment together with the costs and expenses incurred by
the Town in connection therewith arising out of the removal of the building
for which the permit is issued.
(b) Unless the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, upon
investigation, shall find it to be a fact that the excavation exposed by the
removal of such building from its foundation shall not be so close to a public
thoroughfare as to permit the accidental falling therein of travelers or the
location, nature and physical characteristics of the premises and the exposed
excavation such as to make intrusion upon the premises and the falling into
such excavation of children under 12 years of age unlikely, the bond
required by Subsection (5) shall be further conditioned upon the permittee
erecting adequate barriers and within 48 hours, filling in such excavation or
adopting and employing such other means, devices or methods approved by
the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, and reasonably
adopted or calculated to prevent the occurrence set forth herein.
(6) Insurance. The Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, shall
require, in addition to said bond above indicated, public liability insurance covering
injury to one person in the sum of not less than $500,000 and for one accident in a
sum of not less than $500,000, together with property damage insurance in a sum
of not less than $500,000, or such other coverage as deemed necessary by the Town
of Middleton in its sole discretion.
(7) Compatibility.
(a) Photographs of all sides of the building proposed to be moved shall be
submitted to the Town Board, together with a complete plan for all exterior
repairs, improvements and remodeling.
(b) Upon receipt of all information required in Subsection (7)(a) above, the
Town Board shall schedule a public hearing to provide an opportunity for
Town residents in the area of the location on which such building or
structure is proposed to be established to object to or support such move.
The information provided in accordance with Subsection (7)(a) above shall
be made available for public inspection and notice of the time and place for
holding the public hearing shall be published as a Class 1 notice under Ch.
985, Wis. Stats., and posted in three public places within the Town at least
10 days prior to the public hearing. In addition, notice of the public hearing
shall be mailed to all landowners whose real estate is located within 600
feet of the lands upon which location of the building or structure being
28
moved is proposed to be established.
(d) Based upon its own investigation and the matters presented at the public
hearing, the Town Board shall pass a resolution approving or rejecting the
requested moving permit. In making such determination, the Town Board
shall take into account whether the building or structure proposed to be
moved is compatible in architectural style and type, size, appearance,
quality, condition and proposed use to the existing building or structures in
the area surrounding the location upon which such building or structure is
proposed to be established.
16.15 Swimming pools.
(1) Definition. A private or residential swimming pool is an outdoor structure
containing water in a receptacle or other container having a depth for water at any
point greater than 1 1/2 feet located above or below the surface of ground elevation,
used or intended to be used solely by the Owner, operator or lessee thereof and his
or her family and by friends invited to use it, and includes all structural facilities,
appliances and appurtenances, equipment and other items used and intended to be
used for the operation and maintenance of a private or residential swimming pool.
Exempt from this section are decorative landscaping pools and wildlife pools.
(2) Exempt pools. Storable children's swimming or wading pools, with a maximum
dimension of 15 feet and a maximum height of 15 inches and which are so
constructed that it may be readily disassembled for storage and reassembled to its
original integrity are exempt from the provisions of this section.
(3) Permit required.
(a) Before work is commenced on the construction or erection of private or
residential swimming pools or on any alteration, additions, remodeling or
other improvements, an application for a swimming pool building permit to
construct, erect, alter, remodel or add must be submitted in writing to the
Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee. Plans and
specifications and pertinent explanatory data should be submitted to the
Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee, at the time of
application. No work or any part of the work shall be commenced until the
Applicant obtains a written permit for such work. The minimum building
permit fee pursuant to the Building Code shall accompany such application.
(b) Swimming Pool discharges shall conform to WDNR Wastewater Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) General Permit No. WI-0046523-
5 for Swimming Pool Facility (expiration March 31, 2014) or its current
updated version. Permit requirements include completion of the General
Permit Information Checklist. Monitoring requirements are waived for pool
facilities under 67,000 gallons. [Added 10-10-2005; amended 9-11-2006]
29
(4) Construction requirements. In addition to such other requirements as may be
reasonably imposed by the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee,
the Building Inspector's or the Building Inspector's designee shall not issue a permit
for construction as provided for in Subsection (3), unless the following construction
requirements are observed:
(a) All materials and methods of construction in the construction, alteration,
addition, remodeling or other improvements and pool installation shall be
in accord with all State regulations and code and with any and all
Ordinances of the Town now in effect or hereafter enacted.
(b) All plumbing work shall be in accordance with all applicable Ordinances of
the Town and all State codes. Every private or residential swimming pool
shall be provided with a suitable draining method and in no case shall waters
from any pool be drained into the sanitary sewer system, onto lands of other
property Owners adjacent to that on which the pool is located or in the
general vicinity.
(c) All electrical installations, including lighting and heating but not limited
thereto, which are provided for, installed or used in conjunction with a
private or residential swimming pool shall be in conformance with the State
law and Town Ordinances regulating electrical installations.
(5) Setbacks. No swimming pool shall be located, constructed or maintained closer to
any side or rear lot line than is permitted in the Dane County Zoning Code for an
accessory building. In addition, no swimming pool shall be located within public
easements (stormwater, Public Recreational Trail, or public utility, etc.).
(6) Fence.
(a) Pools within the scope of this section that are not enclosed within a
permanent building shall be completely enclosed by a fence of sufficient
strength to prevent access to the pool or shall have a cover or other
protective device over such swimming pool of such design and material that
it can be securely fastened in place and sustain the weight of a person
weighing 250 pounds. Such cover or protective device shall be securely
fastened in place whenever the pool is not in use. Such fence or wall shall
not be less than four feet in height and so constructed as not to have voids,
holes or openings larger than four inches in one dimension. Gates or doors
shall be kept locked while the pool is not in actual use.
(b) The pool enclosure may be omitted where pools are installed above ground
and have a raised deck around the entire pool perimeter with an attached
railing a minimum of 36 inches high on the top or sidewalks a minimum of
36 inches high or have a pool cover approved by the Town Building
30
Inspector.
(7) Filter system required. All private and residential pools within the meaning of this
chapter must have, in connection therewith, some filtration system to assure proper
circulation of the water therein and proper bacterial maintenance thereof.
16.16 Regulation and permit for razing buildings.
(1) No building within the Town of Middleton shall be razed without a permit from the
Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's designee unless a raze order has
been issued by the Town Board, the Building Inspector or their designee(s). A snow
fence or other approved barricade shall be provided as soon as any portion of the
building is removed and shall remain during razing operations. After all razing
operations have been completed, the foundation shall be filled at least one foot
above the adjacent grade, the property raked clean and all debris hauled away.
Razing permits shall lapse and be void unless the work authorized thereby is
commenced within six months from the date of issuance. All work associated with
the razing permit shall be completed within 30 days of the commencement of such
work. Any unfinished portion of work remaining beyond the 30 days must have
special permission to proceed from the Building Inspector, or the Building
Inspector's designee.
(2) All debris must be hauled away at the end of each day for the work that was done
on that day. Combustible material shall not be used for backfill but shall be hauled
away. There shall not be any burning of materials on the site of the razed building.
(3) If any razing or removal operation under this section results in, or would likely
result in, an excessive amount of dust particles in the air, creating a nuisance in the
vicinity thereof, the permittee shall take all necessary steps, by use of water
spraying or other appropriate means, to eliminate such nuisance.
(4) The permittee shall take all necessary steps, prior to the razing of a building, to treat
the building as to prevent the spread and migration of rodents and insects therefrom
during and after the razing operations. Such steps may include the employment of
a qualified person in the field of pest control or by such other means as may be
appropriate.
16.17 Fees.
(1) Establishment of fees. All building permit fees required by this chapter shall be
established by resolution of the Town Board of the Town of Middleton. These fees
shall be subject to periodic review and amendment.
(2) Professional Fee Reimbursement. Any Applicant for a permit under this Chapter
may request preliminary review of required plans, site plans, sufficiency of existing
documents or similar matters that are not normally handled by the Building
31
Inspector. If the Town, in its exclusive discretion, requests that the Town Engineer
or Town Attorney undertake any such review, the Applicant shall be responsible
for any professional fees or expenses incurred in such review and shall reimburse
the Town for any such fees or expenses within 30 days of invoice.
(3) Fees doubled. If a building permit is not obtained prior to commencement of
construction, the applicable building permit fees shall be doubled.
16.18 Violations and penalties.
(1) Any building or structure hereafter erected, enlarged, altered or repaired or any use
hereafter established in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
an unlawful building, structure or use. The Building Inspector, or the Building
Inspector's designee, shall promptly report all such violations to the Town Board
and Town Attorney who shall bring an action to enjoin the erection, enlargement,
alteration, repair or moving of such building or structure or the establishment of
such use of buildings in violation of this chapter or to cause such building, structure
or use to be removed and may also be subject to a penalty as provided below.
(2) General penalty. Unless otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to
a penalty, which shall be as follows:
(a) First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100 nor more than
$500, together with the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the County
Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
(b) Second or subsequent offense. Any person found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter who shall previously have been convicted of a
violation of the same Ordinance within one year shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 for each such
offense, together with costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the County
Jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not exceeding
six months.
(3) Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs
shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Town
from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any
provision of this Code.
(4) Other remedies. The Town shall have any and all other remedies afforded by the
Wisconsin Statutes in addition to the forfeitures and costs of prosecution above. In
any such action, the fact that a permit was issued shall not constitute a defense, nor
32
shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the Building Inspector,
or the Building Inspector's designee, or other Town officials constitute a defense.
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by injunction
order at the suit of the Owner or Owners of any real estate within the jurisdiction
of this chapter.
(5) Violations of the Uniform Dwelling Code.
(a) If an inspection reveals a noncompliance with this chapter or the Uniform
Dwelling Code, the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's
designee, shall notify the permittee and the Owner, in writing, of the
violation to be corrected. All cited violations shall be corrected within 30
days after written notification unless an extension of time is granted
pursuant to provisions of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(b) If, after written notification, the violation is not corrected within 30 days, a
stop-work order may be served on the Owner or the Owner's authorized
representative or agent, and a copy thereof shall be posted at the
construction site. Such stop-work order shall not be removed except by
written notice of the Building Inspector, or the Building Inspector's
designee, after satisfactory evidence has been supplied that the cited
violation has been corrected.
(c) Each day each violation continues after the thirty-day written notice period
has run shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this chapter shall
preclude the Town from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or
remove a violation of any provision of this chapter or the Uniform Dwelling
Code.
(d) If any construction or work governed by the provisions of this chapter or
the Uniform Dwelling Code is commenced prior to the issuance of a permit,
the fees for the permit shall be doubled.
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order or determination of the Building Inspector, or
the Building Inspector's designee, may appeal from such order or determination to
the Town Board. The procedures under Chapter 4 of this Code used to effectuate
an appeal to the Town Board shall apply.
(7) Except as may otherwise be provided by Statute or Ordinance, no officer, agent or
employee of the Town of Middleton charged with the enforcement of this chapter
shall render himself or herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
the individual's duties under this chapter. Any suit brought against any officer,
agent or employee of the Town as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of the individual's duties under this chapter shall be defended by the legal
representative of the Town until the final determination of the proceedings therein.
33
(8) Early occupancy violations. [Amended 5-3-2021 by Ord. No. 20210503-1]
No person may occupy any building unless and until an occupancy permit is issued.
Temporary and early occupancy permits will not be issued. Any person occupying
a building prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit $200 for each day of occupancy prior to the issuance of the
occupancy permit, together with the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail
until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
16.19 Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter or of the Wisconsin Administrative Code
adopted by reference is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remaining provisions of this chapter shall not be affected.
16.20 Outdoor Lighting Standards
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to enhance the attractiveness and
livability of the community for its citizens, both during the day and at night
without compromising the safety, security, and wellbeing of persons engaged in
outdoor nighttime activities. It is the intent of this Section to define practical and
effective measures by which the obtrusive aspects of excessive and careless
outdoor light usage can be minimized. This Section is designed to curtail the
degradation of the nighttime visual environment by requiring lighting practices
that direct appropriate amounts of light where and when it is needed, increasing
the use of energy-efficient sources, and decreasing the wastage of light, sky glow,
and glare resulting from over-lighting and poorly shielded or inappropriately
directed lighting fixtures.
(2) Conformance with Applicable Laws and Regulations. All outdoor illuminating
devices shall be installed and maintained in conformance with all federal and state
laws and codes, including but not limited to the Dane County Zoning Code.
(3) Definitions. As used in this Section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise,
certain words and phrases shall mean the following:
(a) Class A Lighting. All exterior lighting used for, but not limited to, exterior
sales or eating areas, assembly or repair areas, advertising and other signs,
recreational facilities and other similar applications where color rendition is
important to preserve the nature or purpose of the activity. Recognized
Class A uses are: outdoor eating and retail food or beverage service areas;
outdoor maintenance areas; display lots; assembly areas such as concert or
theater amphitheaters; athletic fields; training grounds and fair grounds.
(b) Class B Lighting. All exterior lighting used for, but not limited to,
34
illumination for roadways, walkways, equipment yards, parking lots,
building perimeters and outdoor security where general illumination for
safety and/or security of the grounds is the primary concern.
(c) Class C Lighting. Any exterior lighting used for decorative effects
including, but not limited to, architectural illumination, flag and monument
lighting and illumination of landscape trees, bushes and plants.
(d) Cutoff Light Fixture. A lighting fixture constructed in such a manner that
no light is emitted above the horizontal, and where the intensity at 80
degrees from nadir (a point directly below the light fixture) is no greater
than 10% of lamp lumens.
(e) Decorative Building Lighting. Lighting used primarily to enhance the
building’s architectural appearance through the illumination of the building.
(f) Decorative Landscape Lighting. Lighting used primarily to enhance the
landscape through the illumination of trees, bushes, plants, flag poles and
monuments.
(g) Display Lot or Area. Outdoor areas where active nighttime sales of
automobiles, boats, tractors, building supplies, gardening or nursery
products occurs, where swap meets are held or outdoor product assembly
occurs and where accurate color perception of merchandise by customers is
required. Uses not on this list must be approved as display lot uses by the
Plan Commission.
(h) Flood Lamp. A lamp designated as such by the manufacturer designed to
direct its output in a specific direction but with a diffusing glass envelope
to illuminate a wide area.
(i) Footcandle. The illuminance on a one square foot surface of which there is
a uniformly distributed flux of one lumen. One footcandle is equal to one
lumen per square foot. Unless otherwise expressly provided, footcandle
measurements in this Section shall refer to ground level measurements of
luminance at full maintained output as used rather than initial luminance
(the amount of luminance when new).
(j) Glare. The sensation produced by a bright source within the visual field
that is sufficiently brighter than the ambient level to which the eyes cannot
adapt to, thus causing annoyance, discomfort, or impairment of visual
performance. The magnitude of glare may be affected by factors such as the
size, position, brightness of the source, and on this brightness level to which
the eyes are adapted.
(k) Holiday Lighting. Any low wattage seasonal decorative lighting.
35
(l) Installation. The attachment or assembly, whether or not connected to a
power source, of any outdoor light fixture affixed to the ground, a building,
a pole or any other supporting structure or device.
(m) Light Pollution. Any light spilling in any direction serving no intended
purpose.
(n) Lighting Sources. Any lamp or manufactured device emitting energy that
is capable of exciting the retina and producing a visual sensation. Such
devices shall include, but are not limited to, incandescent, fluorescent,
carbon arc, quartz-iodine/tungsten halogen, low pressure sodium, high
pressure sodium, metal halide, mercury vapor and LED lamps.
(o) Light Trespass. Any light falling across property boundaries.
(p) Lumen. Unit of luminous flux; used to measure the amount of light emitted
by lamps.
(q) Luminaire. The complete lighting assembly, not including the support
assembly. Lighting assembles which include multiple unshielded or
partially shielded lamps on a single pole or standard shall be considered a
single luminaire.
(r) Multi-class or Multi-use Lighting. Any outdoor lighting used for more than
one purpose, such as lighting used for both security and decoration.
(s) Nuisance Lighting. Any excessive lighting causing glare, trespass or
pollution and constituting a nuisance as defined in Chapter 11 of this Code.
(t) Opaque. Opaque means that a material does not transmit light from an
internal illumination source. Applied to sign backgrounds, means that the
area surrounding any letters or symbols on the sign either is not lighted from
within, or allows no light from an internal source to shine through it.
(u) Open Parking Facility. A parking facility without an overhead covering and
shall include the roof level of a multilevel parking structure or ramp.
(v) Outdoor Canopy. A free-standing roof structure without side walls which
may or may not be attached to the roof of an adjacent building and which
shall include but shall not be limited to canopies over gas station pumps or
canopies at convenience stores.
(w) Outdoor Recreation Facility. An area designed for active recreation,
whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, baseball
diamonds, soccer and football fields, golf courses, tennis courts and
36
swimming pools.
(x) Person. Any individual, tenant, lessee, owner, operator, or any public,
private, nonprofit, or commercial entity including, but not limited to, firm,
business, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, municipality,
agency or governmental agency.
(y) Security Lighting. Lighting for the safety of persons and property.
(z) Shielded Light Fixture. A lighting fixture constructed in such a manner that
all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing
element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the
luminaire, is projected below the horizontal as determined by photometric
test or certified by the manufacturer. Any structural part of the light fixture
providing this shielding must be permanently affixed.
(aa) Sign, Externally Illuminated. A sign illuminated by light sources from the
outside the sign.
(bb) Sign, Internally Illuminated. A sign illuminated by light sources enclosed
entirely within the sign cabinet.
(cc) Sign, Neon. A sign including luminous gas-filled tubes formed into text,
symbols or decorative elements and directly visible from outside the sign
cabinet.
(dd) Sky Glow. The brightening of the night sky that results from the scattering
of artificial visible radiation by the constituents of the atmosphere.
(ee) Spot Lamp. A specific type of lamp so designated by the manufacturer
designed to direct its output in a specific direction and with a clear or nearly
clear glass envelope.
(ff) Translucent. Permitting light to pass through but diffusing it so that
persons, objects, etc., on the opposite side are not clearly visible.
(gg) Uniformity Ratio. A ratio describing the uniformity of light levels across
an area expressed as the ratio of average to minimum light levels. Unless
otherwise specified, uniformity ratios in this Section shall be average to
minimum and measured according to a grid across the entire area to be
lighted with each square measuring four feet by four feet.
(hh) Use, Abandonment of. The relinquishment of a property, or the cessation
of a use or activity by the owner or tenant for a period of six months,
excluding temporary or short term interruptions for the purpose of
remodeling, maintaining, or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility.
37
A use shall be deemed abandoned when such use is suspended as evidenced
by the cessation of activities or conditions which constitute the principle use
of the property.
(4) Applicability.
(a) New Uses, Buildings, and Major Additions or Modifications. No new land
uses, developments, buildings, or structures nor any major additions or
modifications to developments, buildings or structures that require a
building permit or other authorization from the City, shall be approved
unless all outdoor lighting fixtures on the development parcel meet the
requirements of this Section. A major addition or modification is any
building addition or modification that increases by 50% or more the number
of dwelling units or gross floor area or parking spaces either with a single
addition or with cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date of
this Section.
(b) Minor Additions. Additions or modifications of less than 50% to existing
uses as described in subsection (a) above, which include changes or
additions to outdoor lighting and that require a permit, shall require the
submission of a complete outdoor lighting inventory and site plan detailing
all existing and any proposed new outdoor lighting. Any new lighting on
the site shall meet the requirements of this Section. The site luminance as
measured in footcandles after the modifications are complete shall not
exceed that on the site before the modification, or that permitted by this
Section, whichever is larger.
(c) Residential Fixtures. Any new light fixtures 2500 lumens and over, any
new outdoor light fixtures above the eave, or any new light fixture attached
to buildings or poles separate from the residence must comply with the
provisions of this Section. Examples of lamp types of 2500 lumens and less
are:
100 Watt Standard Incandescent
15 Watt Cool White Fluorescent
15 Watt Compact Fluorescent
18 Watt Low Pressure Sodium
35 Watt High Pressure Sodium
18 Watt LED
(d) Resumption of Use After Abandonment. If a property or use with nonconforming
lighting is abandoned, then all outdoor lighting shall be
reviewed and brought into compliance with this Section before the use is
resumed.
(5) General Outdoor Lighting Standards.
38
(a) Except as otherwise expressly provided elsewhere in this Section, the
standards applicable to a particular parcel shall depend upon its lighting
zone designation which shall be determined at the time of application. Such
determination shall be based upon the following criteria:
(i) Zone E1 Natural Resource & Recreation, Farmland Preservation
and Rural Residential. This zone is intended for areas where low
to no ambient light is expected. This zone includes all parcels
within the NR-C, RE, FP and RR districts.
(ii) Zone E2 Residential. This zone is intended for areas where
medium ambient light levels are expected. This includes the AT,
RM, SFR, TFR, MFR and HAM districts and abutting areas.
(ii) Zone E3 Commercial. This zone is intended for areas where
relatively high ambient light levels are expected. This includes all
parcels within the LC, GC, HC, RI and MI districts except where
such uses directly abut any single family residential uses.
(b) All new outdoor lighting fixtures shall be shielded as follows:
(i) In all zones and for all classes of lighting where initial output of
the fixture is equal to or greater than 2500 lumens, the fixture shall
be fully shielded.
(ii) In lighting zones E3 and E2, where fully shielded fixtures are
less than 2500 lumens, lamps shall not be aimed higher than 45
degrees above straight down when the source is visible from
any off-site residential property or public roadway, park or
conservancy.
(iii) Only fully shielded fixtures may be used in lighting zone E1.
(c) All new outdoor lighting fixtures shall be placed so as to eliminate
trespass greater than 0.5 footcandles on the ground at the lot line.
(d) Multi-use lighting must conform to the shielding and timing
restrictions, if any, that apply to the most restrictive included use.
(e) All outdoor lighting fixtures, unless expressly exempted from the
terms of this Section must be installed and maintained according to
approved plans.
(f) No pole mounted luminaire shall be higher than 35 feet except for
lighting for athletic fields.
39
(6) Special Uses.
(a) Recreational Facilities
(i) Shielding. Fully shielded lighting is required for fields.
(ii) Luminance. All lighting installations shall be designed to achieve
no greater than the minimal luminance levels for the activity as
recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America (IESNA). Current IESNA standards applicable to such
lighting shall be kept on file with the Zoning Administrator.
(iii) Light Trespass. The installation shall limit light trespass to the
maximum extent possible consistent with the illumination
constraints of the design.
(iv) Certification. Every such lighting system design and installation
shall be certified by a qualified registered engineer as conforming
to all applicable restrictions of this Section.
(b) Display Lots
(i) Shielding. All display lot lighting shall utilize fully shielded
luminaires that are installed in a fashion that maintains the fully
shielded characteristics.
(ii) Luminance. The display lot shall be designed to achieve no greater
than the minimal luminance levels for the activity as
recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America (IESNA). Current IESNA standards shall be kept on file
with the Zoning Administrator.
(iii) Off-site Spill. The display lot shall limit off-site spill to a
maximum of 2.0 footcandles at any location on any nonresidential
property, and 0.5 footcandles at any location on any residential
property, as measurable from any orientation of the measuring
device.
(iv) Certification. Every display lot lighting system design and
installation shall be certified by a qualified registered engineer as
conforming to all applicable restrictions of this Section.
(c) Service Station Canopies
(i) Shielding. All luminaires mounted on or recessed into the lower
40
surface of service station canopies shall be fully shielded and utilize
flat lenses.
(ii) Total Under-Canopy Output. The total light output used for
illuminating service station canopies, defined as the sum of all
under-canopy initial bare-lamp outputs in lumens, shall not exceed
20 foot- candles. Any luminaire located under a canopy including
any lighting within signage or illuminated panels over the pumps, is
to be included toward the total at full initial lumen output.
(iii) Certification. Every service station canopy lighting system design
and installation shall be certified by a qualified registered engineer
as conforming to all applicable restrictions of this Section.
(d) Parking Facilities. A lighting system for parking facilities and outdoor
merchandizing areas shall be designed to provide the lighting intensities and
uniformities described as follows:
(i) Open Parking Facilities. The illumination requirements of an open
parking facility depend on the amount of usage the facility receives.
Three levels of activity are hereby established as High and Low,
reflecting both traffic and pedestrian activity. The following
examples are nonexclusive and include:
1. High Activity. Shopping centers, retail parking areas,
hospital and clinic parking areas, transportation parking
(airports, commuter lots, etc.), cultural, civic or recreational
events, and fast food facilities.
2. Low Activity. Employee parking, educational facility
parking, office parks and church parking.
(ii) Horizontal Luminance for Parking Facilities
1. Open Parking Facilities
General Parking & Pedestrian Area Vehicle use Area (Driveway)
Level of
Activity
Min.
Footcandles
on
Pavement
Max.
Avg.
Footcandles
on
Pavement
Max.
Uniformity
Ratio
(Avg. Min)
(1)
Min.
Footcandles
on Pavement
Max.
Avg.
Footcandles
on Pavement
Max.
Uniformity
Ratio
(Avg. Min)
(1)
High 0.4 fc 2.5 fc 5:1 0.33 fc 1.5 fc 5:1
Low 0.2 fc 1.5 fc 5:1 0.125 fc 1.0 fc 5:1
41
42
2. Covered Parking Facilities
Areas
_________________
General Parking
and Pedestrian
Areas
Min
Footcandles on
Pavement
1.25 fc
Min.
Footcandle
Avg. on
Pavement
5 fc
Max.
Avg.
Footcandles
on Pavement
9 fc
Max.
Uniformity
Ratio
(Avg:Min)1
4:1
Private Controlled
Entry Parking
0.75 fc
3 fc
6 fc
4:1
1 Not Mandatory within four feet of the pavement edge.
(e) Building Lighting
(i) Building mounted lights shall be mounted and installed so that all
light is directed downward, unless the lights are decorative
lighting in which case the light shall be directed toward the
building.
(ii) Fixtures shall be fully shielded.
(iii) No wall packs or similar lights shall be permitted unless the cutoff
angle effectively eliminates visible glare from beyond the property
lines.
(iv) No lights shall be mounted above the parapet, or for pitched roofs
above the eave except for motion detection security lighting,
decorative building lighting.
(v) Functional lighting shall not exceed 400 watts. Decorative
building or landscape lighting shall not exceed 100 watts.
(v) The maximum light trespass allowed on adjacent properties is .5
footcandles for residential and 2.0 footcandles for nonresidential.
(vi) If swivel mountings are used, lights may be raised a
maximum of 20 degrees from horizontal and must be full
cutoff fixtures.
(f) Public Private Street Lighting
43
(i) All public street lighting shall comply with this Section to the
extent possible consistent with professionally acceptable
traffic engineering standards.
(ii) All new street lamps on public and private streets shall be
fully shielded. This requirement shall not be construed to
apply to the repair or replacement of an existing lamp unless
part of a larger project including replacement of all street
lamps in the project area.
(iii) Public street lighting shall be approved by the Town Engineer.
(g) Security Lighting. Security lighting is a minimum amount of lighting
required on all public, commercial, business and residential buildings
containing 4 or more separate dwellings. The purpose of security lighting
is for the safety of persons and property.
(i) Security lighting is required in all exterior/interior parking
areas, service walk areas and entrance/exits.
(ii) All security lighting fixtures shall be shielded and aimed so that
illumination is directed only to the designated area. In no case shall
security lighting be directed above a horizontal plane through the
top of the lighting fixture, and the fixture shall include shields that
prevent the light source or lens from being visible from adjacent
properties and roadways.
(iii) Security lighting fixtures may be mounted on poles no higher than
35 feet and located no more than 5 feet from the perimeter of the
designated secure area.
(iv) Security lights intended to illuminate a perimeter (such as a fence
line) shall include motion sensors and be designed to be off unless
triggered by an intruder located within 5 feet of the perimeter.
(v) The maximum footcandles allowed on adjacent property is 0.5
for residential and 2.0 for non-residential.
(h) The minimum footcandles required for security lighting shall conform
to the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America’s (IESNA)
recommendations and standards. Current IESNA standards shall be
kept on file with the Town Administrator.
(i) Commercial and multi-family dwelling construction sites whether new,
additions or remodeling shall install the minimum security lighting in
accordance with IESNA recommendations and standards to safeguard the
44
site and materials.
(j) Flag Illumination. Flag lighting shall be shielded and down-directed.
(7) Lighting Plans.
(a) Submittal Required. Any application for design review pursuant to Chapter
15 or Chapter 16 of this Code of Ordinances shall include evidence that the proposed
work will comply with this Section. The installation or modification of any exterior
lighting except for routine servicing and same-type lamp replacement shall require
submission of the information described below. The evidence shall include but shall not
necessarily be limited to the following:
(i) A catalog page, cut sheet or photograph of the lighting fixtures,
including the mounting method.
(ii) A photometric data test report of the proposed lighting fixture
graphically showing the lighting distribution in all angles
vertically and horizontally around the fixture.
(iii) A plot plan showing the location of all outdoor lighting fixtures
proposed, the mounting or installation height, the overall
maintained illumination levels and uniformities, and the point
where 0.5 horizontal footcandles occurs on the property or
adjacent property at ground level. This may be accomplished by
means of an isolux curve or computer printout projecting the
illumination levels.
(b) Additional Submission. The above required plans, descriptions and data
shall be sufficiently complete to permit a determination that compliance
with the requirements of this Section will be secured. If such plans,
descriptions and data are insufficient to make the required determination,
the applicant shall submit such additional evidence as necessary to enable
such determination.
(c) Subdivision Plats. If any subdivision proposes to have installed street or
other common or public area outdoor lighting, submission of the
information as described herein shall be required for all such lighting.
(d) Lamp or Fixture Substitution. Should any outdoor light fixture or the type
of light source therein be changed to a fixture or light source not
substantially equal to the type of fixtures or light sources in the approved
plan after the permit has been issued, a change request must be submitted
to the Town Engineer or designee for approval, together with adequate
information to assure compliance with this Section, which must be received
prior to the change.
45
(e) Plan Review. If the Town Engineer or designee determines that the
proposed lighting does not comply with this Section, the permit shall not be
issued or the plan approved.
(f) Certification. For all projects where the total initial output of the proposed
lighting equals or exceeds 200,000 lamp lumens, certification that the
lighting, as installed, conforms to the approved plans shall be provided by
a certified lighting engineer, or other similarly qualified professional
acceptable to the City, before the certificate of occupancy is issued. Until
this certification is submitted, approval for use of a Certificate of
Occupancy shall not be issued for the project.
(g) Fee. All submittals for approval of lighting plans shall be accompanied by
a fee as set forth in the Fee Schedule under Section 25.____ to cover costs
of processing the application. In addition to this fee, the applicant shall be
required to pay all Town costs relating to staff or outside consultant review
of the lighting plan. The scope of review and related cost may vary
depending upon the size and complexity of the plan. An itemized invoice
shall be sent to the applicant for all such costs which shall be paid within
thirty (30) days. If not paid, such costs shall be placed on the tax roll against
the applicable property as a special charge pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0627.
(8) Exemptions.
(a) Emergency Lighting. Emergency lighting, used by police, firefighting, or
medical personnel, or at their direction, is exempt from all requirements of
this Section for as long as the emergency exists.
(b) Swimming Pool and Fountain Lighting. Underwater lighting used for the
illumination of swimming pools and fountains is exempt from the lamp type
and shielding standards provided herein, though it must conform to all other
provisions of this Section.
(c) Holiday lighting.
(d) Legally required safety lighting for towers or other facilities at which safety
lighting is required (e.g., ski hills).
(9) Lighting Public Nuisance. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit
lighting that otherwise constitutes a public nuisance. Any lighting producing
excessive glare, pollution or trespass may be deemed a public nuisance under
Chapter 11 of the Town’s Code of Ordinances or Wis. Stats. Chap. 823 subject to
the remedies provided therein.
(10) Enforcement and Penalties.
46
(a) Violations. Any person found to have violated or caused a violation of this
Section may be subject to enforcement action as provided in this Code of
Ordinances. Each day during which the violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense. The Town may institute appropriate action or
proceedings to enjoin violations of this Section.
(b) Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this
Section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture under §
16.18.
16.21 Outdoor furnaces regulated.
(1) Definition. As used in this section, "Outdoor Furnace" means any device,
equipment or apparatus designed for the combustion of solid fuel for purposes of
providing indoor heat and/or heated water to any building or other structure, which
is located outside of the building or structure.
(2) Location restrictions. No outdoor furnace shall be constructed, installed or operated
except on parcels larger than five acres. The Town Board may condition any land
division on the removal of any outdoor furnace located on any parcel proposed to
consist of less than five acres as a result of the land division.
(3) Installation standards. The following standards shall apply to permitted outdoor
furnaces.
(a) No outdoor furnace shall be located nearer than 200 feet to any property
line.
(b) No outdoor furnace shall be located nearer than 200 feet to any building
intended for human occupancy other than the building served by the
furnace.
(c) All outdoor furnaces shall be installed in accordance with all manufacturer's
recommendations.
(d) All outdoor furnaces shall be installed upon a nominal four-inch permanent
concrete pad of such dimensions as to allow for not less than six inches of
exposed surface area around the entire perimeter of the pad.
(e) Installation of any electrical or plumbing apparatus or device used in
connection with the operation of the outdoor furnace shall comply with all
applicable electrical and plumbing codes.
(f) All outdoor furnaces shall be equipped with a properly functioning spark
arrestor.
47
(4) Use and operation. All outdoor furnaces shall be used and operated in accordance
with the following restrictions:
(a) All outdoor furnaces shall be operated in accordance with the
manufacturer's directions, except as otherwise provided herein.
(b) No industrial waste, rubber, plastic, used motor oil, toxic chemicals,
hazardous waste, yard waste, painted or chemically treated wood, processed
wood products, household garbage, cardboard, wastepaper or animal waste
shall be burned in an outdoor furnace.
(c) Outdoor furnaces shall not be operated between May 31 through the next
following September 1.
(d) Outdoor furnaces shall not be operated in a manner that produces excessive
smoke, dust or odors.
(e) Outdoor furnaces shall meet all applicable state and federal emission
standards.
(5) Permit required. No person shall install, construct or connect to any building in the
Town any outdoor furnace without first obtaining a building permit from the
Building Inspector. Fees for such permits shall be as provided for HVAC permits.
(6) Penalties. Penalties for violation of this section shall be as provided in § 16.18.
1
CHAPTER 17
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
17.01 Title
17.02 Finding and declaration of purpose.
17.03 Applicability; performance time
17.04 Definitions
17.05 Land-disturbing activities subject to control
17.06 Reporting on stormwater facilities
17.07 Prohibited acts
17.08 Standards and criteria
17.09 Application and issuance of permits
17.10 Violations and penalties
17.11 Appeals
17.01 Title. This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Erosion and Stormwater
Runoff Control Ordinance."
17.02 Finding and declaration of purpose. The Town finds that urbanizing land uses have
accelerated the process of soil erosion, runoff and sediment deposition in the waters of the Town
of Middleton. Therefore, it is declared to be the purpose of this chapter to control and prevent soil
erosion and minimize stormwater runoff increases and thereby to preserve the natural resources,
control floods and prevent impairment of dams and reservoirs, protect the quality of public waters,
protect wildlife, protect the tax base and protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare
of the people of the Town of Middleton.
17.03 Applicability; performance time.
(1) Applicability. This chapter applies to the use of lands within the boundaries of the
Town of Middleton.
(2) Performance time requirement. All action required in this chapter shall be
conducted as soon as possible as determined by the Administrative Authority.
17.04 Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, certain words used herein are defined as
follows:
(1) ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The governmental employee designated by
the Town Board to administer this chapter and includes any other governmental
employees who are supervised by the said administrator, for the implementation
and enforcement of this chapter.
(2) AGRICULTURAL LAND USES — Alterations or disturbances of the land used
for the production of food and fiber.
2
(3) CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A means of giving notice to the permittee or
violator that the Administrative Authority believes that the permittee or violator has
violated one or more provisions of this chapter. Notice is given by posting upon the
lands where the disturbing activity occurs one or more copies of a poster so stating
the violation and by mailing a copy of this poster by certified mail to the permittee
or violator at the address shown on the permit or to the violator at any address of
record.
(4) CONTROL PLAN (EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN and
RUNOFF CONTROL PLAN) — A plan approved by the Administrative Authority
of methods for controlling soil erosion, surface water runoff and sediment
deposition caused by or resulting from land-disturbing activities.
(5) DETENTION STORAGE — The temporary detaining or storage of stormwater in
reservoirs, under predetermined and controlled conditions, with the rate of
discharge therefrom regulated by installed devices.
(6) DRAINAGE WAY – MAJOR – Any watercourse, drainage way, channel, stream
or swale that has a tributary drainage area of 10 acres or more.
(7) DRAINAGE WAY – MINOR – Any watercourse, drainage way, channel, stream
or swale that has a tributary drainage area of 5 acres.
(8) EROSION (SOIL EROSION) — The detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
(9) EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior
to excavating or filling.
(10) GRADING — Altering the elevation of the land surface by stripping, excavating,
filling, stockpiling of solid materials or any combination thereof and shall include
the land from which the material was removed or upon which it was placed.
(11) LAND IN ITS NATURAL UNDEVELOPED STATE — Land that has runoff
characteristics equivalent to the maximum Runoff Curve Numbers as shown below
for the sites as they existed prior to August 22, 2001.
*Hydraulic Soil Group defined by Natural Resources Conservation Services.
Runoff Curve
Number Hydrologic Soil Group*
A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Grassland 39 61 71 78
Cropland 51 68 78 83
3
(12) BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — A practice, technique, or measure that
is an effective, practical means of preventing or reducing soil erosion or water
pollution, or both, from runoff both during and after land development activities.
These can include structural, vegetative or operational practices.
(13) LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITIES OR USES — Any land changes which may
result in soil erosion, sedimentation and/or the increase in runoff, including but not
limited to filling, removal of ground cover, grading, excavating and filling of land,
except that the term shall not include such minor land-disturbing activities as home
gardens and repair and maintenance of private roads. Additionally, this term does
not include agricultural land uses and wildlife plantings.
(14) PEAK FLOW — The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel,
watercourse or conduit resulting from a predetermined storm or flood.
(15) PUBLIC LANDS — All government owned lands which are subject to regulation
by the Town, including but not limited to:
(a) All lands owned or controlled by the Town;
(b) All lands owned by another unit of government.
(16) SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or ice and
has come to rest on the earth's surface at a different site.
(17) SEDIMENTATION — The transportation and deposition of eroded soils at a site
different from the one where the erosion occurred.
(18) SOIL LOSS — Soil moved from a given site because of land-disturbing activities
or by the forces of erosion and redeposited at another site on land or in a body of
water.
(19) STORM EVENTS — The average period of time which a storm of a given duration
and intensity can be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
(20) STORMWATER RUNOFF — The waters derived from rains falling or snowmelt
or icemelt occurring within a drainage area, flowing over the surface of the ground
and collected in channels, watercourses, or conduits.
(21) STRUCTURAL MEASURES — Works of improvement for land stabilization to
prevent erosion, sedimentation or runoff.
(22) TOWN — The Town of Middleton Town Board.
17.05 Land-disturbing activities subject to control.
4
(1) General requirement. Any owner, occupant or user who undertakes, commences or
performs land-disturbing activities; or who permits another person to do the same,
on land subject to this section, shall be subject to this chapter.
(2) Land-disturbing activities subject to erosion and sediment control. Activities on
public lands and on all private lands shall be subject to this chapter if:
(a) An area of 4,000 square feet or greater will be disturbed resulting in the loss
or removal of protective ground cover or vegetation.
(b) Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof, will exceed 400 cubic yards.
(c) Any public (federal, state or local) street, road or highway is to be
constructed, enlarged, relocated or substantially reconstructed.
(d) Any use by a unit of government or by public or private utilities in which
underground pipe or facilities will be laid, repaired, replaced or enlarged for
a distance over 300 feet.
(e) There is a subdivision of land as defined in Chapter 15 of this Code.
(f) Any land disturbance within the Shoreland Zone, as defined in Dane County
Ordinance Section 11:02(5).
(3) Land disturbing activities subject to on-site detention and runoff control. Activities
on public lands and on all private lands shall be subject to this chapter if:
(a) Development results in the cumulative addition of 20,000 square feet of
impervious surface to the site since August 22, 2001.
(b) New agricultural buildings are constructed and the new total impervious
surface area exceeds 20,000 square feet.
(c) The development requires a subdivision plat.
(d) Commercial or industrial development requires a certified survey map.
(e) Redevelopment exceeds 4,000 square feet of land disturbance where site is
predominantly developed to commercial, industrial, institutional, or
multifamily residential uses.
(f) Other development or redevelopment may have significant downstream
impacts as determined by the Town Engineer.
(4) Shoreland Zoning. Land areas within the Shoreland district as defined by Dane
5
County Ordinance Section 11.02(5) are subject to Dane County’s Shoreland
regulations.
(5) Compliance with this section. The owner, occupant or user shall be in compliance
with this section if the procedure of § 17.09 is followed.
17.06 Reporting on stormwater facilities. [Added 12-15-2008]
(1) Any development or land disturbing activity required to have a recorded
Stormwater Maintenance Agreement per § 14.49(3)(d), Dane County Ordinances,
rev. January 31, 2017 (or similar section in earlier or later versions of the
Ordinances), or any development or land disturbing activity required to record a
Stormwater Maintenance Agreement or Plan by the Town of Middleton or other
regulatory agency (either as part of Covenants and Restrictions for a development
or by other instrument) is subject to biennial reporting of the activities required by
the Stormwater Maintenance Agreement or Plan.
(2) The Landowner or Homeowners' Association must submit a report and certification
to the Town of Middleton in every odd numbered year describing the inspection
and maintenance activities of the stormwater facilities, as required by the
Stormwater Maintenance Agreement, that took place during the previous two years.
The report must be completed by an Engineer or qualified individual suitable to the
Town, and must be submitted to the Town by November 1 of each odd numbered
calendar year. Frequency of the report and contents of the report shall be per Town
of Middleton Stormwater Reporting Guidelines Policy.1 The fee for the report and
certification shall be as indicated on the Town Fee Schedule, if complete reports
are not received by November 1 of each odd numbered calendar year, a penalty (per
the Town Fee Schedule) will be assessed to all owners of the stormwater facilities.
In addition, for those reports not received by the due date, the Town may complete
the report, charge the report fee indicated on the Town Fee Schedule, and assess
the cost to all owners of the stormwater facilities.
17.07 Prohibited acts. Any person, firm or corporation who causes or permits erosion, sediment
deposits, tracking or dropping of dirt on adjacent land, public streets or bodies of water from any
land, whether otherwise subject to this chapter or not, shall be deemed in violation of this chapter
and subject to the penalties provided in § 17.10.
17.08 Standards and criteria.
(1) Standard for erosion and sediment control for land-disturbing activities. Plans will
not be approved nor permits issued unless erosion and sedimentation leaving the
site during and after the land disturbance will not exceed that which would have
eroded if the land had been left in its undisturbed state and/or are controlled in
accordance with established procedures, including but not limited to, "Minimizing
1. Editor's Note: The Stormwater Reporting Guidelines Policy is included at the end of this chapter.
6
Erosion in Urbanizing Areas" or other technical guidelines as developed by Dane
County Land Conservation District in cooperation with the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
(2) Standards for on-site detention and runoff control for land-disturbing activities.
Activities subject to on-site detention and runoff control regulation under this
chapter shall accomplish the following:
(a) Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the 1-year, 24 hour storm
event (2.49 inches over 24-hour duration using NRCS MSE4 storm
distribution).
(b) Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the 2-year, 24 hour storm
event (2.84 inches over 24-hour duration using NRCS MSE4 storm
distribution).
(c) Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the 5-year, 24 hour storm
event (3.49 inches over 24-hour duration using NRCS MSE4 storm
distribution).
(d) Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the 10-year, 24 hour storm
event (4.09 inches over 24-hour duration using NRCS MSE4 storm
distribution).
(e) Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the 25-year, 24 hour storm
event (5.01 inches over 24-hour duration using NRCS MSE4 storm
distribution).
(f) Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the 100-year, 24 hour storm
event (6.66 inches over 24-hour duration using NRCS MSE4 storm
distribution).
(3) Design Requirements for Public Improvements. In addition to meeting the
requirements of this chapter, land disturbing activities and sites requiring
stormwater management shall meet the requirements of the Design Requirements
for Public Improvements document which is developed, modified, and approved,
from time to time by the Town Board and which is incorporated in this chapter by
reference.
(4) Design criteria engineering standards and general principals.
(a) The applicant for a permit may employ any structural or nonstructural
measures necessary to achieve all applicable standards set out in this
Chapter provided these measures shall meet accepted design criteria and
engineering standards.
7
(b) The following general principles shall be used when evaluating control
plans and granting permits under this chapter:
(i) The smallest area of land shall be exposed for the shortest period of
any given time during development.
(ii) The rough grading of the lot shall include backfilling the basement
and all excess earth shall be hauled off the lot.
(iii) Accommodation of the increased runoff caused by changed soil and
surface conditions during and after development.
(iv) Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed prior
to final acceptance.
(v) The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soils of
the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created.
(vi) Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected and shall be
deemed a dominating factor in developing the site and temporary
vegetation, mulching or other cover shall be used to protect the area
exposed during the land-disturbing activity.
17.09 Application and issuance of permits.
(1) Permit required; procedure and fee.
(a) Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, no owner, occupant or user
may undertake an activity subject to this chapter without receiving a permit.
Each owner, occupant or user desiring to undertake a regulated activity
subject to this chapter shall submit an application for a permit together with
the appropriate fee. The permit fee shall be as indicated on the Town Fee
Schedule.
(b) Exceptions to this requirement are as follows:
(i) No permit fee shall be assessed against public lands unless those
public lands are being developed for private purposes.
(ii) The Town may enter into an agreement with public or private
utilities and governmental agencies to waive the need for a permit
for each individual activity upon their written agreement to comply
with this chapter.
(iii) Any subdivision of land as defined by the subdivision regulations of
the Town of Middleton shall reimburse the Town for actual costs
incurred for administration of this Chapter related to the subdivision,
8
in lieu of the permit fee.
(2) Control plan required.
(a) Unless specifically exempted by this chapter, every applicant for a permit
shall submit a plan to control erosion, sedimentation and runoff that would
result from the proposed activity.
(b) Permit applicants are exempted from the requirement of the submission of
a control plan if the proposed activity is on 1/4 acre or less of land, and the
permit devices to implement all the control techniques which are necessary
to meet all the applicable standards in § 17.08.
(3) Contents of the control plan. The Control Plan required by Subsection B shall
contain such information as needed to determine soil erosion, sedimentation and
runoff control:
(a) A map of the site location showing the location of the predominant soil
types.
(b) An existing topographic map with a maximum of one foot contour intervals
of the site location, including the contiguous properties, existing drainage
patterns and watercourses affected by the proposed development of the site
and the existing vegetative cover.
(c) A proposed plan of the site showing:
(i) Name, address and telephone number of the occupant and party
responsible for maintaining erosion control.
(ii) Limits of natural floodplain(s), based on a one-hundred-year flood,
if any.
(iii) A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion
dates of the development sequence.
(iv) Proposed topography of the site location with a maximum of one
foot contour intervals showing:
1. Location of activity, disturbance of protective cover, any
additional structure on the site, areas to be seeded or
mulched, areas to be vegetatively stabilized and areas to be
left undisturbed.
2. Elevations, dimensions, location of all activities including
where topsoil will be stockpiled.
9
3. The finished grade, stated in feet horizontal to feet vertical,
of cut and fill slopes.
4. Kinds of utilities and areas of installation, including special
erosion control practices for utility installation.
5. Impervious areas in square feet or to scale on a plan map for
each watershed.
6. Existing and proposed culvert sizes, drainage area map for
each culvert.
7. Proposed watershed size for each drainage area.
8. Cross section of and profiles of channels, swales, and
ditches.
(v) Provisions to prevent tracking material off-site onto public streets
during construction.
(vi) Copies of permits and permit applications required by any other
agencies.
(vii) Proposed limits of disturbance.
(d) Hydraulic computations for all structural or nonstructural measures or other
protective devices to be constructed in connection with the proposed work
showing:
(i) Estimated rate of discharge in cubic feet per second at all structural
or nonstructural measures and at the point of discharge from the site
location for the one- through one-hundred-year frequency storm
event after development.
(ii) Estimated rate of discharge in cubic feet per second from the site for
the one- through one-hundred-year frequency storm event prior to
development.
(iii) Provisions to carry runoff to the nearest adequate outlet.
(iv) Design computations and applicable assumptions for all structural
measures for erosion and sediment pollution control and water
management. Volume and velocity of flow must be given for all
surface water conveyance measures and pipe outfalls.
(e) Provisions for perpetual maintenance of control facilities including
10
easements.
(4) Review of application.
(a) The Administrative Authority shall review all permit applications
accompanied by the control plan, if required, and the appropriate fee and
shall determine if measures are adequate to meet all the applicable standards
as set out in § 17.08. The determination shall be made within 15 work days
from receipt of the completed application. The applicant will be informed
in writing whether the control plan is approved, disapproved and modified
or if additional information is required. Failure to render a written decision
within 15 work days shall be deemed an approval of the plan as submitted,
and the applicant may proceed as if a permit has been issued.
(b) In the event that the plan is disapproved, the applicant may resubmit a new
control plan or may appeal the Administrative Authority's decision as
provided in § 17.11. No additional permit fee is required.
(5) Permit; conditions. All permits under this chapter shall be issued subject to the
following conditions and requirements:
(a) All land disturbances will be done pursuant to the approved control plan.
(b) The permittee gives two working days’ notice to the Town Office in
advance of the start of any activity.
(c) The permittee shall file a notice with the Town Office within 10 work days
after completion of land-disturbing activities.
(d) Approval in writing must be obtained prior to any modifications to the
approved control plan.
(e) The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining all proposed public
roads, road rights-of-way, streets, runoff and drainage facilities and
drainage ways as specified in the approved plan until they are accepted and
become the responsibility of the Town.
(f) The permittee shall be responsible, at permittee's expense, for repairing any
damage to all adjoining surfaces and drainage ways caused by runoff and/or
sedimentation resulting from permittee's activities.
(g) The permittee shall provide and install at permittee's expense all drainage,
runoff control and erosion control improvements as required by this chapter
and the approved control plan and shall provide perpetual maintenance on
all these private control facilities.
11
(h) No portion of the land which is disturbed will be allowed to remain
uncovered for greater than 7 days after notice is given that the activity is
completed.
(i) The permittee agrees to permit the Administrative Authority to enter onto
the land regulated under this chapter for the purpose of inspecting for
compliance with the approved control plan and permit.
(j) The permittee authorizes the Administrative Authority to perform any work
or operations necessary to bring the condition of the lands into conformity
with the approved control plan and further consents to the Town collecting
the total of the costs and expenses of such work and operations as a special
charge against the property for current services rendered as provided by law.
(k) The permittee shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, each site following
any one-half inch (1/2”) rainfall in any twenty-four (24) hour period. Such
inspections shall ensure compliance with the control plan.
(6) Permit duration. Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period of six
months from the date of issuance. The Administrative Authority is authorized to
extend the expiration date of the permit. The Administrative Authority is authorized
to modify the plans to prevent any increase in sedimentation, erosion or runoff
resulting from any extension.
17.10 Violations and penalties.
(1) General penalty. Unless otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to
a penalty, which shall be as follows:
(a) First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100 nor more than
$500, together with the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the County
Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
(b) Second or subsequent offense. Any person found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter who shall previously have been convicted of a
violation of the same provision within one year shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 for each such
offense, together with costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the County
Jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not exceeding
six months.
(c) Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or
12
occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this chapter shall
preclude the Town from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or
remove a violation of any provision of this chapter.
(d) Other remedies. The Town shall have any and all other remedies afforded
by the Wisconsin Statutes in addition to the forfeitures and costs of
prosecution above. In any such action, the fact that a permit was issued shall
not constitute a defense, nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty
on the part of the Administrative Authority, or the Administrative
Authority's designee, or other Town officials constitute a defense.
(2) Enforcement by injunction. Compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance may
also be enforced by injunction at the suit of the Town of Middleton.
(3) Performance of work by the Administrative Authority. Where it is found that any
of the provisions of this chapter are not being observed on particular lands, the
Administrative Authority is hereby authorized to require the owner, occupant or
user to perform the work or Best Management Practices within 10 working days of
receipt of written notice of deficiency by the Town or the Town’s designee and to
order that if the owner, occupant or user fails to perform, the Administrative
Authority may go on the land and bring the condition of said lands into conformity
with the requirements of this chapter and recover the costs and expenses thereof
from the owner. In the event that the owner fails to pay the amount due, it shall be
collected as a special charge for current services rendered upon the property as
provided by law.
17.11 Appeals.
(1) Authority. The Town Board shall:
(a) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Administrative
Authority in administering this chapter.
(b) Authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of
this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to
special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will
result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be
observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done.
Such variance may be granted to two or more property owners, including
governmental agencies that submit one runoff control plan for two or more
parcels of land. In the event it is in the interest of the Town of Middleton to
participate with another property owner(s) in a runoff control plan and
contribute available stormwater detention capacity, or construct stormwater
detention on Town lands, the other participant(s) shall reimburse the Town
an amount equal to the value of the Town lands used but not less than the
13
fair market value of unimproved lands plus the estimated construction cost
of the detention capacity that would have been required of the other
participant(s) to serve their lands in order to comply with this chapter.
(2) Procedure. The rules, procedures, duties and powers of the Town Board shall apply
to appeals under this chapter.
(3) Who may appeal. Appeals may be taken by any person, firm or corporation
aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or commission of the Town of
Middleton affected by the order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Administrative Authority. For the purpose of this chapter, "aggrieved person"
shall include applicants and property owners who own land that is subject to this
chapter.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Board of the Town of Middleton 8-2-2004 as Title 10, Ch.
3 of the 2004 Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
14
TOWN OF MIDDLETON -STORMWATER REPORTING GUIDELINES POLICY
Original Adoption Date: 12/15/08 Last
Updated: 1/21/14
This document lists the required contents of the report for each type of stormwater
facility and the frequency of required reporting for each type of facility. This document
does not list the inspection and maintenance requirements of each facility. Note: The
frequency of the reports may differ from the frequency of required inspection and
maintenance activities.
These stormwater reporting guidelines shall be followed for any development within the
Town of Middleton subject to the requirements of Chapter 17 of the Town's Code of
Ordinances.
Reports must contain:
• The date of the previous report.
• Records of all inspection and maintenance activities occurring since the
previous report.
• A written assessment of all inspection and maintenance activities occurring
since the previous report.
• Photographs and any other backup documentation the inspector feels is necessary.
A. Dry Detention Basins: Reports due every odd calendar year.
B. Wet Detention Basins: Reports due every odd calendar year.
C. lnfiltration Facilities (Includes Rain Gardens): Reports due every odd calendar year.
D. Bioretention Facilities: Reports due every odd calendar year.
E. Storm Sewer System: Reports due every odd calendar year.
F. Culverts: This includes erosion protection at end sections. Reports due every odd
calendar year.
G. Swales and Drainways: Reports due every odd calendar year.
Town of Middleton - Stormwater Reporting Guidelines Policy
Page 1 of 1
1
CHAPTER 18
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED
HOME COMMUNITIES
18.01 Definitions.
18.02 Permitted uses and structures.
18.03 Mobile and manufactured homes limited to parks only.
18.04 Mobile and Manufactured Home Community license and application.
18.05 Inspection and enforcement.
18.06 Mobile and Manufactured Home Community Standards.
18.07 Water supply.
18.08 Waste and garbage disposal.
18.09 Number of spaces per parcel.
18.10 Operation of mobile and manufactured Home communities; responsibilities of park
management.
18.11 Responsibilities and duties of Mobile and Manufactured Home Community
occupants.
18.12 Additional regulations.
18.13 Compliance with plumbing, electrical and building ordinances.
18.14 Limitations on signs.
18.15 Standards for general site planning for mobile and manufactured home communities.
18.01 Definitions.
(1) The following definitions are used in this chapter:
(a) LICENSEE or OPERATOR — Any person licensed to operate and
maintain a Mobile and Manufactured Home Community under this chapter.
(b) LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Town of Middleton.
(c) MANUFACTURED HOME --- has the meaning given in Wis. Stat.
sec. 101.91(2) and includes any additions, attachments, annexes,
foundations, and appurtenances.
(d) MOBILE HOME ---has the meaning given in Wis. Stat.
sec. 101.91(10) and includes any additions, attachments, annexes,
foundations, and appurtenances.
(e) MOBILE AND MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOME
COMMUNITY —Any plot or plots of ground upon which 3 or more
manufactured homes or mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping
purposes, are located, regardless of whether a charge is made for the
accommodation. "Mobile and Mobile and Manufactured Home
2
Community" shall not include automobile or mobile home sales lots on
which unoccupied mobile or manufactured homes are parked for the sole
purpose of inspection and sale.
(f) MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION — A parcel
of land platted for subdivision according to all requirements of Chapter 15,
Land Division and Subdivision, of this Code and the Town comprehensive
plan, designed or intended for lots to be conveyed by deed to individual
owners for residential occupancy primarily by mobile and/or manufactured
homes.
(g) PERSON — An individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, or
trust, whether owner, lessee, licensee or their agent, heir or assignee.
(h) RECREATIONAL MOBILE HOME --- A prefabricated structure that is no
larger than 400 square feet, or that is certified by the manufacturer as
complying with the code promulgated by the American National Standards
Institute as ANSI A119.5, and that is designed to be towed and used
primarily as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal purposes.
(i) SPACE — A plot of ground within a Mobile and Mobile and Manufactured
Home Community designed for the accommodation of one mobile or
manufactured home.
(j) UNIT — A single mobile or manufactured home.
(2) STATUTORY DEFINITIONS. In addition to the above definitions, definitions
contained in § 66.0435 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall also be applicable.
18.02 Permitted uses and structures. The following principal uses and structures are permitted
within Mobile and Manufactured Home Communities:
(1) Single-family manufactured or mobile homes. In mobile and manufactured home
communities, recreational vehicles, including recreational mobile homes, shall not
be occupied as living quarters and sales lots shall not be permitted, but dwellings
may be sold on lots they occupy in residential use.
(2) Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures that are customarily
accessory and clearly incidental to permitted principal uses and structures shall be
permitted, except for those requiring specific approval as provided below.
(3) Rental. No Mobile and Manufactured Home Community site shall be rented for a
period of less than 30 days.
18.03 Mobile and manufactured homes limited to parks only.
3
(1) It shall be unlawful, except as provided in this chapter, for any person to park or
use any mobile or manufactured home on any street, alley, highway or road or other
public place, or on any parcel of land or other space within the Town of Middleton.
(2) No person shall park, locate or place any mobile or manufactured home outside of
a licensed Mobile and Manufactured Home Community in the Town of Middleton,
except that unoccupied manufactured or mobile homes may be parked on the
lawfully situated premises of a licensed dealer for the purposes of sale display; the
lawfully situated premises of a vehicle service business for purposes of servicing
or making necessary repairs; the premises leased or owned by the owner of such
manufactured or mobile home for purposes of sale display for a period not
exceeding 120 days, provided no business is carried on therein, or in an accessory
private garage, building or rear yard of the owner of such manufactured or mobile
home, provided no business is carried on therein. Recreational vehicles may be
parked on residential or agricultural parcels provided that they are not inhabited for
more than 14 days.
(3) Units constructed prior to 1974 are prohibited.
18.04 Mobile and Manufactured Home Community license and application.
(1) As provided under § 18.08, it shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate
or maintain, or permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property
owned, leased or controlled by said person a Mobile and Manufactured Home
Community within the limits of the Town of Middleton without first having
obtained a license for each such community from the Town Board pursuant to this
chapter. Such license shall expire on the second June 30th after the date of issuance
but may be renewed under the provisions of this chapter for additional two-year
periods commencing July 1 of the renewal year.
(2) No license shall be issued or renewed by the Town of Middleton until a state license
has been issued to the licensee as required under Wis. Stat. sec. 101.935 and
remains in full force and effect.
(3) The application for such license or the renewal shall be accompanied by a fee of $2
for each space in the existing or proposed Mobile and Manufactured home
community, provided that the minimum fee shall not be less than $25, and surety
bond in the amount of $5,000, which shall guarantee:
(a) The collection by the licensee of any monthly parking permit fee required
by the Town and the payment of such fees to the Town Treasurer;
(b) The payment by the licensee of any fine or forfeiture, including legal costs
imposed upon or levied against said licensee for a violation of the
ordinances of the said Town pursuant to which said license is granted, and
4
shall also be for the use and benefit, and may be prosecuted and recovery
had thereon, by any person who may be injured or damaged by reason of
the licensee violating the provisions of this chapter.
(4) The application for a license or a renewal thereof shall be made on forms furnished
by the Town Clerk and shall include the name and address of the owner in fee of
the lands upon which said Mobile and Manufactured Home Community is to be
located (if the fee is vested in some person other than the applicant, a duly verified
statement by that person that the applicant is authorized by him or her to construct
or maintain the Mobile and Manufactured Home Community and to apply for a
license), and the location and legal description of the premises upon which the
Mobile and Manufactured Home Community is to be or is located as will readily
identify and definitely locate the premises.
(a) The application shall be accompanied by two copies of the complete Mobile
and Manufactured Home Community plan showing the following, either
existing or as proposed:
(i) The extent and area used for mobile and Mobile and Manufactured
Home Community purposes;
(ii) Roadways and driveways;
(iii) Location of space for homes;
(iv) Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets,
washrooms, laundries and utility rooms to be used by occupants of
spaces;
(v) Method and plan of sewage disposal;
(vi) Method and plan of garbage removal;
(vii) Plan for water supply;
(viii) Plan for lighting of spaces;
(ix) Plan for rubbish disposal;
(x) Designated green space for leisure activities;
(xi) All other matters required of this chapter.
(b) The plans shall clearly set forth the location of all sewer and water pipes
and connections.
5
(5) Every licensee shall furnish the Town and Town Assessor with information on
mobile homes added to the community within five days after their arrival on forms
prescribed by the Department of Revenue.
(6) Review and Approval of Mobile and Manufactured Home Community
(a) Preliminary Consultation
(i) The Applicant shall complete a preliminary consultation with the
Plan Commission and the Town Engineer regarding general
subdivision requirements before filing a plan. The Land Divider
shall inform the Town in writing of the proposed Community and
shall request information on meeting dates, agenda deadlines and
filing requirements.
(ii) The Applicant shall, at the time of preliminary consultation, submit
a location map showing the relationship of the proposed Community
to traffic arteries and existing community facilities.
(iii) The Preliminary Consultation is intended to inform the Applicant of
the purpose and objectives of these ordinances, the Town Land Use
Plan and duly adopted plan implementation devices of the Town and
to otherwise assist the Applicant in planning the proposed
Community. The Preliminary Consultation is also designed to
provide the Plan Commission with information regarding the
potential impact of the contemplated Community.
(iv) The Plan Commission and the Applicant may reach non-binding
mutual conclusions regarding the general program and objectives of
the proposed Community and its potential impact and effects on the
neighborhood and community during the Preliminary Consultation.
(v) If it is determined during preliminary consultation that the Town
will incur out-of-pocket expenses from the Town Engineer, Town
Attorney or otherwise with regard to review of the concept plan, the
Applicant shall submit to the Town a deposit of $1,000 to be applied
to Town expenses. Should the Town’s fees and expenses exceed the
initial deposit during review of the concept plan, the Applicant shall
submit an additional $1,000 as a deposit. The Applicant shall be
responsible for all Town expenses, even if they exceed the amount
of the deposit(s). The Applicant shall sign an Agreement with the
Town accepting responsibility for all said costs.
(b) Submission of A Mobile Home and Manufactured Home Community
6
(i) An Application for Mobile and Manufactured Home Community
shall be completed as detailed in § 18.08.
(ii) Administrative Fees:
1. Applicant shall pay for all fees as hereinafter at the time
specified before entitled to an approved Application.
2. Engineering fees. The Applicant shall pay a fee equal to the
actual cost to the Town for all engineering and technical
assistance work incurred by the Town in connection with the
Application, including inspections required by the Town to
determine the quality and potential acceptance of
improvements and the compliance with provisions of the
Developer Agreement and Restrictive Covenants which the
Town may have an interest in. The Applicant shall pay a fee
equal to the actual cost to the Town for such inspection as
the Town Board deems necessary to assure that the
construction of the required improvements is in compliance
with the plans, specifications and ordinances of the Town
and any other governmental agency.
3. Legal fees. The Applicant shall pay a fee equal to the actual
cost to the Town for all legal fees and costs incurred by the
Town in connection with the Application, including
acceptance of improvements and the compliance with
provisions of the Developer Agreement and Restrictive
Covenants in which the Town may have an interest. Such
legal services include, but are not limited to, conferences,
review and preparation of documents, and consultations with
the Applicant or the Town.
4. Administrative fees. The Applicant shall pay a fee equal to
the cost of any administrative or fiscal work, publication and
special meeting costs which may be incurred or undertaken
by the Town in connection with the Application or
acceptance of improvements and the compliance with
provisions of the Developer Agreement and Restrictive
Covenants in which the Town may have an interest.
5. Application review fees. The Applicant shall pay fees for
Town review of the Application as established by resolution
of the Town Board.
6. Escrow account.
7
a. At the time of filing with the Town an Application,
the Applicant shall deposit with the Town an escrow
fund amount of $10,000. As required at the sole
discretion of the Town Board, funds may be drawn
against such escrow accounts for the payment of
engineering, legal, administrative and other costs
incurred by the Town in reviewing the proposed
Community.
b. Monies not required for such engineering, legal,
administrative and other costs shall be returned to the
Applicant within 180 days of final acceptance of all
improvements required by the Town and compliance
with all provisions of the Developer Agreement and
provisions of the Restrictive Covenants to which the
Town may be a party. If Town costs exceed the initial
amount deposited in the escrow account, the Town
shall require the Applicant to deposit an additional
amount in the escrow account.
c. Escrow amounts may not reflect final costs for
review, and in fact could vary significantly based on
the size and complexity of the proposed Community.
(c) Plan Commission and Park Commission recommendations.
(i) After the preliminary consultation, an initial review of the
application, and negotiations with the Applicant regarding changes
and the kind and extent of Public Improvements which will be
required, the Plan Commission and Park Commission shall
recommend to the Town Board disapproval, approval or conditional
approval of the Application.
(ii) The Town shall give notice of the Plan Commission's and Park
Commission’s review of the Application by listing it as an agenda
item in the Plan and Park Commissions’ posted meeting notices. The
notice shall include the name of the Applicant, the address of the
property proposed to for a Mobile Home or Manufactured Home
Community and the requested action.
(iii) Town Board review; public hearing. The Town shall schedule a
public hearing on the Application before the Town Board. The
Town shall give notice of the Town Board's review and public
hearing on the Application by listing it as an agenda item in the
Board's posted meeting notice. The Applicant shall also be notified
in writing. The meeting notice shall include the name of the
8
Applicant, the address of the property in question and the requested
action. Abutting property Owners and property Owners within 600
feet of the Applicant's total Parcel shall receive written notice of the
public hearing.
(7) Licenses granted under this section shall be subject to revocation or suspension by
the governing body for cause in accordance with § 66.0435, Wis. Stats., and the
procedures in that Section shall be followed. "Cause" as used in this subsection,
shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Failure or neglect to abide by the requirements of this chapter or the laws or
regulations of the State of Wisconsin relating to mobile and manufactured
home communities and their operation.
(b) Conviction of any offense under the laws of the State or Ordinances of the
Town relating to fraudulent or misleading advertising or deceptive practices
regarding the sale or renting of manufactured or mobile homes or the leasing
or rental of manufactured or mobile home spaces or sale, lease or operation
of park facilities.
(c) Operation or maintenance of the Mobile and Manufactured Home
Community in a manner inimical to the health, safety or welfare of park
occupants or the inhabitants of the Town including, but not limited to,
repeated violations of laws or ordinances relating to health, sanitation,
refuse disposal, fire hazards or morals.
(d) Transfer or sale of an ownership interest in any space or the underlying land
other than to another eligible licensee. Such action shall also subject the
owner of the underlying land to all requirements of the state or municipal
subdivision control laws and regulations regardless of the size or number of
lots or spaces so transferred or sold.
(e) Loss of the licensee’s state license, whether through lapse, suspension,
termination or any other means.
18.05 Inspection and enforcement.
No Mobile and Manufactured Home Community license shall be issued until the Town Board, or
its designee, shall have inspected and reviewed for compliance with this chapter each application
and the premises on which mobile or manufactured homes will be located to ensure compliance
with the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. No license will be renewed without
a re-inspection of the premises. For the purposes of making inspections and securing the
enforcement of this chapter, such officials or their authorized agents shall have the right and are
hereby empowered to enter on any premises on which a manufactured or mobile home is located,
or about to be located, and to inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith at any
reasonable time.
9
18.06 Mobile and Manufactured Home Community Standards.
(1) Each space within a Mobile and Manufactured Home Community shall be clearly
defined and shall contain at least 5,000 square feet of land area for the exclusive
use of the occupant; such space shall be no less than 40 feet in width and no less
than 100 feet in depth. Each mobile or manufactured home shall equal one Dwelling
Unit for park dedication and open space requirements as outlined in Chapter 15 of
these ordinances. The area occupied by a mobile or manufactured home shall not
exceed 50% of the total area of the space (including any awnings, carports, vehicles
or attachments thereto). Each space shall be landscaped in accordance with the
plans approved by the Town Board. The Mobile and Manufactured Home
Community shall be so arranged that all spaces shall face or abut on an approved
public roadway giving easy access thereto. Each space shall have a paved off-street
parking space of 10 feet by 20 feet for an automobile. The yard shall be landscaped
except for necessary driveway and sidewalk needs, which shall not exceed 1/2 the
width of the space. Temporary storage shall not be allowed on lawn areas.
(2) Roadways within the Mobile and Manufactured Home Community shall be at least
66 feet in width and shall be surfaced to Town specifications. Mobile and
Manufactured Home Community parking spaces shall be paved.
(3) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces surfaced with bituminous concrete or
similar material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds shall be provided
for each space within the Mobile and Manufactured Home Community. Each
Mobile and Manufactured Home Community shall maintain paved off-street
parking lots for guests of occupants in the amount of one parking space for each
space. Such parking shall be located within 300 feet of the mobile and
manufactured homes to be served.
(4) Each space shall be properly landscaped with at least one tree and hedges, grass,
fences, windbreaks and the like. All Mobile and Manufactured Home Communities
shall have a greenbelt or buffer strip not less than 20 feet wide along all boundaries.
Unless adequately screened by existing vegetative cover, all Mobile and
Manufactured Home Communities shall be provided within such greenbelt or
buffer strip with screening of natural growth or screen fence, except where the
adjoining property is also a Mobile and Manufactured Home Community.
Compliance with this requirement shall be made within one year from the granting
of the Mobile and Manufactured Home Community developer's permit. Permanent
planting shall be grown and maintained at a height of not less than six feet.
(5) No mobile or manufactured home shall be parked closer than five feet to the side
lot lines nor closer than 20 feet to the front lot line or within 25 feet of the rear lot
line.
(6) There shall be an open space of at least 10 feet between the sides of adjacent mobile
10
or manufactured homes. Automobiles may park no closer than five feet to the side
of any mobile or manufactured home; automobiles shall not, however, be parked
nearer than five feet to any side lot line.
(7) No tents shall be erected or occupied on any space, and there shall be no outdoor
camping anywhere in the Mobile and Manufactured Home Community.
(8) All units must be connected to public water and sanitary sewer systems, and plans
for disposal of surface stormwater shall be approved by the Town Board.
Stormwater Management facilities shall meet the requirements of Chapter 17 and
the Design Requirements for Public Improvements.
(9) Every space shall be furnished with an electric service outlet. Such outlet shall be
equipped with an externally operated switch or fuse with not less than 60 amperes
capacity and a heavy-duty outlet receptacle. All utility lines shall be placed
underground.
(10) No mobile or manufactured home shall be parked in a Mobile and Manufactured
Home Community outside of a designated space therein.
(11) Each space shall contain a paved area upon which said mobile or manufactured
home is to be placed. Said paved area shall be at least as large as the home that is
to be placed thereon.
(12) Park land dedication requirements
(a) Dedication requirement. In order that adequate open spaces and sites for
public uses may be properly located and reserved and in order that the cost
of providing public facilities, such as but not limited to, parks, playgrounds,
land for athletic fields, and recreation areas may be equitably apportioned
on the basis of additional need created by the Community, each Applicant
shall be required to dedicate land or pay fees in lieu of land for park or other
public uses.
(b) Findings.
(i) The Town finds that additional residential development directly
produces a need for more open space, recreational facilities, athletic
fields, parks, and playgrounds.
(ii) The Town has been advised that there exist nationally recognized
standards for community parkland, recreational space and facilities,
and capital investment in athletic fields and parkland. Pursuant to
these standards, and with additional input from the public, the Town
has created a plan for future park and recreational facilities, and has
projected the cost of realizing those facilities. The Town finds that
11
a substantial portion of the capital costs and land acquisition
expenses will be incurred by the Town in order to meet the needs
created by new Development in the Town.
(iii) The Town finds that there is a direct causal relationship between
additional Development and the need for additional public parks,
recreational land, playgrounds, and athletic fields. The extent of the
demand for such additional facilities has been reasonably estimated
in the Town's plans, and the dedications or fees imposed under this
ordinance are proportional to the impact of the developments.
(iv) Dedication calculation. When land within the Town of Middleton is
divided or improved into a Mobile Home or Manufactured Home
Community, a parkland and/or conservancy area dedication of 5,000
square feet of land per Lot or Dwelling Unit created, whichever is
greater, shall be required.
(v) Fee in lieu of dedication. In areas where land dedication is not
desired by the Town, a fee pursuant to the Town fee schedule times
the number of Lots or number of approved Dwelling Units,
whichever is greater, shall be required. Where the land dedication
desired by the Town is less than 5,000 square feet of land per Lot or
Dwelling Unit, a pro rata fee will be required. Where the
Community does not specify the number of Dwelling Units to be
constructed, the land dedication shall be based upon the maximum
number of units permitted by the Dane County Zoning Chapter and
this chapter.
(vi) Collection of fee; security. The fee imposed in subs. (v), above shall
be the responsibility of the Applicant.
1. Except as provide in (2) below, fees in Lieu of dedication
shall be paid according to the following:
a. For Mobile Home and Manufactured Home Communities
containing 50 Lots or Dwellings Units or fewer, all fees
shall be paid prior to the Town executing a Developer
Agreement and prior to a building permit being issued.
b. For Mobile Home and Manufactured Home Communities
containing more than 50 Lots or Dwelling Units, the
Applicant shall, at his/her option, either:
i. Pay all fees prior to the Town executing the
Developer Agreement, or
12
ii. Pay the fees for 50 new Lots or Dwelling Units
prior to the Town executing the Developer
Agreement, and pay for the next 50 Lots or
Dwelling Units (or remaining balance of fee if
the Community contains fewer than 100 Lots or
Dwelling Units, or the Community contains
some parkland dedication) within 12 months of
the date the final plan approval is given by the
Town, and pay for all remaining fees, if any,
within 24 months of the date the final plan is
approved by the Town. Any payments in default
shall accrue interest at the rate of 18% per
annum. The fees for at least 50 lots shall be paid
prior to a building permit being issued.
2. In the event the fee imposed in subs. (v) above exceeds
$75,000, the Applicant may defer payment of the impact fees
for a period of 4 years from the date of the issuance of the
building permit or until 6 months before the Town incurs the
costs to construct, expand, or improve the public facilities
related to the Development, whichever is earlier. If the
Applicant elects to defer payment under this paragraph, the
Applicant shall maintain in force a bond or irrevocable letter
of credit in the amount of the unpaid fees executed in the
name of the Town.
3. As surety, the letter of surety required by the Developer
Agreement shall be increased as necessary to cover the
balance of outstanding park fees at the time the Developer
Agreement is signed by the Town. The Town may make a
demand on the surety, including interest, if payment is more
than 15 days late. On an annual basis, the surety can be
reduced as additional park fees are paid.
4. In addition, prior to the time the Developer Agreement is
executed by the Town, the Owner(s) of the Community shall
execute and deliver a mortgage of such land and in such
amount for which park fees are unpaid to the Town of
Middleton as additional collateral. The Town shall execute
and deliver to the Owner, or Owner's designated agent, an
individual Lot release upon receipt of the park fee payment
for each such Lot.
(vii) Land dedication or fee in lieu of dedication determination. The
determination of whether land dedication, fees in lieu of land
dedication or a combination thereof will be required shall be at the
13
sole discretion of the Town Board, with the advice of the Park
Commission.
(viii) Fund maintenance/disbursement. The Town shall collect any fees
assessed pursuant to this section and shall maintain and disburse the
fees collected for the purposes contained herein and in § 15.46(6).
The fees received shall be held in the "Park Development Fund"
account. The fees in this account must be expended for the purposes
for which they were imposed.
(ix) General design. In the design of the Community, provision shall be
made for suitable sites of adequate area for parks, playgrounds,
athletic fields, open spaces, drainage ways, Recreational Trails,
conservancy areas, and other public facilities. Such sites are to be
shown on the plans contained in the Application, and shall comply
with the Town of Middleton Master Plan, Comprehensive Outdoor
Recreation Plan, Recreational Trails Plan and any other plan
affecting public areas adopted by the Town Board, or components
of said plans. Consideration shall be given to the preservation of
scenic and historic sites, stands of trees, marshes, lakes, ponds,
streams, watercourses, watersheds, ravines and woodlands, prairie
and Wetlands, and plant and wildlife communities.
18.07 Water supply.
(1) An adequate supply of pure water furnished through a pipe distribution system
connected directly with the public water main shall be furnished for drinking and
domestic service in all Mobile and Manufactured Home Communities.
(2) Individual water service connections provided for direct use of each unit shall be
so constructed that they will not be damaged by the parking of such unit. Such
system shall be adequate to provide 20 pounds per square inch pressure and capable
of furnishing a minimum of 125 gallons of water per day per space.
(3) No common drinking vessels shall be permitted, nor shall any drinking water
faucets be placed in any toilet room.
(4) Water service installation shall conform with all statutory and regulatory
requirements including, but not limited to Wis. Stat. secs. 101.935, 101.937 and
101.96, and Wis. Admin Code Chapters SPS 321 and 326, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
18.08 Waste and garbage disposal.
(1) All liquid wastes from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets, lavatories, etc., shall be
discharged into a sewer system.
14
(2) Every space shall be provided with waste disposal connections that shall comply
with all applicable state plumbing codes. The sewer connections shall be provided
with suitable fitting so that watertight connections can be made. Such connections
shall be so constructed so that they can be closed when not connected and trapped
in such a manner as to be maintained in an odor-free condition.
(3) All sanitary facilities in any unit that are not connected with a public sewer system
by approved pipe connections shall be sealed and their use is hereby declared
unlawful.
(4) Mobile and Manufactured Home Community residents shall comply with all Town
refuse disposal and recycling requirements.
18.09 Number of spaces per parcel.
(1) There shall be at least three spaces in each Mobile and Manufactured Home
Community and no more than 50 spaces; all requirements of this chapter for the
issuance of a license shall be complied with prior to the issuance of such license.
All accommodations required by this chapter shall be based upon the total park
capacity according to the accepted plans.
(2) Mobile and manufactured homes shall not be placed in campgrounds. A travel
trailer shall not be parked and left unoccupied anywhere in the Town for more than
five days.
(3) Mobile homes and manufactured homes shall be installed in accordance with all
applicable codes.
18.10 Operation of mobile and manufactured Home communities; responsibilities of park
management.
(1) In every Mobile and Manufactured Home Community there shall be located an
office of the attendant or person in charge of said park. A copy of the state and town
licenses and a copy of this chapter shall be posted therein and the community
register shall at all times be kept in said office. A fire number shall be assigned to
each Mobile and Manufactured Home Community, with a lot number assigned to
each individual space.
(2) The attendant or person in charge and the community licensee shall operate the
community in compliance with this chapter and regulations and Ordinances of the
Town and State and their agents or officers and shall have the following duties:
(a) Maintain a register of all community occupants, to be open at all times to
inspection by state, federal and municipal officers, which shall show:
15
(i) Names and addresses of all owners and occupants of each mobile or
manufactured home.
(ii) Number of children of school age.
(iii) State of legal residence.
(iv) Dates of entrance and departure of each mobile or manufactured
home.
(v) Make, model, year and serial number of each mobile or
manufactured home.
(b) Notify occupants of the provisions of this chapter and inform them of their
duties and responsibilities and report promptly to the proper authorities any
violations of this chapter or any other violations of law that may come to
their attention.
(c) Report to Town authorities all cases of persons or animals affected or
suspected of being affected with any dangerous communicable disease.
(d) Ensure that the placement of each home on its stand complies with all
applicable codes and is installed by a licensed installer, when required.
(e) Maintain community grounds, buildings and structures free of insect and
rodent harborage and infestation and accumulations of debris that may
provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other
pests.
(f) Maintain the community free from growth of noxious weeds.
(g) Maintain the community free of litter, rubbish and other flammable
materials; provide portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the Fire
Chief in all locations designated by the Chief and maintain such
extinguishers in good operating condition and cause every area within the
park designated as a fire lane by the Fire Chief to be kept free and clear of
obstructions.
(h) Check to ensure that every unit has furnished, and in operation, a
substantial, flytight, watertight, rodent-proof container for the deposit of
garbage and refuse in accordance with the ordinances of the containers so
designed as to prevent tipping and minimize spillage and container
deterioration and facilitate cleaning.
(i) Provide for the sanitary and safe removal and disposal of all refuse and
garbage at least weekly. Removal and disposal of garbage and refuse shall
16
be in accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin and the Ordinances
and regulations of the Town.
(j) Collect a security deposit equal to three months' parking fee for each
occupied nonexempt mobile home within the park and remit such fees and
deposits to the Town Clerk.
(k) Allow inspections of the premises and facilities at reasonable times by
municipal officials or their agents or employees.
18.11 Responsibilities and duties of Mobile and Manufactured Home Community
occupants.
(1) Occupants shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter and
regulations issued hereunder and shall maintain their space, its facilities and
equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) Occupants shall be responsible for proper installation of their units as required by
state law and administrative regulation.
(3) No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other pet animal shall permit it to run
at large or to cause any nuisance within the limits of any Mobile and Manufactured
Home Community.
(4) Each owner or occupant of a nonexempt mobile home within a Mobile and
Manufactured Home Community shall remit to the licensee or authorized
community management the cash deposit and monthly parking permit fee.
(5) It shall be the duty of every occupant to give the park licensee or management, or
his or her agent or employee, access to any part of the community or unit at
reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with this chapter or any law or Ordinance of the
State or Town or lawful regulation or order adopted thereunder.
(6) Units shall be parked only in the space provided and shall be installed in accordance
with all requirements of law.
(7) No home owner or occupant shall conduct in any unit or any Mobile and
Manufactured Home Community any business or engage in any other activity that
would not be permitted in single-family residential areas in the Town.
(8) No person shall discharge any wastewater on the surface of the ground within any
Mobile and Manufactured Home Community.
(9) No person shall erect or place upon any space any permanent or temporary structure
intended to be used for dwelling purposes or in connection with any unit except as
17
specifically authorized by this chapter.
18.12 Additional regulations.
(1) Wrecked, damaged or dilapidated units shall not be kept or stored in a Mobile and
Manufactured Home Community or upon any premises in the Town. The Town
Board shall determine if a unit is damaged or dilapidated to a point which makes it
unfit for human occupancy. Such units are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
Whenever the Town Board so determines, it shall notify the licensee or landowner
and owner of the unit in writing that such public nuisance exists within the
community or on lands owned by him or her, giving the owner(s) findings upon
which this determination is based and shall order such unit removed from the
community or site or repaired to a safe, sanitary and wholesome condition of
occupancy within a reasonable time, but not less than 30 days.
(2) The Town Board or its lawful agents or employees are authorized and directed to
inspect Mobile and Manufactured Home Communities not less than once in every
twelve-month period to determine the health, safety and welfare of the occupants
of the community and inhabitants of the Town as affected thereby and the
compliance of structures and activities therein with this chapter and all other
applicable laws of the State and ordinances of the Town.
(3) Fires in Mobile and Manufactured Home Community shall be made only in stoves
and other cooking or heating equipment intended for such purposes. Outside
burning is prohibited except by permit and subject to requirements or restrictions
of the Fire Chief.
(4) All plumbing, building, electrical, oil or gas distribution, alterations or repairs in
the park shall be in accordance with the regulations of applicable laws, ordinances
and regulations of the State and municipality and their authorized agents.
(5) All mobile homes in Mobile and Manufactured Home Communities shall be
installed as required by state law and administrative regulation.
(6) Storage under units is prohibited.
18.13 Compliance with plumbing, electrical and building ordinances.
All plumbing, electric, electrical, building and other work on or at any Mobile and Manufactured
Home Community under this chapter shall be in accordance with the Ordinances of the Town and
the requirements of state law and administrative regulations as the same may be amended from
time to time. Licenses and permits granted under this chapter grant no right to install or repair any
structure, to do any plumbing work or to do any electric work.
18.14 Limitations on signs.
18
(1) In connection with Mobile and Manufactured Home Communities under this
chapter, no sign intended to be read from any public way adjoining the community
shall be permitted except:
(a) No more than one identification sign, not exceeding 20 square feet in area,
for each principal entrance.
(b) No more than one sign, not exceeding four square feet in area, advertising
property for sale, lease or rent, or indicating "Vacancy" or "No Vacancy",
may be erected at each principal entrance.
(c) In the case of new communities consisting in whole or in part of mobile or
manufactured home subdivisions or condominiums, one sign, not exceeding
20 square feet in area, may be erected for a period of not more than two
years at each principal entrance to advertise the sale of lots or dwellings.
(2) No source of illumination for any such signs shall be directly visible from adjoining
streets or residential property, and no such signs shall be erected within five feet of
any exterior property line.
18.15 Standards for general site planning for mobile and manufactured home communities.
In addition to meeting the requirements of §16.05(3)(a), the following guides, standards and
requirement shall apply in site planning for mobile and manufactured home communities:
(1) Principal vehicular access points. Principal vehicular access points shall be
designed to encourage smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and
minimum hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Merging and turnout lanes
and/or traffic dividers shall be required where existing or anticipated heavy flows
indicate need. In general, minor streets shall not be connected with streets outside
the district in such a way as to encourage the use of such minor streets by substantial
amounts of through traffic. No lot within the community shall have direct vehicular
access to a street bordering the development.
(2) Access for pedestrians and cyclists. Access for pedestrians and cyclists entering or
leaving the community shall be by safe and convenient routes. Such ways need not
be adjacent to or limited to the vicinity of vehicular access points. Where there are
crossings of such ways and vehicular routes at edges of planned developments, such
crossings shall be safely located, marked and controlled and where such ways are
exposed to substantial vehicular traffic at edges of communities, safeguards may
be required to prevent crossings except at designated points. Bicycle paths, if
provided, shall be so related to the pedestrian way system that street crossings are
combined.
(3) Exterior yards for Mobile and Manufactured Home Communities; minimum
requirements; occupancy. The following requirements and limitations shall apply
19
to yards at the outer edges of mobile home communities:
(a) Along public streets. Where Mobile and Manufactured Home Communities
adjoin public streets along exterior boundaries, a yard at least 25 feet in
minimum dimensions shall be provided adjacent to such streets. Such yard
may be used to satisfy open space depth requirements for individual
dwellings but shall not contain carports, recreational shelters, storage
structures or any other structures generally prohibited in yards adjacent to
streets in residential districts. No direct vehicular access to individual lots
shall be permitted through such yards, and no group parking facilities or
active recreation areas shall be allowed therein.
(b) At edges of Mobile and Manufactured Home Communities (other than at
streets or alleys). Where Mobile and Manufactured Home Communities are
so located that one or more boundaries are at the edges of Mobile and
Manufactured Home Communities and adjoining neighboring districts
without an intervening street alley or other permanent open space at least
20 feet in width, an exterior yard at least 20 feet in minimum dimension
shall be provided. Where the adjoining area is residential, the same
limitations on occupancy and use of such yards shall apply as stated above
concerning yards along public streets. Where the adjoining area is
nonresidential, such yards may be used for group or individual parking,
active recreation facilities or carports, recreational shelters or storage
structures.
(4) Ways for pedestrians and/or cyclists in exterior yards. In any exterior yard, required
or other, ways for pedestrians and/or cyclists may be permitted, if appropriately
located, fenced or landscaped to prevent potential hazards arising from vehicular
traffic on adjacent streets or other hazards and annoyances to users or to occupants
of adjoining property. When otherwise in accord with the requirements concerning
such ways set forth above, approved ways in such locations shall be counted as
common recreation facilities and may also be used for utilities easements.
(5) Yards, fences, walls or vegetative screening at edges of Mobile and Manufactured
Home Communities. Along the edges of Mobile and Manufactured Home
Communities, walls or vegetative screening shall be provided where needed to
protect residents from undesirable views, lighting, noise, or other off-site influences
or to protect occupants of adjoining residential districts from potentially adverse
influences within the mobile home community. In particular, extensive off-street
parking areas and service areas for loading and unloading other than passenger
vehicles, and for storage and collection of trash and garbage, shall be screened.
(6) Internal relationships. The site plan shall provide for safe, efficient, convenient and
harmonious groupings of structures, uses and facilities, and for appropriate relation
of space inside and outside buildings to intended uses and structural features. In
particular:
20
(a) Streets, drives and parking and service areas. Streets, drives and parking and
service areas shall provide safe and convenient access to dwellings and
community facilities and for service and emergency vehicles, but streets
shall not be so laid out as to encourage outside traffic to traverse the
community, nor occupy more land than is required to provide access as
indicated, nor create unnecessary fragmentation of the community into
small blocks. In general, block size shall be the maximum consistent with
use, the shape of the site and the convenience and safety of the occupants.
(b) Vehicular access to streets. Vehicular access to streets from off-street
parking areas may be direct from up to 5 dwellings if the street is classified
as a local street. Along arterial or collector streets, access from parking and
service areas shall be so combined, limited, located, designed and controlled
as to channel traffic conveniently, safely and in a manner that minimizes
marginal traffic friction, and vehicular access from individual dwellings
shall generally be prohibited.
(c) Ways for pedestrians and cyclists; use by emergency, maintenance or
service vehicles.
(i) Walkways shall form a logical, safe and convenient system for
pedestrian access to all dwellings, project facilities and principal offstreet
pedestrian destinations. Maximum walking distance in the
open between dwelling units and related parking spaces, delivery
areas and trash and garbage storage areas intended for use of
occupants shall not exceed 100 feet.
(ii) Walkways to be used by substantial numbers of children as play
areas and safeguarded as to minimize contracts with normal
automotive traffic. If an internal walkway system is provided, away
from streets, bicycle paths shall be incorporated in the walkway
system. Street crossings shall be held to a minimum on such
walkways and shall be located and designated to provide safety and
shall be appropriately marked and otherwise safeguarded. Ways for
pedestrians and cyclists, appropriately located, designed and
constructed may be combined with other easements and used by
emergency, maintenance or service vehicles but shall not be used by
other automotive traffic.
1
CHAPTER 19
REGULATION OF WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
19.01 Purpose, intent and applicability.
19.02 Definitions.
19.03 Permits and Application Process
19.04 Conditions for Approval.
19.05 Written Decision.
19.06 Post-Approval Obligations.
19.07 Change of Ownership and Modifications.
19.08 Monitoring Compliance.
19.09 Complaint Process.
19.10 Permit Revocation.
19.11 Fees.
19.01 Purpose, intent and applicability. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a regulatory
scheme for the construction and operation of Wind Energy Systems in the Town of Middleton,
Dane County, Wisconsin. Chapter is adopted pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0401 and PSC 128. All
regulations contained herein are adopted to preserve and protect the public health and safety.
19.02 Definitions
(1) Wind Energy System: Has the meaning given in Wis. Stat. § 66.0403(1)(m) and is
used to convert wind energy to electrical energy. “Wind Energy System” includes
Small Wind Energy Systems. The provisions of Subchapter VI of PSC 128 are
incorporated by reference and shall apply to Small Wind Energy Systems.
(2) Small Wind Energy System: A Wind Energy System that has a total installed
nameplate capacity of 300 kilowatts or less and that consists of individual wind
turbines that have an installed nameplate capacity of not more than 100 kilowatts.
(3) Other Definitions: The remaining definitions set forth in PSC 128.01 are
incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein.
(4) PSC 128: Chapter PSC 128 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
19.03 Permits and Application Process
(1) No Wind Energy System may be installed, constructed or expanded in the Town
without a Wind Energy System Permit granted pursuant to this Chapter.
(2) Every application for a Wind Energy System Permit shall be made in writing and
shall include the following information:
2
(a) Wind Energy System description and maps showing the locations of all
proposed wind energy facilities.
(b) Technical description of wind turbines and wind turbine sites.
(c) Timeline and process for constructing the Wind Energy System.
(d) Information regarding anticipated impact of the Wind Energy System on
local infrastructure.
(e) Information regarding noise anticipated to be attributable to the Wind
Energy System.
(f) Information regarding shadow flicker anticipated to be attributable to the
Wind Energy System.
(g) Information regarding the anticipated effects of the Wind Energy System
on existing land uses within 0.5 mile of the Wind Energy System.
(h) Information regarding the anticipated effects of the Wind Energy System
on airports and air space.
(i) Information regarding the anticipated effects of the Wind Energy System
on line-of-sight communications.
(j) A list of all state and federal permits required to construct and operate the
Wind Energy System.
(k) Information regarding the planned use and modification of roads within the
Town during the construction, operation, and decommissioning of the Wind
Energy System, including a process for assessing road damage caused by
Wind Energy System activities and for conducting road repairs at the
owner’s expense.
(l) A copy of all emergency plans developed in collaboration with appropriate
first responders under PSC 128.18(4)(b). An owner may file plans using
confidential filing procedures as necessary.
(m) A decommissioning and site restoration plan providing reasonable
assurances that the owner will be able to comply with PSC 128.19.
(n) A representative copy of all notices issued under Subsection 9.03(5) and
PSC 128.105(1)(a) and 128.42(1).
(o) Any other information necessary to understand the construction, operation
or decommissioning of the proposed Wind Energy System.
3
(3) The owner shall certify that the information contained in an application is accurate.
(4) The applicant shall file an original and three copies of the application with the
Town. One copy shall be an electronic copy. Each copy shall include, but is not
limited to, all worksheets, maps and other attachments included in the application.
(5) Notice to Property Owners and Residents.
(a) On the same day an owner files an application for a Wind Energy System,
the owner shall, under Wis. Stat. § 660.0401(4)(a)3., use commercially
reasonable methods to provide written notice of the filing of the application
to property owners and residents located within one mile of the proposed
location of any wind energy system facility. At the same time, a copy shall
be provided to the Town. The notification shall include all of the following:
(i) A complete description of the Wind Energy System, including the
number and size of the wind turbines.
(ii) A map showing the locations of all proposed Wind Energy System
facilities.
(iii) The proposed timeline for construction and operation of the Wind
Energy System.
(iv) Locations where the application is available for public review.
(v) Owner contact information.
(b) After the Town receives an application for a Wind Energy System, the
Town shall publish the notice required by Wis. Stat., § 66.0401(4)(a)(1),
which shall include a brief description of the proposed Wind Energy System
and its proposed location, the locations where the application is available
for public review, the method and time period for the submission of public
comments to the Town, and the approximate schedule for review of the
application by the Town.
(6) Public Participation.
(a) The Town shall make a copy of an application for a Wind Energy System
available for public review at a local library and at the Town Hall and the
Town website.
(b) The Town shall accept written public comments on an application for a
Wind Energy System filed with the Town Clerk and shall make them part
of the record at the public hearing held pursuant to subsection (c).
4
(c) The Town shall hold at least one public meeting to obtain comments on and
to inform the public about a proposed Wind Energy System.
(7) If a Wind Energy System is proposed to be located in the Town and at least one
other municipality with jurisdiction over the Wind Energy System, the Town may
participate in the joint application review process set forth in PSC 128.30(7).
(8) Application Completeness:
(a) Complete Applications.
(i) An application is complete if it meets the filing requirements set by
this Chapter and PSC 128.50(1).
(ii) The Town shall determine the completeness of an application, and
shall notify the owner in writing of the completeness determination,
no later than 45 days after the day the application is filed. An
application is considered filed the day the owner notifies the Town
in writing that all the application materials have been filed. If the
Town determines that the application is incomplete, the notice
provided to the owner shall state the reasons for the determination.
(iii) The owner may file a supplement to an application that the Town
has determined to be incomplete. There is no limit to the number of
times that an owner may re-file an application. For incomplete
applications, the owner shall provide additional information as
specified in the notice under par. (a)(ii).
(iv) An additional 45-day completeness review period shall begin the
day after the Town receives responses to all items identified in the
notice under par. (a)(ii).
(v) If the Town does not make a completeness determination within the
applicable review period, the application is considered to be
complete.
(b) Requests for Additional Information. The Town may request additional
information necessary to understand the wind energy system after
determining that an application is complete. An owner shall provide
additional information in response to all reasonable requests. An owner
shall respond to all inquiries made subsequent to a determination of
completeness in a timely, complete and accurate manner.
(9) Pursuant to PSC 128.10(1), the Town incorporates by reference all owner
requirements set forth in Subchapter II of PSC 128.
5
19.04 Conditions for Approval. The Town requires the following conditions for approval of an
application to construct a Wind Energy System:
(1) Information from other agencies. The owner shall inform the Town in writing
whether the owner has consulted with and received any non-binding
recommendations for constructing, operating or decommissioning the Wind Energy
System from a state or federal agency, and whether the owner has incorporated such
non-binding recommendations into the design of the Wind Energy System.
(2) Studies. The owner shall cooperate with any study of the effects of Wind Energy
System coordinated by a state agency.
(3) Monetary Compensation. The owner of a Wind Energy System shall offer an
agreement that includes annual monetary compensation to the owner of
nonparticipating residence, if the residence is located within 0.5 mile of a
constructed wind turbine. For one turbine located within 0.5 mile of a
nonparticipating residence, the initial annual monetary compensation shall be $600.
For two turbines located within 0.5 mile of a nonparticipating residence, the initial
annual monetary compensation shall be $800. For three or more turbines located
within 0.5 mile of a nonparticipating residence, the initial annual monetary
compensation shall be $1,250. The initial amounts shall increase each year by the
greater of two percent or the increase in the Consumer Price Index, as described in
Wis. Stat., § 196.374(5)(bm)2.b., from the previous year. An agreement offered
under this subsection shall specify in writing any waiver of a requirement or right
under PSC 128 and whether the landowner’s acceptance of payment establishes the
landowner’s property as a participating property under PSC 128.
(4) Aerial Spraying. The owner of a Wind Energy System shall offer an agreement
that includes monetary compensation to a farm operator farming on a
nonparticipating property located within 0.5 mile of a constructed wind turbine if
the farm operator demonstrates all of the following:
(a) Substantial evidence of a history, before the wind energy system owner
gives notice under s. PSC 128.105(1), of using aerial spraying for pest
control or disease prevention for growing potatoes, peas, snap beans or
sweet corn on all or part of a farm field located within 0.5 mile of a
constructed wind turbine.
(b) A material reduction in potato, pea, snap beans or sweet corn production or
a material increase in application costs on all or part of a farm field located
within 0.5 mile of a constructed wind turbine as a results of the wind energy
system’s effect on aerial spraying practices.
(5) Permits. The owner shall submit to the Town copies of all necessary county, state,
and federal permits and approvals.
6
(6) Annual Reports. The owner shall file an annual report with the Town documenting
the operation and maintenance of the Wind Energy System during the previous
calendar year.
(7) Safety Notifications. It is the owners’ obligation to notify the Town of any recalls
or safety notices that have been issued by the manufacturer.
19.05 Written Decision.
(1) The Town shall issue a written decision to grant or deny an application. The Town
shall provide its written decision to the owner and to the Public Service
Commission of Wisconsin. If the Town approves an application for a wind energy
system, the Town shall provide the owner with a duplicate original of the decision.
(2) The owner shall record the duplicate original of a decision approving an application
with the register of deeds for Dane County, Wisconsin.
(3) The Town shall keep a complete written record of its decision-making relating to
an application for a Wind Energy System. The record of a decision shall include
all of the following:
(a) The approved application and all additions or amendments to the
application.
(b) A representative copy of all notices issued under ss. PSC 128.105(1)(a),
128.30(5) and 128.42(1).
(c) A copy of any notice or correspondence that the Town issues related to the
application.
(d) A record of any public meeting under s. PSC 128.30(6)(c) and any hearing
related to the application. The record may be an electronic recording, a
transcript prepared from an electronic recording, or a transcript prepared by
a court reporter or stenographer. The record shall include any documents
or evidence submitted by meeting or hearing participants.
(e) Copies of any correspondence or evidentiary material that the Town
considered in relation to the application, including copies of all written
public comments filed under s. PSC 128.30(6)(b).
(f) Minutes of any Town Board, council or committee meetings held to
consider or act on the application.
(g) A copy of the written decision under s. PSC 128.32(3)(a).
7
(h) Other materials that the Town prepared to document its decision-making
process.
(i) A copy of any Town ordinance cited in or applicable to the decision.
(4) If the Town denies an application, the Town shall keep the record for at least 7
years following the year in which it issues the decision.
(5) If the Town approves an application, the Town shall keep the record for at least 7
years after the year in which the Wind Energy System is decommissioned.
19.06 Post-Approval Obligations. Within 90 days of the date a Wind Energy System
commences operation, the owner shall file with the Town an as-built description of the Wind
Energy System, an accurate map of the Wind Energy System showing the location of all Wind
Energy System facilities, geographic information system information showing the location of all
Wind Energy System facilities and current information identifying the owner of the Wind Energy
System. An owner shall in the filings under this subsection label each win turbine location with a
unique identifier consistent with the information posted at the wind turbine location under s. PSC
128.18(1)(g).
19.07 Change of Ownership and Modifications.
(1) Approval of a Wind Energy System remains in effect if there is a change in
ownership of the Wind Energy System. However, a Wind Energy System owner
must provide timely notice to the Town of any change of ownership of the Wind
Energy System.
(2) Modifications to an Approved Wind Energy System.
(a) An owner may not make a material change in the approved design, location
or construction of a wind energy system without the prior written approval
of the Town, unless the Town automatically approves the material change
by taking either of the steps specified in s. PSC 128.32(2)(b)1. or 2.
(b) An owner shall submit to the Town an application for a material change to
an approved Wind Energy System.
(3) Review Limited.
(a) The Town, upon notice of receiving an application for a material change to
a Wind Energy System under Subsection (2) above, shall not reopen the
merits of the earlier approval but shall consider only those issues relevant
to the proposed change.
(b) An application for a material change is subject to ss. PSC 128.30(1), (3) to
(5), (6)(a) and (b) and (7) and 128.31 to 128.34.
8
(c) An application for a material change shall contain information necessary to
understand the material change as determined by the Town.
(d) The Town may hold at least one public meeting to obtain comments on and
to inform the public about a proposed material change to an approved wind
energy system.
19.08 Monitoring Compliance.
(1) Monitoring Procedure. The Town may establish a procedure to monitor
compliance by the owner with any condition on an approved Wind Energy System
or to assess when Wind Energy System facilities are not maintained in good repair
and operating condition. The procedure may include timelines, provide for
payment of reasonable fees for conducting an assessment, and provide for
notification to the public. Such procedures shall be included in the permits granted
under this Chapter.
(2) Third-Party Inspector During Construction. The Town may require an owner to
pay a reasonable fee for a third-party inspector to monitor and report to the Town
regarding the owner’s compliance with permit requirements during construction.
An inspector monitoring compliance under this subsection shall also report to a
state permitting authority upon the state permitting authority’s request.
19.09 Complaint Process.
(1) Notice of Process for Making Complaints. Before construction of a Wind Energy
System begins, an owner shall provide written notice of the process for making
complaints and obtaining mitigation measures to all residents and landowners
within 0.5 mile of any Wind Energy System facility. An owner shall include in the
notice the requirements under PSC 128.401(1) for submitting a complaint to the
owner, a petition for review to the Town, and an appeal to the Commission, and
shall include a contact person and telephone number for the owner for receipt of
complaints or concerns during construction, operation, maintenance, and
decommissioning.
(2) Notice to Town. An owner shall provide a copy of the notice provided under
subsection (1) to the Town, and the owner shall keep the contact person and
telephone number current and on file with the Town.
19.10 Permit Revocation. Any permit granted for the installation, construction or expansion of
a Wind Energy System may be revoked by the Town if the permit holder, its heirs, or
assigns, violates the provisions of this Chapter or the provisions of a Wind Energy System
Permit granted pursuant to this Chapter.
9
19.11 Fees.
(1) The Town requires at the time of the application a deposit of $5,000. All costs
incurred by the Town relating to the review and processing of the application shall
be billed against the deposit and a minimum of $2,000 shall remain in the account
until the review process and construction (if approved) is completed. The Town
will refund any remaining balance in the account within 60 days after the final
inspection of the constructed wind energy system.
(2) The Town’s fee or reimbursement requirement under par. (1) is based on the actual
and necessary cost of the review of the Wind Energy System application, and may
include the cost of services necessary to review an application that are provided by
outside engineers, attorneys, planners, environmental specialists, and other
consultants or experts.
1
CHAPTER 20
CABLE TELEVISION
20.01 Short title.
20.02 Definitions.
20.03 Rights and privileges of grantee.
20.04 Agreement and incorporation of application by reference.
20.05 Franchise territory.
20.06 Duration and acceptance of franchise.
20.07 Franchise renewal.
20.08 Police powers.
20.09 Cable television franchise required.
20.10 Use of grantee facilities.
20.11 Initial franchise costs.
20.12 Notices.
20.13 Letter of credit/security deposit.
20.14 Construction performance bond.
20.15 Liability and insurance.
20.16 Indemnification.
20.17 Rights of individuals.
20.18 Public notice.
20.19 Service availability and record request.
20.20 System construction.
20.21 Construction and technical standards.
20.22 Use of streets.
20.23. Operational standards.
20.24. Customer service standards.
20.25 Continuity of service mandatory.
20.26. Complaint procedure.
20.27 Grantee rules and regulations.
20.28 Franchise fee.
20.29 Transfer of ownership or control.
20.30 Availability of books and records.
20.31 Other petitions and applications.
20.32 Fiscal reports.
20.33 Removal of cable television system.
20.34 Required services and facilities.
20.35 Rules and regulations.
20.36 Performance evaluation sessions.
20.37 Rate change procedures.
20.38 Forfeiture and termination.
20.39 Foreclosure.
20.40 Approval of transfer and right of acquisition by the Town.
2
20.41 Receivership.
20.42 Compliance with state and federal laws.
20.43 Landlord/tenant.
20.44 Applicants' bids for initial franchise.
20.45 Financial, contractual, shareholder and system disclosure for initial franchises.
20.46 Damages.
20.47 Procedures.
20.48 Force majeure.
20.01 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Middleton Cable Television Franchise
Ordinance," hereinafter "Franchise" or "Chapter."
20.02 Definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. "May" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory.
(1) BASIC SERVICE — All Subscriber services provided by the Grantee in 1 or more
service tiers, which includes the delivery of local broadcast stations, and public,
educational and government access channels. Basic Service does not include
optional program and satellite service tiers, a la carte services, per channel, per
program, or auxiliary services for which a separate charge is made. However,
Grantee may include other satellite signals on the Basic Service tier.
(2) CABLE SERVICE
(a)The one-way transmission to subscribers of:
(i) Video programming; or
(ii) Other programming services; and
(b) Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such
video programming or other programming services.
(3) CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM or CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM — A facility,
consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service which
includes video programming and which is provided to multiple Subscribers within
a community, but such term does not include:
(a) A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more
television broadcast stations;
(b) A facility that serves Subscribers without using any public right-of-way;
3
(c) A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the
provisions of Title II of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (the “Act”),
except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System [other than for
purposes of Section 621(c) of the Act] to the extent such facility is used in
transmission of video programming directly to Subscribers; or
(d) Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility system.
(4) CLASS IV CHANNEL — A signaling path provided by a cable communications
system to transmit signals of any type from a Subscriber terminal to another point
in the cable communications system.
(5) CONTROL or CONTROLLING INTEREST — Actual working control or
ownership of a System in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption of
the existence of Control or a Controlling Interest shall arise from the ownership,
directly or indirectly, by any person or legal entity (except underwriters during the
period in which they are offering securities to the public) of 25% or more of a Cable
System or the Franchise under which the System is operated. A change in the
Control or Controlling Interest of a legal entity which has Control or a Controlling
Interest in a Grantee shall constitute a change in the Control or Controlling Interest
of the System under the same criteria. Control or Controlling Interest as used herein
may be held simultaneously by more than one person or legal entity.
(6) CONVERTER — An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not
susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a Subscriber, and by an
appropriate channel selector also permits a Subscriber to view more than 12
channels delivered by the System at designated converter dial locations.
(7) DWELLING UNIT — Any building or part of a building that is used as a home or
residence.
(8) FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed,
designated or elected agent or successor.
(9) FRANCHISE — An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the Town,
as the franchising authority, to a Grantee to construct or operate a Cable System.
(10) FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — A contractual agreement entered into between the
Town and any Grantee hereunder that is enforceable by the Town and by the
Grantee, and which sets forth the rights and obligations between the Town and the
Grantee in connection with the Franchise.
(11) GRANTEE — A person or legal entity to whom or to which a Franchise under this
Chapter is granted by the Town, along with the lawful successors or assigns of such
4
person or entity.
(12) GROSS REVENUES
(a) All revenue collected by the Grantee, arising from or attributable to the
provision of cable, cable modem, high speed data, and internet services by
the Grantee within the Town including, but not limited to: periodic fees
charged Subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, per-channel or perprogram
service; franchise fees; installation and reconnection fees; leased
channel fees; converter rentals and/or sales; program guide revenues; late
or administrative fees; upgrade, downgrade or other change-in-service fees;
local advertising revenues; revenues from home shopping and bank-athome
channels; revenues from the sale, exchange, use or cable cast of any
programming, cable modem, high speed data or internet service developed
on the System for community or institutional use; provided, however, that
this shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the Grantee herein
imposed directly upon any Subscriber or User by the state, local or other
governmental unit and collected by the Grantee on behalf of the
governmental unit.
(b) Gross revenues shall not include revenues received from the provision of
Internet service over the cable system until such time as the law allows such
revenues to be included in gross revenues for the purpose of calculating
franchise fees.
(13) INITIAL SERVICE AREA — All areas in the Town having a density of at least40
dwelling units per street mile.
(14) INSTALLATION — The connection of the System from feeder cable to a
Subscriber's terminal.
(15) LOCAL ADVERTISING REVENUES — Local and regional advertising revenues
derived from the sale of locally and regionally inserted advertising, except such
advertising sold by or through Grantee's national representative firm.
(16) MONITORING — Observing a communications signal, or the absence of a signal,
where the observer is neither the Subscriber nor the programmer, whether the signal
is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever; provided
monitoring shall not include system-wide, non-individually addressed sweeps of
the System for purposes of verifying System integrity, controlling return paths
transmissions, or billing for pay services.
(17) NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — As applied to the Grantee shall mean those
hours during which similar businesses in the Town are open to serve customers. In
all cases, Normal Business Hours must include some evening hours at least one
5
night per week, and/or some weekend hours.
(18) NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those service conditions that are
within the control of the Grantee. Those conditions that are not within the control
of the Grantee include, but are not limited to: natural disasters, civil disturbances,
power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather
conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the Grantee
include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate
increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of
the Cable System.
(19) PERSON — Any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint stock
company, limited liability company, joint venture, corporation, or other legally
recognized entity, private or public, whether for-profit or not-for-profit.
(20) SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of either picture or sound or both for a
single or multiple Subscriber(s).
(21) STREET — The surface of and all rights-of-way and the space above and below
any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, sidewalk,
alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or easement now or hereafter held by the
Town for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rightsof-
way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the Town which shall, within their
proper use and meaning entitle the Grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of
installing poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes,
amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily
necessary and pertinent to a Cable Television System.
(22) SUBSCRIBER — Any person(s), firm, Grantee, corporation or other legal entity,
or association lawfully receiving any service provided by a Grantee pursuant to this
Chapter.
(23) TOWN — The Town of Middleton, Wisconsin.
(24) USER — A party utilizing a Cable Television System channel for purposes of
production or transmission of material to Subscribers, as contrasted with receipt
thereof in a Subscriber capacity.
20.03 Rights and privileges of grantee. Any Franchise granted by the Town pursuant to §
66.082, Wis. Stats.,1 shall grant to the Grantee the right and privilege to erect, construct, operate
and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets now in existence and as
may be created or established during the term of the Franchise any poles, wires, cable, underground
conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance
1. Editor's Note: Section 66.082 was renumbered § 66.0419 by 1999 Act 150. Section 66.0419 was repealed by 2007 Act 42 with the
exception of Subsection (3m) which was renumbered § 66.0420(12).
6
and operation of a Cable System.
20.04. Agreement and incorporation of application by reference.
(1) Upon adoption of any Franchise Agreement and execution thereof by the Grantee,
the Grantee agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions contained herein.
(2) Any Grantee also agrees to provide all services specifically set forth in its
application and to provide cable television service within the confines of the Town;
and by its acceptance of the Franchise, the Grantee specifically grants and agrees
that its application is thereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the
Franchise.
20.05 Franchise territory. A Franchise may be issued by the Town and to a Grantee for the
entire geographic territory of the Town, for all areas henceforth added to the Town during the term
of a Franchise, or for only a portion of those areas. The “Franchise Area” of a Grantee shall be
that portion of the geographic territory of the Town that the Grantee agrees to serve under a
Franchise Agreement with the Town (“Initial Service Area”) as well as any additional areas within
the Town which the Grantee elects to serve or for which the Grantee is required to extend service
pursuant to Section 20.20(1) of this Chapter.
20.06 Duration and acceptance of franchise. Any Franchise and the rights, privileges and
authority granted under this Chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after final Town
approval thereof, as provided by law, and shall continue in force and effect for a term of no longer
than 12 years, provided that within 7 days after the date of final Town approval of the Franchise
the Grantee shall file with the Town its unconditional acceptance of the Franchise and promise to
comply with and abide by all its provisions, terms and conditions. Such acceptance and promise
shall be in writing duly executed and sworn to, by, or on behalf of the Grantee before a notary
public or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths. Such Franchise shall be nonexclusive
and revocable.
20.07 Franchise renewal.
(1) Current federal procedures and standards pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546, shall govern
the renewal of any Franchise awarded under this Chapter.
(2) In the event that any or all of the applicable provisions of federal law are repealed
or otherwise modified, the following relevant section(s) shall apply:
(a) At least 24 months prior to the expiration of the Franchise, the Grantee shall
inform the Town in writing of its intent to seek renewal of the Franchise.
(b) The Grantee shall submit a proposal for renewal that demonstrates:
(i) That it has been and continues to be in substantial compliance with
7
the terms, conditions, and limitations of this Chapter and its
Franchise;
(ii) That its System has been installed, constructed, maintained and
operated in accordance with the FCC and this Chapter and its
Franchise;
(iii) That it has the legal, technical and financial qualifications to
continue to maintain and operate its System; and
(iv) That it has made a good faith effort to provide services and facilities
which accommodate the demonstrated needs of the community,
taking into account the cost of meeting such needs.
(c) After giving public notice, the Town shall proceed to determine whether the
Grantee has satisfactorily performed its obligations under the Franchise. To
determine satisfactory performance, the Town shall consider technical
developments and performance of the System, cost of services, and any
other particular requirements set forth in this Chapter. The Town shall also
consider the Grantee's reports made to the Town and to the FCC, and the
Town may require the Grantee to make available specified records,
documents, and information for this purpose, and may inquire specifically
whether the Grantee will supply services sufficient to meet future
community needs and interest, taking into account the cost of meeting such
needs. Industry performance on a national basis shall also be considered.
Provisions shall be made for public comment with adequate prior notice of
at least 10 days.
(d) Grantee shall be entitled to the same due process rights included in § 626 of
the Act.
(e) The Town shall then prepare any amendments to this Chapter that it believes
necessary for the exercise of the Town’s police powers.
(f) If the Town finds the Grantee's performance satisfactory, and finds the
Grantee's technical, legal, and financial abilities acceptable, and finds the
Grantee's renewal proposal meets the future cable-related needs of the
Town, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs, a new Franchise
shall be granted pursuant to this Chapter as amended for a period to be
determined.
(g) If the Grantee is determined by the Town to have performed
unsatisfactorily, new applicants may be sought and evaluated and a
Franchise award shall be made by the Town according to franchising
procedures adopted by the Town.
8
20.08 Police powers.
(1) In accepting a Franchise, the Grantee acknowledges that its rights thereunder are
subject to the police power of the Town to adopt and enforce general ordinances
necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees to comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the Town pursuant to such
power.
(2) Any conflict between the provisions of a Franchise and any other current or future
lawful exercise of the Town's police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter,
except that any such exercise that is not of general application in the jurisdiction or
applies exclusively to the Grantee or cable television systems which contains
provisions inconsistent with this Chapter shall prevail only if upon such exercise
the Town finds a danger to health, safety, property or general welfare or if such
exercise is mandated by law.
20.09 Cable television franchise required. No Cable Television System shall be allowed to
operate or to occupy or use the streets for System installation and maintenance purposes without a
Franchise.
20.10 Use of grantee facilities. The Town shall have the right to install and maintain upon the
poles of the Grantee at a charge equal to Grantee's costs any wire or pole fixtures that do not
unreasonably interfere with the Cable Television System operations, including future plans, of the
Grantee. The Town shall indemnify and hold harmless the Grantee from any claim that might arise
due to or as a result of the Town's use.
20.11 Initial franchise costs. Costs to be borne by a Grantee shall include any requirements or
charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of its initial Franchise, but shall not be limited to:
all costs of publications of notices prior to any public meeting provided for pursuant to this
Chapter, and any costs not covered by application fees, incurred by the Town in its study,
preparation of proposal documents, evaluation of all applications, and examinations of the
applicant's qualifications.
20.12 Notices. All notices from the Grantee to the Town pursuant to any Franchise shall be to
the Town Clerk. The Grantee shall maintain with the Town, throughout the term of the Franchise,
an address for service of notices by mail. The Grantee shall maintain a central office to address
any issues relating to operating under this cable television Chapter.
20.13 Letter of credit/security deposit.
(1) Within 15 days after the award of an initial or renewal Franchise, the Grantee shall
deposit with the Town either an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial
institution, security deposit, or a performance bond in the amount of $25,000 with
the form to be established by the Town. The form and content of such letter of
9
credit, security deposit or bond shall be approved by the Town Attorney. These
instruments shall be used to ensure the faithful performance of the Grantee of all
provisions of this Chapter, and to ensure compliance with all orders, permits and
directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division, or office of the
Town having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this Chapter, and to ensure
the payment by the Grantee of any claims, liens, and taxes due the Town which
arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the System.
(2) The letter of credit, security deposit or performance bond shall be maintained at the
amount established in subsection (1) for the entire term of the Franchise, even if
amounts have to be withdrawn pursuant to this Chapter.
(3) If the Grantee fails to pay to the Town any amounts owed under the Franchise
Agreement, that is not on appeal to the court of proper jurisdiction, within the time
fixed herein; or fails after 15 days’ notice to pay to the Town any taxes due and
unpaid; or fails to repay the Town within 15 days, any damages, costs or expenses
which the Town is compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the Grantee
in connection with the Franchise, or fails, after three days’ notice of such failure by
the Town to comply with any provision of the Franchise which the Town
reasonably determines can be remedied by demand on the letter of credit, security
deposit or performance bond, the Town may immediately demand payment of the
amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the letter of credit, security
deposit or performance bond. Upon such demand for payment, the Town shall
notify the Grantee of the amount and date thereof.
(4) The rights reserved to the Town with respect to the letter of credit are in addition
to all other rights of the Town, whether reserved by the Franchise or authorized by
law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such letter of
credit shall affect any other right the Town may have.
(5) The letter of credit, security deposit or performance bond shall contain an
endorsement agreeing that the letter of credit, security deposit or performance bond
may not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the
surety until 30 days after receipt by the Town, by registered mail, of a written notice
of such intention to cancel or not to renew.
(6) In the event the Town receives a 30 day notice from a surety, it shall have the right
to demand payment from the letter of credit, security deposit or performance bond
unless Grantee provides appropriate assurance that a replacement letter of credit,
security deposit or performance bond will be presented before the expiration of the
30 day period. Assurance shall be determined by the Town at its sole discretion.
This section shall not apply if the Town and Grantee agree that a letter of credit,
security deposit or performance bond is no longer required or if the letter of credit,
security deposit or performance bond is, by agreement between the Town and
Grantee, in the process of being reduced.
10
(7) The Town may, at any time during the term of this Chapter, waive the Grantee's
requirement to maintain a letter of credit, security deposit or performance bond.
The waiver of the requirement may be initiated by the Town or may be requested
by the Grantee, but shall be in the Town’s sole discretion.
20.14 Construction performance bond.
(1) Within 30 days after the award of an initial or renewal Franchise, the Grantee shall
file with the Town a performance bond in the amount of not less than 50% of the
costs to install or upgrade the System contained in the application or renewal
proposal in favor of the Town. This bond shall be maintained throughout the
construction period and until such time as determined by the Town, unless
otherwise specified in the Franchise Agreement.
(2) If the Grantee fails to comply with any law, ordinance or resolution governing the
Franchise, or fails to observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of the
Franchise, as it relates to the conditions relative to the construction of the System,
including the Franchise Agreement that is incorporated herein by reference, there
shall be recoverable jointly and severally, from the principal and surety of the bond,
any damages or losses suffered by the Town, including the full amount of any
compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property
of the Grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees, including the Town's
legal staff, and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. This section shall be an
additional remedy for any and all violations outlined in § 20.13.
(3) The Town may, upon completion of construction of the service area, waive or
reduce the requirement of the Grantee to maintain the bond. However, the Town
may require a performance bond to be posted by the Grantee for any construction
subsequent to the completion of the initial service areas, in a reasonable amount not
to exceed the cost of construction and upon such terms as determined by the Town.
(4) The bond shall contain an endorsement stating that the bond may not be canceled
by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 30 days
after receipt by the Town, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intent to
cancel and not to renew.
(5) Upon receipt of a 30 day notice, and following a 30 day period to cure, this shall be
construed as default granting the Town the right to demand payment on the bond.
(6) The Town, at any time during the term of this Chapter, may waive Grantee's
requirement to maintain a performance bond. The waiver of the requirement can be
initiated by the Town or the Grantee.
20.15 Liability and insurance.
11
(1) The Grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the Franchise specifically
agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the Franchise liability insurance
insuring the Town and the Grantee in the minimum amount of:
(a) $1,000,000.00 for property damage to any 1 person;
(b) $3,000,000.00 for property damage from any 1 occurrence;
(c) $1,000,000.00 for personal injury to any 1 person; and
(d) $3,000,000.00 for personal injury from any 1 occurrence.
(2) The certificate of insurance obtained by the Grantee in compliance with this section
shall be filed and maintained with the Town during the term of the Franchise. The
Grantee shall immediately advise the Town Attorney of any litigation that may
develop that would affect this insurance.
(3) Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the Town
thereunder shall be construed to or limit the liability of the Grantee under any
Franchise issued hereunder.
(4) Such insurance policies provided for herein shall name the Grantor, its officers,
boards, commissions and employees as additional insured, and shall be primary to
any insurance carried by the Grantor, and shall contain an endorsement stating that
the insurance policy may not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to
renew be stated by the surety until 30 days after receipt by the Town, by registered
mail, of written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew.
20.16 Indemnification.
(1) Disclaimer of liability. The Town shall not at any time be liable for injury or
damage occurring to any person or property from any cause whatsoever arising out
of the construction, maintenance, repair, use, operation, condition or dismantling
of the Grantee's Cable Television System or due to the act or omission of any person
or legal entity other than the Town or those persons or legal entities for which the
Town is legally liable as a matter of law.
(2) Indemnification. The Grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold
harmless the Town, its respective officers, boards, departments, commissions and
employees (hereinafter referred to as "Indemnitees") from and against:
(a) Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs,
charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees
and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be
12
imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the Indemnitees by reason of
any act or omission of the Grantee, its personnel, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors, resulting in personal injury, bodily injury,
sickness, disease or death to any person or damage to, loss of or destruction
of tangible or intangible property, libel, slander, invasion of privacy and
unauthorized use of any trademark, trade name, copyright, patent, service
mark or any other right of any person, corporation or other legal entity,
which may arise out of or be in any way connected with the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or condition of the Cable Television
System caused by Grantee, its subcontractors or agents or the Grantee's
failure to comply with any federal, state or local law.
(b) Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs,
charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees
and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants) imposed upon
Indemnitees by reason of any claim or lien arising out of work, labor,
materials or supplies provided or supplied to Grantee, its contractors or
subcontractors, for the installation, construction, operation or maintenance
of the Cable Television System. Upon written request by the Town, such
claim or lien shall be discharged or bonded within 15 days following such
request.
(c) Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs,
charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees
and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be
imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the Indemnitees by reason of
any financing or securities offering by Grantee or its Affiliates for violations
of the common law or any laws, statutes or regulations of the State of
Wisconsin or of the United States, including those of the Federal Securities
and Exchange Commission, whether by the Grantee or otherwise; excluding
therefrom, however, claims which are solely based upon and arise solely
out of information supplied by the Town to the Grantee in writing and
included in the offering materials with the express written approval of the
Town prior to the offering.
(3) Assumption of risk.
(a) The Grantee undertakes and assumes for its officers, directors, agents,
contractors and subcontractors and employees all risk of dangerous
conditions, if any, on or about any Town-owned or controlled property,
including public rights-of-way, and the Grantee hereby agrees to indemnify
and hold harmless the Indemnitees against and from any claim asserted or
liability imposed upon the Indemnitees for personal injury or property
damage to any person arising out of the installation, operation, maintenance
or condition of the Cable Television System or the Grantee's failure to
13
comply with any federal, state or local law.
(b) The Town shall hold Grantee harmless for any damages resulting from the
negligence or misconduct of the Grantor or its officials, boards,
departments, commissions or employees in utilizing any PEG access
channels, equipment or facilities.
(4) Defense of indemnitees. In the event any action or proceeding shall be brought
against any or all of the Indemnitees by reason of any matter for which the
Indemnitees are indemnified hereunder, the Grantee shall defend the claim by
counsel reasonably acceptable to the Town,provided, however, that the Town, in
its sole discretion, may participate in the defense of such claims. Such participation
shall not relieve Grantee of its duty to defend against liability or to pay any
judgment entered against such party. Grantee shall not admit liability in any such
matter on behalf of the Indemnitees without the written consent of the Town
Attorney or the Town Attorney's designee.
(5) Notice, cooperation and expenses. The Town shall give the Grantee reasonably
prompt notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any action, suit
or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section. Nothing herein shall
be deemed to prevent the Town from cooperating with the Grantee and participating
in the defense of any litigation by the Town's own counsel at the Town's own
expense. No recovery by the Town of any sum under the Letter of Credit shall be
any limitation upon the liability of the Grantee to the Town under the terms of this
section, except that any sum so received by the Town shall be deducted from any
recovery which the Town might have against the Grantee under the terms of this
section.
(6) Nonwaiver of statutory limits. Nothing in this Chapter is intended to express or
imply a waiver by the Town of statutory provisions, privileges or immunities of
any kind or nature as set forth in Wisconsin Statute § 893.80, et seq., including the
limits of liability of the Town.
20.17 Rights of individuals.
(1) The Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against
Subscribers, channel Users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion,
national origin, income, sex, marital status, sexual preference or age. The Grantee
shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations and all executive and administrative orders relating to
nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this Chapter by
reference.
(2) The Grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements
of the Federal Communications Commission and of state and local governments,
14
and as amended from time to time.
(3) The Grantee shall, at all times, comply with the privacy requirements of state and
federal law.
(4) The Grantee is required to make all services available to all residential dwellings
throughout the service area located in areas having a density of at least 40 dwelling
units per street mile.
20.18 Public notice. Minimum public notice of any public meeting relating to the Franchise shall
be governed by the provisions of the State Open Meetings Law2 and shall be on at least 1 channel
of the Grantee's System between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., for (5 consecutive days
prior to the meeting.
20.19 Service availability and record request. The Grantee shall provide cable television
service throughout the entire Franchise area pursuant to the provisions of the Franchise and shall
keep a record for at least 3 years of all requests for service received by the Grantee. This record
shall be available for public inspection at the local office of the Grantee during regular office hours.
20.20 System construction.
(1) New construction timetable.
(a) Within 2 years from the date of the award of an initial Franchise, the Grantee
must make cable television service available to every dwelling unit within
the initial service area.
(i) The Grantee must make cable television service available to at least
20% of the dwelling units within the initial service area within 6
months from the date of the award of the Franchise.
(ii) The Grantee must make cable television service available to at least
50% of the dwelling units within the initial service area within 1
year from the date of the award of the Franchise.
(b) The Grantee, in its application, may propose a timetable of construction
which will make cable television service available in the initial service area
sooner than the above minimum requirements, in which case the said
schedule will be made part of the Franchise Agreement, and will be binding
upon the Grantee.
(c) Any delay beyond the terms of this timetable, unless specifically approved
by the Town, will be considered a violation of this Chapter for which the
2. Editor's Note: See §§ 19.81 to 19.98, Wis. Stats.
15
provisions of either § 20.38 or § 20.46 shall apply, as determined by the
Town.
(d) In special circumstances the Town may waive 100% completion within the
two-year time frame, provided substantial completion is accomplished
within the allotted time frame, substantial completion to be not less than
95%. Justification for less than 100% must be submitted subject to the
approval of the Town.
(2) Line extensions:
(a) New development. In cases where new construction or property
development in the Town meets the density requirements of Section
20.17(4) above, and the construction or development is adjacent to a
Grantee’s Initial Service Area, that Grantee shall, at its own expense, extend
its system so that Cable Service is available in such areas.
(i) In a new subdivision or developing area where utility and cable
facilities are to be above ground, and a Grantee is required to extend
its system under this section, the Land Divider will forward to the
Grantee an approved engineering plan of each project. The Grantee
shall commence the design and construction process upon receipt of
the plan. Upon notification from the Land Divider that the first
home in the project has been approved for a building permit, the
Grantee shall have 3 months to complete construction, unless the
Town agrees to extend this time period.
(ii) In a new subdivision or developing area where utility and cable
facilities are to be placed underground, and a Grantee is required to
extend its system under this section, the Land Divider shall give the
Grantee at least 30 days advance written notice of the date on which
open trenching will be available for the Grantee’s installation of
conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at the
Grantee’s expense. The Grantee shall provide specifications as
needed for trenching and shall place its facilities in the trenches on
the date in the notice. Costs of trenching and easements required to
bring cable service to the new subdivision shall be assessed in
nondiscriminatory manner on the users of such trenching and
easements; Grantee shall pay its equal share of such costs.
(iii) Notwithstanding other provisions of this Chapter, if more than one
Grantee would be required to extend service under the provisions of
this section, the Grantees may agree that only one Grantee will
extend service to that area and that the other Grantee(s) will not be
required to extend service. In addition, the Town may waive
16
extension requirements upon good cause shown by a Grantee.
(iv) The Grantee shall extend and make cable television service
available to any isolated resident outside the initial service area
requesting connection at the standard connection charge, if the
connection to the isolated resident would require no more than a
standard 200 drop line.
(b) Early extension. In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory
extension of service, the Grantee shall provide, upon the request of a
potential Subscriber desiring service, an estimate of the Grantee's costs
required to extend service to the Subscriber. The Grantee shall then extend
service upon request of the potential Subscriber. The Grantee and the
potential subscriber shall share the cost of the extension as follows: the
Grantee shall pay 100% of the cost of the first 200’ of the extension; for that
part of an extension that is longer than 200’, the Grantee may charge the
potential subscriber for the Grantee’s actual cost of that portion of the
extension. The Grantee may require advance payment or assurance of
payment satisfactory to the Grantee. In the event the area reaches the density
required for mandatory extension within 5 years, such payments shall be
refunded to the Subscriber upon request.
(3) Special agreements. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Grantee from
serving areas within the legally incorporated boundaries of the Town not covered
under this section upon agreement with developers, property owners residents, or
businesses, provided that 5% of the gross revenues from those areas are paid to the
Town as franchise fees under § 20.28, and that the terms and conditions of this
Chapter shall also apply to such additional service areas.
(4) A Grantee may propose a line extension policy that will result in serving more
residents of the Town than as required above, in which case the Grantee’s policy
will be incorporated into the Franchise Agreement and will be binding on the
Grantee, and any such areas served will be added to that Grantee’s Franchise Area.
(5) The violation of this section following a 30 day period to cure shall be considered
a breach of the terms of this Chapter, for which the provisions of either § 20.38 or
§ 20.46 shall apply, as determined by the Town.
20.21. Construction and technical standards.
(1) Compliance with construction and technical standards. The Grantee shall construct,
install, operate and maintain its System in a manner consistent with all laws,
ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, and FCC technical
standards. In addition, the Grantee shall provide the Town, upon request, a written
report of the results of the Grantee's annual proof of performance tests conducted
17
pursuant to Federal Communications Commission standards and requirements.
(2) Additional specifications:
(a) Construction, installation and maintenance of the Cable Television System
shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All cables and
wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone
lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and
bundled with due respect for engineering considerations.
(b) The Grantee shall at all times comply with:
(i) National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards);
(ii) National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters);
(iii) Applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations.
(c) In any event, the System shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of
persons or property in the Franchise area or other areas where the Grantee
may have equipment located.
(d) Any antenna structure used in the System shall comply with construction,
marking, and lighting of antenna structure, required by the United States
Department of Transportation.
(e) All working facilities and conditions used during construction, installation
and maintenance of the Cable Television System shall comply with the
standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
(f) Radio frequency (RF) leakage shall be checked at reception locations for
emergency radio services to prove no interference signal combinations are
possible. Stray radiation shall be measured adjacent to any proposed
aeronautical navigation radio sites to prove no interference to airborne
navigational reception in the normal flight patterns. FCC rules and
regulations shall govern.
(g) The Grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power
for head end, transportation and trunk amplifiers for a minimum of two (2)
hours.
(h) In all areas of the Town where all cables, wires and other like facilities of
public utilities are placed underground, the Grantee shall place its cables,
wires and other like facilities underground. When all public utilities relocate
their facilities from pole to underground, the cable operator must
18
concurrently do so.
20.22 Use of streets.
(1) Interference with persons and improvements. The Grantee's System, poles, wires
and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so that none of its
facilities shall endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or interfere with the
rights or reasonable health, safety or welfare of property owners who adjoin any of
the streets and public ways, or interfere with any improvements the Town may
make, or hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements or
public property.
(2) Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk,
landscaping, driveway or other surfacing, the Grantee shall, at its own cost and
expense and in a manner approved by the Town, replace and restore all paving,
sidewalk, driveway, landscaping, or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as
good condition as before the work was commenced and in accordance with
standards for such work set by the Town. After 30 days, if restoration measures are
not performed to the reasonable satisfaction of the Town, the Town may undertake
remedial restoration activities, such activities to be performed at the Grantee's cost.
(3) Erection, removal and common uses of poles:
(a) No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by the Grantee
without prior approval of the Town with regard to location, height, types,
and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole or wireholding
structure of the Grantee shall be a vested interest and such poles or
structures shall be removed or modified by the Grantee at its own expense
whenever the Town determines that the public health, safety or welfare
would be enhanced thereby.
(b) Where poles or other wire-holding structures already existing for use in
serving the Town are available for use by the Grantee, but it does not make
arrangements for such use, the Town may require the Grantee to use such
poles and structures if it determines that the public health, safety or welfare
would be enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to the Grantee
are just and reasonable.
(c) Where the Town desires to make use of the poles or other wire-holding
structures of the Grantee and the use will not unduly interfere with the
Grantee's operations, the Town may require the Grantee to permit such use
for reasonable consideration and terms.
(4) Relocation of facilities. If at any time during the period of the Franchise the Town
shall lawfully elect to alter, or change the grade of any street, alley or other public
19
ways, the Grantee, upon reasonable notice by the Town, shall remove or relocate
as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
fixtures at its own expense.
(5) Cooperation with building movers. The Grantee shall, at the request of any person
holding a building moving permit issued by the Town, temporarily raise or lower
its wires to permit the moving of buildings. Expenses of such temporary removal,
raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person making the request, and the
Grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Grantee
shall be given at least 10 days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire
changes.
(6) Tree trimming. The Grantee shall not remove any tree or trim any portion of any
tree within any public street as defined herein without the prior consent of the
Town, except in an emergency situation. The Grantee shall provide notice to any
affected residents at the same time that the Grantee applies to the Town for consent
to perform tree trimming. The Town shall have the right to do the trimming
requested by the Grantee at the cost of the Grantee. With the exception of the Town,
regardless of who performs the work requested by the Grantee, the Grantee shall
be responsible, shall defend and hold Town harmless from any and all damages to
any tree as a result of Grantee's trimming, or to the property surrounding any tree,
whether such tree is trimmed or removed.
(7) Excavation permits. The Grantee shall not disturb or alter the roads or ground
surfaces within the road right-of-way without first applying for and obtaining an
"Excavation Permit" from the Town. The normal fee for such Excavation Permit
will be paid for at time of application or billed to the applicant. The Town will not
unreasonably deny such permit. Wherever possible auguring/boring will be used
instead of road cuts.
20.23. Operational standards.
(1) The Grantee shall maintain all parts of the System in good condition throughout the
entire Franchise period.
(2) Upon the reasonable request for service by any person located within the Franchise
territory, the Grantee shall, within 30 days, furnish the requested service to such
person within terms of the line extension policy. A request for service shall be
unreasonable for the purpose of this subsection if no distribution line capable of
servicing that person's block has been installed.
(3) Temporary service drops:
(a) The Grantee shall put forth every effort to bury temporary drops within 10
working days after placement. Any delays for any other reason than listed
20
will be communicated to the Town. The following delays will be found
understandable and within the course of doing business: weather, ground
conditions, street bores, system redesign requirements and any other
unusual obstacle, such as obstructive landscaping that is created by the
customer.
(b) The Grantee shall provide monthly reports to the Town, upon request, on
the number of drops pending.
(4) The Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt
service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions,
insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of
minimum System use.
(5) The Grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television
reception of Subscribers or persons not served by the Grantee, nor shall the System
interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the various utilities
serving the customers within the confines of the Town, nor shall other utilities
interfere with the Grantee's System.
20.24. Customer service standards.
(1) Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit the enforcement of any
federal, state or local law or regulation concerning customer service or consumer
protection that imposes customer service standards or consumer protection
requirements that exceed the customer service standards set out in this Chapter or
that address matters not addressed in this Chapter.
(2) The Grantee shall maintain a local or toll-free telephone access line which is
available to its Subscribers and shall have knowledgeable, qualified representatives
available to respond to customer telephone inquiries regarding repairs 24 hours per
day, 7 days per week.
(3) Under Normal Operating Conditions, telephone answer time, including wait time
and the time required to transfer the call, shall not exceed 30 seconds. This standard
shall be met no less than 90% of the time as measured on a quarterly basis.
(4) Under Normal Operating Conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less
than 3% of the total time that the office is open for business.
(5) A centrally located customer service center will be open for walk-in customer
transactions a minimum of 8 hours per day Monday through Friday, unless there is
a need to modify those hours because of the location or customers served. The
Grantee and Town by mutual consent shall establish supplemental hours on
weekdays and weekends as fits the needs of the community.
21
(6) Under Normal Operating Conditions, each of the following standards will be met
no less than 95% of the time as measured on a quarterly basis.
(a) Standard installations will be performed within 7 business days after an
order has been placed. A standard installation is one that is within 150’ of
the existing System. Other installations required under this Chapter, which
exceed 150’, will be performed within 15 days after an order has been
placed.
(b) Excluding those situations that are beyond its control, the Grantee will
respond to any service interruption promptly and in no event later than 24
hours from the time of initial notification. All other regular service requests
will be responded to within 36 hours during the normal work week for that
System. The appointment window alternatives for installations, service calls
and other installation activities will be: "morning" or "afternoon"; not to
exceed a 4 hour "window" during Normal Business Hours for the System,
or at a time that is mutually acceptable. The Grantee shall schedule
supplemental hours during which appointments can be scheduled based on
the needs of the community. If at any time an installer or technician is
running late, an attempt to contact the customer will be made and the
appointment rescheduled as necessary at a time that is convenient to the
customer.
(7) Subscriber credit for outages. Upon Service Interruption of a Subscriber's Cable
Service, the following shall apply:
(a) For Service Interruptions of more than four hours and up to 4 days, the
Grantee shall provide, at the Subscriber's request, a credit of 1/30 of 1
month's fees for affected services for each 24 hour period service is
interrupted for 4 or more hours for any Subscriber, with the exception of
Subscribers disconnected because of nonpayment or excessive signal
leakage.
(b) For interruptions of 7 days or more in 1 month, the Grantee shall provide,
at the Subscriber's request, a full month's credit for affected services for all
affected Subscribers; but if the interruption is caused by events described in
Section 20.48 below, the Grantee shall provide affected Subscribers a pro
rata credit for the time that Cable Service was interrupted.
(8) The Grantee shall provide written information for each of the following areas at the
time of installation and at any future time upon the request of the customer:
(a) Product and services offered.
(b) Prices and service options.
22
(c) Installation and service policies.
(d) How to use the cable television services.
(9) Bills will be clear, concise and understandable, with all charges for cable services
itemized.
(10) Credits will be issued promptly, but no later than the customer's next billing cycle
following the resolution of the request and the return of the equipment by the
Grantee if service has been terminated.
(11) The Grantee shall notify customers a minimum of 30 days in advance of any rate
or channel change.
(12) The Grantee shall maintain and operate its network in accordance with the rules
and regulations incorporated herein or as may be promulgated by Federal
Communications Commission, the United States Congress, or the State of
Wisconsin.
(13) The Grantee shall continue, through the term of the Franchise, to maintain the
technical standards and quality of service set forth in this Chapter. Should the Town
find, by resolution, that the Grantee has failed to maintain these technical standards
and quality of service, and should it, by resolution, specifically enumerate
improvements to be made, the Grantee shall make such improvements. Failure to
make such improvements within 3 months of such resolution will constitute a
breach of a condition for which penalties contained in § 20.46 are applicable.
(14) The Grantee shall keep a monthly service log that indicates the nature of each
service complaint received in the last 24 months, the date and time each complaint
was received, the disposition of each complaint, and the time and date thereof. This
log shall be made available for periodic inspection by the Town.
(15) The Grantee shall provide a copy of the customer service standards to every
Subscriber via a bill insert at least once every calendar year, and shall also provide
a copy of these customer service standards to every new customer within 30 days
of connection.
20.25 Continuity of service mandatory.
(1) It shall be the right of all Subscribers to continue receiving service as long as their
financial and other obligations to the Grantee are honored. If the Grantee elects to
overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the System, or the Town gives notice of intent to
terminate or fails to renew the Franchise, the Grantee shall act so as to ensure that
all Subscribers receive continuous service regardless of the circumstances.
23
(2) If there is a change of Franchise, or if a new operator acquires the System, the
Grantee shall cooperate with the Town, new franchisee or new operator to maintain
continuity of service to all Subscribers.
(3) If the Grantee fails to operate the System for 7 consecutive days without prior
approval of the Town or without just cause, the Town may, at its option, operate
the System or designate an operator until such time as the Grantee restores service
under conditions acceptable to the Town or a permanent operator is selected. If the
Town is required to fulfill this obligation for the Grantee, the Grantee shall
reimburse the Town for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from
the System received by the Town that are the result of the Grantee's failure to
perform.
20.26. Complaint procedure.
(1) The Town Board or its designee has primary responsibility for the continuing
administration of the Franchise and implementation of complaint procedures.
(2) During the terms of the Franchise and any renewal thereof, the Grantee shall
maintain a central office, designated by the Grantee, for the purpose of receiving
and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment
malfunctions, and similar matters. The office must be reachable by a local and/or
toll-free telephone call to receive complaints regarding quality of service,
equipment functions and similar matters. The Grantee will make good faith efforts
to arrange for one or more payment locations in a central location where customers
may pay bills or drop off equipment.
(3) As Subscribers are connected or reconnected to the System, the Grantee shall, by
appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish information concerning the
procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and
local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such
inquiries or complaints are to be addressed.
(4) When there have been similar complaints made, or where there exists other
evidence which, in the judgment of the Town, casts doubt on the reliability or
quality of cable service, the Town shall have the right and authority to require the
Grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the System. The Grantee
shall fully cooperate with the Town in performing such testing and shall prepare
results and a report, if requested, within 30 days after notice. Such report shall
include the following information:
(a) The nature of the complaint or problem that precipitated the special tests;
(b) The System component(s) tested;
24
(c) The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;
(d) The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was resolved;
(e) Any other information pertinent to the tests and analysis which may be
required.
(5) The Town may require that tests be supervised, at the Grantee's expense unless
results are found to be in compliance by an independent professional engineer or
equivalent of the Town's choice. The engineer shall sign all records of special tests
and forward to the Town such records with a report interpreting the results of the
tests and recommending actions to be taken.
(6) The Town's rights under this section shall be limited to requiring tests, analysis and
reports covering specific subjects and characteristics based on complaints or other
evidence when and under such circumstances as the Town has reasonable grounds
to believe that the complaints or other evidence require that tests be performed to
protect the public against substandard cable service.
20.27 Grantee rules and regulations. The Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such
rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably
necessary to enable the Grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the
Franchise, and to assure uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers; provided, however,
that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof
or applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations.
20.28 Franchise fee.
(1) A Grantee shall pay to the Town a franchise fee in the amount designated in the
Franchise Agreement. Unless otherwise specified in the Franchise Agreement, such
franchise fee shall be 5% of the Grantee's Gross Revenues.
(2) The franchise fee payment shall be in addition to any other tax or payment owed to
the Town by the Grantee and shall not be construed as payment in lieu of municipal
property taxes or other state, county or local taxes.
(3) The franchise fee and any other costs or penalties assessed shall be payable
quarterly on a calendar year basis to the Town within 30 days of the end of each
quarter. The Grantee shall also file a complete and accurate verified statement of
all Gross Revenues as previously defined within 30 days of the end of each quarter.
(4) The Town shall have the right to inspect the Grantee's income records and to audit
and recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this Chapter; provided,
however, that such audit shall take place within 60 months following the close of
25
each of the Grantee's fiscal years that is the subject of the audit. Any additional
amount due the Town as a result of an audit shall be paid within 30 days following
written notice to the Grantee by the Town, which shall include a copy of the audit
report.
(5) If any franchise fee payment or recomputed amount, cost or penalty, is not made
on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be charged from
such date at an annual rate of 12%. The Grantee shall reimburse the Town for any
additional expenses and costs incurred by the Town by reason of the delinquent
payment(s), including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, consultant fees and audit
fees.
20.29 Transfer of ownership or control.
(1) A Franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased
or sublet in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable or any right,
interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person without the prior written
consent of the Town. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in
trust, by mortgage, or by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title
or interest of the Grantee in the Franchise or the Cable System, which is made in
order to secure indebtedness. The Grantee may, however, transfer or assign the
Franchise to a wholly owned subsidiary of the Grantee and such subsidiary may
transfer or assign the Franchise back to the Grantee without such consent, providing
that such assignment is without any release of liability of the Grantee. Any
proposed assignee must show legal, technical and financial responsibility as
determined by the Town and must agree to comply with all provisions of the
Franchise. The Town shall have 120 days to act upon any request for approval of a
sale or transfer submitted in writing that contains or is accompanied by all such
information as is required in accordance with FCC regulations and by the Town.
The Town shall be deemed to have consented to a proposed transfer or assignment
if its refusal to consent (including the reasons therefor) is not communicated in
writing to the Grantee within 120 days following receipt of written notice together
with all necessary information as to the effect of the proposed transfer or
assignment upon the public, unless the requesting party and the Town agree to an
extension of time. The Town shall not unreasonably withhold consent to a proposed
transfer.
(2) The Grantee shall promptly notify the Town of any actual or proposed change in,
or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, control of the Grantee. The word
"control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual
working control in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a
transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by
any person or group of persons of 25% of the voting shares of the Grantee. Every
change, transfer or acquisition of control of the Grantee shall make the Franchise
subject to cancellation unless and until the Town shall have consented thereto,
26
which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining
whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the Town
may inquire into the legal, technical, financial and other qualifications of the
prospective controlling party, and the Grantee shall assist the Town in such inquiry.
(3) The consent or approval of the Town to any transfer of the Grantee shall not
constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the Town in and to the streets, and any
transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of
the Franchise.
(4) In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the Town shall not be required to
approve any transfer or assignment of a new Franchise prior to substantial
completion of construction of the proposed System.
(5) In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the
successor(s) in interest agreeing in writing to abide by the terms and conditions of
the Franchise Agreement.
20.30 Availability of books and records.
(1) The Grantee shall fully cooperate in making available at reasonable times, and the
Town shall have the right to inspect at the Grantee's office, upon reasonable notice
and where reasonably necessary for the enforcement of the Franchise, books,
records, maps, plans and other like materials of the Grantee applicable to the Cable
Television System, at any time during Normal Business Hours.
(2) Unless prohibited by law, rule or regulation, the following records and/or reports
are to be made available to the Town within 30 days upon request, but no more
frequently than on an annual basis if so mutually agreed upon by the Grantee and
the Town:
(a) A quarterly review and resolution or progress report submitted by the
Grantee to the Town;
(b) Periodic preventive maintenance reports;
(c) Copies of FCC Form 395-A (or successor form) or any supplemental forms
related to equal opportunity or fair contracting policies;
(d) Subscriber inquiry/complaint resolution data (but not including names or
addresses) and the right to review documentation concerning these inquiries
and/or complaints periodically;
(e) Periodic construction update reports including, where appropriate, the
submission of strand maps.
27
20.31 Other petitions and applications. Copies of all petitions, applications, communications
and reports submitted by the Grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, to the
Securities and Exchange Commission, or to any other federal or state regulatory commission or
agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting cable television operations
authorized pursuant to the Franchise or received from such agencies shall be provided to the Town
upon request.
20.32 Fiscal reports. The Grantee shall file annually with the Town no later than 120 days after
the end of the Grantee's fiscal year, a copy of a gross revenues statement certified by an officer of
the Grantee.
20.33 Removal of cable television system. At the expiration of the term for which the Franchise
is granted or when any renewal is denied, or upon its termination as provided herein, the Grantee
shall forthwith, upon written notice by the Town, remove at its own expense all aerial portions of
the Cable Television System from all streets and public property within the Town within 6 months.
If the Grantee fails to do so within 6 months, the Town may perform the work at the Grantee's
expense. Upon such notice of removal, a bond shall be furnished by the Grantee in an amount
sufficient to cover this expense.
20.34 Required services and facilities.
(1) The Cable Television System shall have a minimum channel capacity of 77
channels within a reasonable time of the grant of a Franchise under this Chapter.
(2) Such System shall maintain a plant having the technical capacity for "two-way"
communications within 36 months of the grant of a Franchise under this Chapter.
(3) The Grantee shall maintain the following:
(a) At least 1 specially designated, noncommercial public access channel;
(b) At least 1 specially designated channel for use by local education
authorities;
(c) At least 1 specially designated channel for local governmental uses;
(d) At least 1 specially designated channel for leased access uses.
(e) If required by the Franchise Agreement, an Institutional Network (I-Net) of
cable, optical, electrical or electronic equipment, including Cable
Television Systems, used for the purpose of transmitting two-way video
signals interconnecting designated entities to be determined by the Town.
The cost of such network will be borne by the Town as negotiated between
the Grantee and the Town. Such Network may be provided as needed by
28
utilizing capacity on the System.
(f) Provided, however, these uses may be combined on one or more channels
until such time as additional channels become necessary in the opinion of
the Town. Studios and associated production equipment will be located in
a mutually agreed upon site to meet the public's need for public access,
education and local government channels as noted in Subsection 3(a), (b)
and (d). Financial and technical support and replacement and maintenance
of equipment of this facility shall be separately incorporated into the
Franchise by agreement.
(4) The Grantee shall incorporate into its Cable Television System the capacity to
permit the Town, in times of emergency, to override by remote control the audio,
video and/or text of all channels simultaneously, which the Grantee may lawfully
override. The Grantee shall provide emergency broadcast capacity pursuant to FCC
rules. The Grantee shall cooperate with the Town in the use and operation of the
emergency alert override system.
20.35 Rules and regulations.
(1) In addition to the inherent powers of the Town to regulate and control any cable
television Franchise, and those powers expressly reserved by the Town, or agreed
to and provided for herein, the right and power is hereby reserved by the Town to
promulgate such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of
its lawful powers and furtherance of the terms and conditions of the Franchise;
provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be
in conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable state and federal laws, rules and
regulations and do not appreciably increase the burdens or appreciably impair the
rights of the Grantee under the Franchise Agreement.
(2) The Town may also adopt such regulations at the request of Grantee upon
application.
20.36 Performance evaluation sessions.
(1) The Town and the Grantee may hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions
within 30 days of the 3rd and 6th anniversary dates of the Grantee's award or renewal
of the Franchise and as may be required by federal and state law. All such
evaluation sessions shall be open to the public.
(2) Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of the Franchise
at the request of the Town or the Grantee.
(3) All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper
of general circulation in accordance with legal notice. The Grantee shall notify its
29
Subscribers of all evaluation sessions by announcements on at least 1 channel of its
System between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., for 5 consecutive days
preceding each session.
(4) Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may
include, but are not limited to: service rate structures; franchise fee, penalties, free
or discounted services; application of new technologies; System performance;
services provided; programming offered; customer complaints; privacy;
amendments to this Chapter; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and
Grantee or Town rules. The Town acknowledges that, pursuant to federal law, it
does not have jurisdiction nor enforcement rights over all the standards and services
mentioned above, including programming and the application of all new
technologies under a cable television franchise. Nothing in this subsection shall be
construed as requiring the renegotiation of the cable Franchise Agreement.
(5) Members of the general public may add topics either by working through the
negotiating parties or by presenting a petition. If such a petition bears the valid
signatures of 50 or more residents of the Town, the proposed topic or topics shall
be added to the list of topics to be discussed at the evaluation session.
20.37 Rate change procedures. Pursuant to the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, if the Town is currently certified to regulate the Basic Service rates
charged by Grantee, it may, under these rules, require the Grantee to obtain approval from the
Town for a rate increase for any change to the rates for Basic Service. Should federal or state law
permit further rate regulation beyond Basic Service the Town may, if certified, assume such rate
regulation and adopt appropriate procedures for such regulation.
20.38 Forfeiture and termination.
(1) Pursuant to § 20.47, in addition to all other rights and powers retained by the Town
under this Chapter or otherwise, the Town reserves the right to forfeit and terminate
the Franchise and all rights and privileges of the Grantee hereunder in the event of
a substantial breach of its terms and conditions following the required 30 day period
to cure. A substantial breach by the Grantee shall include, but shall not be limited
to the following:
(a) Violation of any material provision of the Franchise or any material rule,
order, regulation or determination of the Town made pursuant to the
Franchise;
(b) Attempt to evade any material provision of the Franchise or to practice any
fraud or deceit upon the Town or its Subscribers or customers;
(c) Failure to begin or complete System construction or System extension as
provided under § 20.20;
30
(d) Failure to provide the services promised in the Grantee's initial application
as incorporated herein by § 20.04;
(e) Failure to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of interrupted service,
except when approval of such interruption is obtained from the Town; or
(f) Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or negotiation of
the Franchise.
(2) The foregoing shall not constitute a major breach if the violation occurs but is
without fault of the Grantee or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its
control. The Grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship nor by
misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers or employees.
(3) The Town may make a written demand that the Grantee comply with any such
provision, rule, order or determination under or pursuant to the Franchise. If the
violation by the Grantee continues for a period of 30 days following such written
demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being
actively and expeditiously pursued, the Town may place the issue of termination of
the Franchise before the Town Board. The Town shall cause to be served upon the
Grantee, at least 20 days prior to the date of such meeting, a written notice of intent
to request such termination and the time and place of the meeting. Public notice
shall be given of the meeting and the issue(s) which the Board is to consider.
(4) The Town Board shall hear and consider the issue(s) and shall hear any person
interested therein and shall determine in its discretion whether or not any violation
by the Grantee has occurred.
(5) If the Town Board determines that the violation by the Grantee was the fault of the
Grantee and within its control, the Board may, by resolution declare that the
Franchise of the Grantee shall be forfeited and terminated unless there is
compliance within such period as the Board may fix, such period to not be less than
30 days; provided, however, that no opportunity for compliance need be granted
for fraud or material misrepresentation.
(6) The issue of forfeiture and termination shall automatically be placed upon the
Board agenda at the expiration of the time set by it for compliance. The Board may
then terminate the Franchise forthwith upon finding that the Grantee has failed to
achieve compliance or it may further extend the period, at its discretion.
20.39 Foreclosure. Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the
System, or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a substantial part of the System, the
Grantee shall notify the Town of such fact, and such notification shall be treated as a notification
that a change in control of the Grantee has taken place, and the provisions of the Franchise
31
governing the consent of the Town to such change in control of the Grantee shall apply.
20.40 Approval of transfer and right of acquisition by the Town.
(1) Federal regulations as per 47 U.S.C. § 537 shall apply to approval of transfer issues
and the right of acquisition by the Town. In the event that the relevant federal
regulations are repealed, the guidelines specified in Subsection B below shall apply.
(2) Upon the expiration of the term of the Franchise or upon any other termination
thereof as provided herein, the Town at its election and upon the payment to the
Grantee of a price equal to the fair market value shall have the right to purchase
and take over the System upon resolution by the Town Board.
20.41 Receivership. The Town shall have the right to cancel a Franchise 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the Grantee, unless
such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of 120 days, or
unless:
(1) Within 120 days after his/her election or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall
have fully complied with all the provisions of this Chapter and remedied all defaults
thereunder; and
(2) Such receiver or trustee, within the 120 days, shall have executed an agreement,
duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such
receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of
this Chapter and the Franchise granted to the Grantee.
20.42 Compliance with state and federal laws.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Franchise to the contrary, the Grantee
shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal
government or any administrative agencies thereof; provided, however, if any such
state or federal law or regulation shall require the Grantee to perform any service,
or shall permit the Grantee to perform any service, or shall prohibit the Grantee
from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of the Franchise or of any
law or regulation of the Town, then as soon as possible following knowledge
thereof, the Grantee shall notify the Town of the point of conflict believed to exist
between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the Town or the
Franchise.
(2) If the Town determines that a material provision of this Chapter is affected by any
subsequent action of the state or federal government, the Town and the Grantee
shall negotiate to modify any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as
may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this Chapter.
32
(3) If any section, sentence, paragraph, term, or provision hereof is determined to be
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction thereof,
such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section,
sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force
and effect for the term of the franchise, or any renewal or renewals thereof.
20.43 Landlord/tenant.
(1) Interference with cable service prohibited. Neither the owner of any multiple unit
residential dwelling nor his or her agent or representative shall interfere with the
right of any tenant or lawful resident thereof to receive cable television service,
cable installation or maintenance from a cable television Grantee regulated by and
lawfully operating under a valid and existing Franchise issued by the Town.
(2) Penalties and charges to tenants for service prohibited. Neither the owner of any
multiple unit residential dwelling nor his or her agent or representative shall
penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any
right of such tenant or resident, or discriminate in any way against such tenant or
resident who requests or receives cable television service from a Grantee operating
under a valid and existing cable television Franchise issued by the Town.
(3) Reselling service prohibited. No person shall resell, without the expressed, written
consent of the Grantee, any cable service, program or signal transmitted by a cable
television Grantee under a Franchise issued by the Town.
(4) Protection of property permitted. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a person
from requiring that Cable Television System facilities conform to laws and
regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to protect safety, functioning,
appearance and value of premises or the convenience and safety of persons or
property.
20.44 Applicants' bids for initial franchise.
(1) All bids received by the Town from the applicants for an initial Franchise will
become the sole property of the Town.
(2) The Town reserves the right to reject any and all bids and waive informalities and/or
technicalities where the best interest of the Town may be served.
(3) All questions regarding the meaning or intent of this Chapter or application
documents shall be submitted to the Town in writing. Replies will be issued by
addenda mailed or delivered to all parties recorded by the Town as having received
the application documents. The Town reserves the right to make extensions of time
for receiving bids as it deems necessary. Questions received less than 14 days prior
to the date for the opening of bids will not be answered. Only replies to questions
33
by written addenda will be binding. All bids must contain an acknowledgment of
receipt of all addenda.
(4) Bids must be sealed and submitted at the time and place indicated in the application
documents for the public opening. Bids may be modified at any time prior to the
opening of the bids, provided that any modifications must be duly executed in the
manner that the applicant's bid must be executed. No bid shall be opened or
inspected before the public opening.
(5) Before submitting a bid, each applicant must:
(a) Examine this Chapter and the application documents thoroughly;
(b) Familiarize himself/herself with local conditions that may in any manner
affect performance under the Franchise;
(c) Familiarize himself/herself with federal, state and local laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations affecting performance under the Franchise; and
(d) Carefully correlate the bid with the requirements of this Chapter and the
application documents.
(e) The Town may make such investigations as it deems necessary to determine
the ability of an applicant to perform under the Franchise, and the applicant
shall furnish to the Town all such information and data for this purpose as
the Town may request. The Town reserves the right to reject any bid if the
evidence submitted by, or investigation of, such applicant fails to satisfy the
Town that such applicant is properly qualified to carry out the obligations
of the Franchise and to complete the work contemplated therein.
Conditional bids will not be accepted.
(6) All bids received shall be placed in a secure depository approved by the Town and
shall not be opened nor inspected prior to the public opening.
20.45 Financial, contractual, shareholder and system disclosure for initial franchises.
(1) No initial Franchise will be granted to any applicant unless all requirements and
demands of the Town regarding financial, contractual, shareholder and System
disclosure have been met.
(2) Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant,
shall fully disclose all agreements and undertakings, whether written or oral, or
implied with any person, firm, group, association or corporation with respect to the
Franchise and the proposed Cable Television System. The Grantee of a Franchise
shall disclose all other contracts to the Town as the contracts are made. This section
34
shall include, but not be limited to, any agreements between local applicants and
national companies.
(3) Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant,
shall submit all requested information as provided by the terms of this Chapter or
the application documents, which are incorporated herein by reference. The
requested information must be complete and verified as true by the applicant.
(4) Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant,
shall disclose the numbers of shares of stock, and the holders thereof, and shall
include the amount of consideration for each share of stock and the nature of the
consideration.
(5) Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant,
shall disclose any information required by the application documents regarding
other cable Systems in which they hold an interest of any nature, including, but not
limited to, the following:
(a) Locations of all other Franchises and the dates of award for each location;
(b) Estimated construction costs and estimated completion dates for each
System;
(c) Estimated number of miles of construction and number of miles completed
in each System as of the date of this application; and
(d) Date for completion of construction as promised in the application for each
System.
(6) Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant,
shall disclose any information required by the application documents regarding
pending applications for other cable Systems, including, but not limited to, the
following:
(a) Location of other Franchise applications and date of application for each
System;
(b) Estimated dates of Franchise awards;
(c) Estimated number of miles of construction; and
(d) Estimated construction costs.
20.46 Damages. For the violation of any of the following provisions of this Chapter, damages
shall be chargeable to the letter of credit or performance bond as follows, and the Town may
35
determine the amount of the forfeiture for other violations that are not specified in a sum not to
exceed $250.00 for each violation, with each day constituting a separate violation:
(1) Failure to furnish, maintain, or offer all cable services to any potential Subscriber
within the Town pursuant to § 20.20 herein upon order of the Town: $250.00 per
day, per violation, for each day that such failure occurs or continues;
(2) Failure to obtain or file evidence of required insurance, construction bond,
performance bond, or other required financial security: $250.00 per day, per
violation, for each day such failure occurs or continues;
(3) Failure to provide access to data, documents, records, or reports to the Town as
required by §§ 20.19, 20.29, 20.30, 206-31 and 20.37: $250.00 per day, per
violation, for each day such failure occurs or continues;
(4) Failure to comply with applicable construction, operation, or maintenance
standards: $250.00 per day, per violation;
(5) Failure to comply with a rate decision or refund order: $500.00 per day, per
violation, for each day such a violation occurs or continues.
(6) Any violations for noncompliance with the customer service standards of §§ 20.23
through 20.25, the Grantee shall pay $250.00 per day for each day, or part thereof,
that such noncompliance continues;
(7) Any other violations of a Franchise Agreement to be determined by the Grantor in
a public hearing but not specifically noted in this section shall not $250.00 per day,
per violation.
20.47 Procedures.
(1) Whenever the Town believes that the Grantee has violated 1 or more terms,
conditions or provisions of the Franchise, and wishes to impose penalties, a written
notice shall be given to the Grantee informing it of such alleged violation or
liability. The written notice shall describe in reasonable detail the specific violation
so as to afford the Grantee an opportunity to remedy the violation. The Grantee
shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the
violation before the Town may impose penalties unless the violation is of such a
nature so as to require more than 30 days and the Grantee proceeds diligently within
the 30 days to correct the violation. In any case where the violation is not cured
within 30 days of notice from the Town, or such other time as the Grantee and the
Town may mutually agree to, the Town may proceed to impose liquidated damages.
(2) The Grantee may, within 10 days of receipt of notice, notify the Town that there is
a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by
36
the Grantee to the Town shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by the
Grantee and shall stay the running of the 30 day cure period pending Board decision
as required below. The Board shall hear the Grantee's dispute. Grantee must be
given at least 5 days’ notice of the hearing. At the hearing, the Grantee shall be
entitled to the right to present evidence and the right to be represented by counsel.
After the hearing, the Town shall provide Grantee a copy of its action, along with
supporting documents. In the event the Town upholds the finding of a violation, the
Grantee shall have 15 days subsequent, or such other time period as the Grantee
and the Town mutually agree, to correct the violation.
(3) The rights reserved to the Town under this section are in addition to all other rights
of the Town whether reserved by this Chapter or authorized by law or equity, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to penalties shall affect any
other right the Town may have.
20.48 Force majeure. The grantee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with,
the provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance
or default including termination, cancellation or revocation of the franchise, where such
noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by strike, riot, war, earthquake, flood,
tidal wave, severe weather conditions or other catastrophic act of nature, labor disputes, inability
to obtain necessary contract labor or materials, governmental, administrative or judicial order or
regulation or other event that is reasonably beyond the Grantee's ability to anticipate and control
and that makes performance impossible.
1
CHAPTER 25
GENERAL PROVISIONS
25.01 Principles of Construction.
25.02 Conflicting Provisions.
25.03 Separability of Provisions.
25.04 Effective Date of Ordinances.
25.05 Certification; Clerk to Maintain Copies Of Documents Incorporated by Reference;
Scrivener’s Errors.
25.06 Violations and Penalties; Juvenile Dispositions and Sanctions.
25.07 Fees
25.01 Principles of Construction. The following rules or meanings shall be applied in the
construction and interpretation of ordinances codified in this Code of Ordinances unless such
application would be clearly inconsistent with the plain meaning or intent of the Code:
(1) Acts by agents. When an ordinance requires that an act be done by a person that
may be legally performed by an authorized agent of that principal person, the
requirement shall be construed to include all acts performed by such agents.
(2) Code and Code of Ordinances. The words "Code," "Code of Ordinances" and
"Town Code" when used in any Section of this Code shall refer to this Code of
Ordinances of the Town of Middleton unless the context of the Section clearly
indicates otherwise.
(3) Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by
this Code, the day of the act or event from which the period of time begins to run
shall not be included, but the last day of the period shall be included, unless it is a
Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday. If the period of time prescribed or allowed
is 5 or fewer days, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the
computation. As used in this subsection, "legal holiday" means any statewide legal
holiday specified by state law.
(4) Fine. The term "fine" shall be the equivalent of the word "forfeiture," and vice
versa.
(5) Gender. Every word in this Code referring to the masculine gender shall also be
construed to apply to females, and vice versa.
(6) General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed according to their plain
meaning in common usage. However, words or phrases with a technical or special
meaning shall be understood and construed according to that technical or special
2
meaning if such is the intent of the Code.
(7) Joint Authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three (3) or more
Town officers or employees shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such officers or other persons.
(8) Officers. The term “officers” shall refer solely to local offices created by state
statute.
(9) Officials. The term “officials” shall mean all Town officers and employees.
(10) Person. The word "person" shall mean any of the following entities: natural
persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, limited liability companies, firms,
bodies politic, joint venture, joint stock company, association, public or private
corporation, the United States, the State of Wisconsin, including any unit or
division thereof, any county, city, village, town, municipal utility, municipal power
district or other governmental unit, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, executor,
administrator, any other fiduciary, any representative appointed by order of any
court or otherwise acting on behalf of others, or any other entity of any kind which
is capable of being sued (includes singular as well as plural).
(11) Repeal. When any Ordinance having the effect of repealing a prior Ordinance is
itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive the prior Ordinance or
any part thereof, unless expressly so provided.
(12) Singular and plural. Every word in this Code referring to the singular number only
shall also be construed to apply to several persons or things, and every word in this
Code referring to the plural number shall also be construed to apply to one person
or thing.
(13) Tense. The use of any verb in the present tense shall not preclude the interpretation
of the verb in the future tense where appropriate.
(14) Town. The term "Town" shall mean the Town of Middleton, Dane County,
Wisconsin.
(15) Wisconsin Administrative Code. The term "Wisconsin Administrative Code" and
its abbreviation as "Wis. Adm. Code" shall mean the Wisconsin Administrative
Code as of the adoption of this Code, as amended or renumbered from time to time.
(16) Wisconsin Statutes. The term "Wisconsin Statutes" and its abbreviation as "Wis.
Stats." or “Wis. Stat.” shall mean, in this Code, the Wisconsin Statutes for the years
2017-18 and subsequently as amended or renumbered from time to time.
3
25.02 Conflicting Provisions.
(1) If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of
each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons
intended to be governed by that chapter.
(2) If the provisions of different Sections of the same chapter conflict with each other,
the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or person raising
the conflict shall control over the more general provision.
25.03 Separability of Provisions. If any provision of this Code of Ordinances is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other provisions of these Ordinances.
25.04 Effective Date of Ordinances.
(1) Code. The Code of Ordinances, Town of Middleton, Dane County, Wisconsin shall
take effect as provided by state law.
(2) Subsequent Ordinances. All Ordinances passed by the Town Board subsequent to
the adoption of the Code of Ordinances, except when otherwise specifically
provided, shall take effect the day after publication or posting, or at a later date as
expressly provided in the ordinance, resolution, motion or action.
25.05 Certification; Clerk to Maintain Copies Of Documents Incorporated by Reference;
Scrivener’s Errors.
(1) The Clerk shall certify one copy of this Code as the original Municipal Code of the
Town of Middleton and shall file the same as part of the Town Ordinance Book.
Such copy shall be retained in its original form. In addition, the Clerk shall retain
in his or her office at least one copy of the Municipal Code of the Town of
Middleton in current form in which shall be inserted all supplemental sheets as
hereinafter provided.
(2) Whenever any ordinance amending, repealing, revising or creating any action of
this Code is adopted by the Board of Supervisors, the Clerk after recording such
ordinance in the ordinance book, shall cause copies to such ordinance to be
reproduced on supplemental sheets in proper form for insertion in the municipal
code and shall insert such ordinances in all copies of this Code in his or her
possession except the aforementioned original copy. The Clerk shall make such
supplemental sheets available at cost to all persons requesting the same.
(3) The Clerk may make non-substantive changes necessary to accommodate page
numbering and section numbering and may correct typographical errors but no
other changes shall be made without Town Board approval.
4
(4) Whenever any standard code, rule, regulation, statute or other written or printed
matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if
fully set forth herein, and the Town Clerk shall maintain in his or her office a copy
of any such material as adopted and as amended from time to time. Materials on
file at the Town Clerk's office shall be considered public records open to reasonable
examination by any person during the office hours of the Town Clerk, subject to
such restrictions on examination as the Clerk imposes for the preservation of the
material.
25.06. Violations and Penalties; Juvenile Dispositions and Sanctions.
(1) General penalty. Except where a penalty is provided elsewhere in this Code, any
person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction
of such violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows:
(a) First offense penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $25 nor more than
$1,000, together with the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
such forfeiture and costs may, among other lawful collection alternatives
such as suspension of driver’s license or tax intercept, be imprisoned in the
County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid or when there is
appropriate credit for time served.
(b) Second offense penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance
or part of an ordinance of this Code who shall previously have been
convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for each
such offense, together with costs and in default of payment of such
forfeiture and costs, among other lawful alternatives such as suspension of
driver’s license or tax intercept, be imprisoned in the County Jail until such
forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid or when there is appropriate
credit for time served.
(2) Continued violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs
shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the Town
from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any
provision of this Code.
(3) Other remedies.
(a) The Town shall have any and all other remedies afforded by the Wisconsin
Statutes in addition to the forfeitures and costs of prosecution above.
5
(b) Whenever any person fails to pay a forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon
the order of any court for violation of any ordinance of the Town, the court
may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the defendant, or after the
defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution against the
property of the defendant for said forfeiture and costs when such execution
is authorized by law.
(4) Court authority to impose alternative juvenile dispositions and sanctions.
(a) For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance, a court is authorized
to impose any of the dispositions listed in § 938.343, Wis. Stat.
(b) If the juvenile has committed a violation of any statute identified in §
938.344, Wis. Stats., which in turn has been adopted by or strictly conforms
to a Town ordinance the Municipal Court may order any disposition listed
in § 938.344, Wis. Stats., and stay any such disposition pursuant to §
938.344(2g).
(c) If a juvenile is found to have engaged in underage drinking of alcohol,
drinking of alcohol on school premises or at a school-sponsored activity,
falsifying proof of age, possessing drug paraphernalia, or delivery of drug
paraphernalia to a minor in violation of Town Ordinances, the Court may
order any of the dispositions listed in § 938.344, Wis. Stats., and stay such
disposition pursuant to § 938.344(2g).
(5) Schedule of Deposits. To ensure uniformity and equal treatment of all persons who
violate any provision of this Code, the deposit amounts set forth in the Revised
Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule, as the same is amended from time to time,
together with costs and surcharges, shall be the forfeitures imposed under this Code
where the schedule states a deposit amount for a violation of statutory counterparts
to the provisions of this code. The following Schedule of Deposits for Code
Violations shall be the used to establish the deposit amount for forfeitures for other
violations of this Code.
6
TOWN OF MIDDLETON SCHEDULE OF DEPOSITS FOR CODE VIOLATIONS
(Add all court costs and surcharges to amounts listed)
SECOND AND OFFENSE
FIRST OFFENSE WITHIN SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE
DESCRIPTION 12 MONTHS WITHIN 12 MONTHS
Any offense for which
the specified forfeiture
not more than $50.00 $20.00 $40.00
Any offense for which
the specified forfeiture
not more than $200.00 $75.00 $150.00
Any offense for which
the specified forfeiture
is not more than $500.00 $200.00 $375.00
Any offense for which
the specified forfeiture
is at least $501.00 $501.00 maximum permitted
25.07 Fees
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide efficiency, economy and
uniformity in establishing and adjusting the fees charged by the Town of Middleton
as enumerated throughout the Town of Middleton's Code of Ordinances into one
abbreviated schedule.
(2) Fee Schedule. The fees set forth in the Fee Schedule available at the Town Hall
have been adopted by the Town Board for the Town of Middleton.
(3) Review and amendments. The fees set forth in the Fee Schedule available at the
Town Hall may be added to or amended from time to time by adoption of a
resolution or ordinance.
(4) Conflicting provisions. The fees set forth in the Fee Schedule available at the Town
Hall shall supersede any fee established elsewhere in the Town's Code of
Ordinances for the same charges. If a fee is set forth elsewhere in the Town of
Middleton's Code of Ordinances, and there is no corresponding fee set forth in the
Fee Schedule, the fee set forth elsewhere in the Code of Ordinances shall control
until such time as a fee for the same charge is established in the Fee Schedule.

Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
1
Table of Contents
Table of Contents --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 1
10.000. General Provisions -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 22
10.001. Title, Purpose and Statutory Authorization ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 22
Title. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 22
Purpose. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 22
Statutory Authority. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 22
10.002. Reenactment And Repeal ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 23
Rights and liabilities under previous code. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 23
Prior ordinance temporarily in effect. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 23
Repeal of provisions not reenacted. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 23
Violations under previous code. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 23
10.003. Jurisdiction, Effective Date and Interpretation ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 24
Applicability and effective dates. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 24
Severability. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 25
Abrogations and other restrictions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 25
Interpretation and Application. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 26
10.004. Definitions ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 27
Abandoned or discontinued use. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 27
Accessory building. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 27
Accessory dwelling unit - attached. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 27
Accessory dwelling unit - detached. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 28
Accessory structure. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 28
Accessory use. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 28
Active recreation.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 28
Adult book store. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 28
Adult entertainment establishment. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 29
Adopted town and county comprehensive plan. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 29
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
2
Agricultural use. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 29
Agricultural accessory building. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 29
Agricultural accessory use. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 29
Agricultural entertainment. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 30
Agriculture-related use. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 30
Airport, landing strip or heliport. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 30
Amusement park. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 30
Animal boarding, domestic pet. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 31
Animal boarding, large animal. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 31
Animal unit. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 31
Apartment. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 31
Apartment building. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 31
Bed and breakfast. (See Transient or tourist lodging.) -------------------------------------------------------------------- 32
Boathouse. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 32
Boat slip. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 32
Building. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 32
Building envelope. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 32
Building footprint. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 32
Building height. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 32
Building line. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 32
Building setback line. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 33
Bus terminal. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 33
Campground. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 33
Campground, primitive. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 33
Camping unit. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 33
Caretaker’s residence. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 33
Cemetery. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 33
Clear area. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 33
Colony house. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 34
Committee.---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 34
Communications tower. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 34
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
3
Communications tower, substantial modification. ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 35
Community living arrangements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 35
Community garden. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 35
Composting facility. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 36
Condominium.------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 36
Consistent with. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 36
Construction equipment. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 36
Contiguous. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 36
Day care centers. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 36
Development. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 36
Development plan. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 37
Development right. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 37
(m) Distribution Center ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 37
Divided highway --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 37
Domestic beekeeping. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 37
Domestic fowl. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 37
Domestic pets. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 37
Drive-in establishment. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 38
Duplex. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 38
Dwelling. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 38
Electric generating facility. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 38
Explosive materials. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 38
Family. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 39
Farm. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 39
Farm operator. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 39
Farm residence. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 39
Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses. ----------------------------------------------- 39
Gross floor area. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 40
Gross income. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 40
Gross vehicle weight. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 40
Heavy industrial. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 40
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
4
Home occupation. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 41
Incidental room rental. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 41
Indoor commercial lodging. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 41
Indoor entertainment or assembly. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 42
Indoor sales. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 42
Indoor storage and repair. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 42
Institutional residential. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 42
Junk. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 42
Junkyard. (See Salvage yard.) ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 42
Kennel. (see Animal boarding, domestic pet) -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 42
Land disturbing activity. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 43
Light industrial. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 43
Limited family business. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 43
Limited farm business. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 43
Livestock. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 43
Location survey. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 44
Long-term care facility. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 44
Lot. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 44
Lot depth. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 44
Lot width. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 44
Lot line, front. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 45
Lot line, rear. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 45
Lot line, side. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 45
Manufactured home. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 45
Manufactured home communities. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 45
Marina. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 45
Mineral extraction. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 46
Mineral extraction accessory uses. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 46
Mini-warehouse. (See Personal storage facility.) --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 46
Mobile home. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 46
Motel. (See Indoor commercial lodging.) ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 47
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
5
Motor vehicle. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 47
Multiple family dwelling. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 47
Native wildlife rehabilitator. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 47
Nursing home. (See also Institutional residential.) ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 47
Nonconforming parcel. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 47
Nonconforming structure. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 47
Nonconforming use. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 47
Notice document. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 48
Occupiable floor area. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 48
Office. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 48
Outdoor assembly event. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 48
Outdoor entertainment. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 48
Outdoor passive recreation. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 49
Outdoor sales, display, or repair. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 49
Outdoor storage. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 49
Person. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 49
Personal and professional services. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 49
Personal storage facility. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 50
Planned unit development. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 50
Principal building. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 50
Principal use.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 50
Property maintenance shed. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 50
Racetrack. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 50
Recorded. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 50
Recreational equipment. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 50
Recreational racetrack. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 50
Refuse. (See also Solid waste.) --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 51
Rendering plant. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 51
Renewable energy. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 51
Roadside stand. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 51
Rooming house. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 51
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
6
School (See also Governmental, institutional, religious or nonprofit community use). -------------------------- 51
Salvage yard. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 52
Sanitary fixture. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 52
Setback. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 52
Single family residential.----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 52
Slaughterhouse. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 52
Small-scale farming. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 52
Solid waste. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 52
Solid waste disposal operation. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 53
Solid waste recycling center. (See also Salvage yard.) --------------------------------------------------------------------- 53
Stormwater runoff. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 53
Story. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 53
Story, half. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 53
Street. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 53
Street line. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 53
Structure. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 53
Structural alteration. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 54
Substantial farm income. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 54
Tax parcel. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 54
TDR agricultural conservation easement. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 54
Temporary batch asphalt or concrete production. ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 54
Temporary or portable building. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 54
Temporary outdoor display and sales. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 54
Topography. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 55
Transfer of development rights (TDR). ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 55
Transient or tourist. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 55
Transient or tourist lodging. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 55
Truck terminal. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 55
Urban service area. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 56
Use, conditional. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 56
Use, permitted. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 56
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
7
Use, principal. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 56
Utility services. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 56
Variance. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 56
Vehicle, farm or off-road. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 57
Vehicle repair or maintenance service. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 57
Veterinary clinic. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 57
Warehousing. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 57
Vision clearance triangle. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 57
Yard. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 57
Yard, front. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 57
Yard, rear. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 57
Yard, side. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 57
Zoning lot. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 58
10.100. Standards and Requirements for All Land Uses ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 59
10.101. Administration, Enforcement and Penalties ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 59
Zoning Permits ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 59
Location Surveys --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 60
Inspection ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 61
Violations and Penalties ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 61
Certificates of Compliance -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 63
Site Plans ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 63
Conditional Use Permits ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 65
Petitions to Rezone (Zoning Map Amendments) --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 72
Appeals of administrative decisions. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 74
Variances ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 75
10.102. General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts ------------------------------------------------- 77
Accommodations for disabled persons. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 77
Buildings and structures ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 77
Compliance with other laws, regulations and codes. ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 78
Junk and refuse. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 78
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
8
Lighting. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 78
Noise Reduction.--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 78
Nonconforming Uses and Structures------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 79
Parking and loading areas. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 81
Road setbacks / required front yards. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 88
Setback measurements and exceptions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 89
Topography Near Property Lines. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 90
Visual Screening --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 91
10.103. Special Requirements for Particular Uses ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 93
Accessory dwelling units. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 93
Adult book stores. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 93
Agricultural entertainment, special events, tourism or assembly. ----------------------------------------------------- 94
Airport, landing strip or heliport. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 94
Animal boarding, domestic pets. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 95
Animal boarding, large animal. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 95
Animal use in excess of one animal unit per acre -------------------------------------------------------------------------- 95
Campgrounds. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 96
Communication towers. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 96
Conditional use permits issued under this section shall identify the primary type or types of transmission equipment which is to be placed on the subject communication tower. Any communication tower on which the transmission equipment so identified is no longer placed or used for a continuous period of 12 months shall, upon notification by the committee, be removed by the holder of the conditional use permit issued under this section. If the tower is not removed within 60 days of such notification, the county may remove the tower at the expense of the holder of the conditional use permit. Financial surety bonds or other security instruments, as described in s. 10.101(7)(d)2.b.x., will be required.Domestic fowl and beekeeping. ----------------------------------- 102
Farm residences. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 103
Limited family business. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 104
Limited farm business. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 104
Manufactured home communities. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 105
Mineral extraction. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 106
Outdoor assembly events [as defined in s. 10.004(113) ---------------------------------------------------------------- 109
Salvage yards or junkyards ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 110
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
9
Small-scale farming. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 111
Solid waste disposal operations. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 111
Temporary batch concrete and asphalt production.--------------------------------------------------------------------- 111
10.200. Zoning Districts ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 112
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 112
Zoning Districts --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 112
Table of Land Uses by Zoning District ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 112
Zoning Maps ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 114
Interpretation Of Zoning District Boundaries. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 114
10.210. Natural Resource and Recreation Zoning Districts ------------------------------------------------------------------ 115
10.211. NR-C (Natural Resource Conservation) Zoning District ------------------------------------------------------------ 115
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 115
Permitted uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 115
Conditional uses ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 115
Lot size requirements ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 116
Setbacks and required yards --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 116
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 116
10.212. RE (Recreational) Zoning District ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 117
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 117
Permitted uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 117
Conditional uses ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 118
Lot size requirements ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 118
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 118
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 118
10.220. Farmland Preservation Districts ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 119
Provisions applicable to all Farmland Preservation Districts ---------------------------------------------------------- 119
10.221. FP-1 (Small-lot Farmland Preservation) Zoning District ----------------------------------------------------------- 120
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 120
Permitted uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 120
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
10
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 121
Lot size requirements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 121
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 121
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 122
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 122
Other restrictions on buildings. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 122
10.222. FP-35 (General Farmland Preservation) Zoning District ----------------------------------------------------------- 123
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 123
Permitted uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 123
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 124
Lot size requirements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 125
Setbacks. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 125
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 126
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 126
Other restrictions on buildings. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 126
10.223. FP-B (Farmland Preservation – Business) Zoning District --------------------------------------------------------- 127
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 127
Permitted uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 127
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 128
Lot size requirements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 129
Setbacks. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 129
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 130
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 130
Other restrictions on buildings. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 130
10.230. Rural Mixed-Use & Transitional Zoning Districts -------------------------------------------------------------------- 131
10.231. AT-35 (Agriculture Transition, 35 acres) Zoning District ----------------------------------------------------------- 131
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 131
Permitted uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 131
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 132
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
11
Lot size requirements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 133
Setbacks. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 133
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 134
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 134
Other restrictions on buildings. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 134
10.232. AT-B (Agriculture Transition – Business) Zoning District ---------------------------------------------------------- 135
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 135
Permitted uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 135
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 136
Lot size requirements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 137
Setbacks. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 137
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 138
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 138
Other restrictions on buildings. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 138
10.233. RM-8 (Rural Mixed-Use, 8-16 acres) Zoning District ---------------------------------------------------------------- 139
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 139
Permitted uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 139
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 139
Lot size requirements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 140
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 140
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 141
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 141
Other restrictions on buildings. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 141
10.234. RM-16 (Rural Mixed-Use, 16-35 acres) Zoning District ------------------------------------------------------------ 142
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 142
Permitted uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 142
Conditional uses ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 143
Lot size requirements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 143
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 143
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 144
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
12
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 144
Other restrictions on buildings. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 144
10.235. AT-5 (Agriculture Transition – 5 Acres) Zoning District ------------------------------------------------------------ 145
Applicability ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 145
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 145
Permitted uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 145
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 146
Lot size requirements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 147
Setbacks. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 147
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 148
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 148
Other restrictions on buildings. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 148
10.240. Rural Residential Zoning Districts ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 150
10.241. RR-1 (Rural Residential, 1 to 2 acres) Zoning District -------------------------------------------------------------- 150
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 150
Permitted uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 150
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 150
Lot size requirements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 150
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 151
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 151
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 151
10.242. RR-2 (Rural Residential, 2 to 4 acres) Zoning District -------------------------------------------------------------- 152
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 152
Permitted uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 152
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 152
Lot size requirements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 152
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 153
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 153
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 153
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
13
10.243. RR-4 (Rural Residential, 4 to 8 acres) Zoning District -------------------------------------------------------------- 154
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 154
Permitted uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 154
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 154
Lot size requirements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 154
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 155
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 155
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 155
10.244. RR-8 (Rural Residential, 8 to 16 acres) Zoning District ------------------------------------------------------------- 156
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 156
Permitted uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 156
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 156
Lot size requirements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 156
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 157
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 157
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 157
10.245. RR-16 (Rural Residential, 16 to 35 acres) Zoning District --------------------------------------------------------- 158
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 158
Permitted uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 158
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 158
Lot size requirements. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 158
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 159
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 159
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 159
10.250. Residential Zoning Districts ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 160
10.251. SFR-08 (Single-Family Residential, small lots) Zoning District --------------------------------------------------- 160
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 160
Permitted uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 160
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 160
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
14
Lot dimensions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 161
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 161
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 161
Lot coverage and building area. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 162
10.252. SFR-1 (Single-Family Residential, 1 to 2 acres) Zoning District -------------------------------------------------- 163
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 163
Permitted uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 163
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 163
Lot dimensions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 163
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 164
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 164
Lot coverage and building area. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 164
10.253. SFR-2 (Single-Family Residential, 2 to 4 acres) Zoning District -------------------------------------------------- 165
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 165
Permitted uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 165
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 165
Lot dimensions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 165
Setbacks and required yards. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 166
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 166
Lot coverage and building area. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 166
10.254. TFR-08 (Two-Family Residential) Zoning District -------------------------------------------------------------------- 167
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 167
Permitted uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 167
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 167
Lot dimensions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 167
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 168
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 168
Lot coverage and building area. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 168
10.255. MFR-08 (Multi-Family Residential) Zoning District ----------------------------------------------------------------- 170
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
15
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 170
Permitted uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 170
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 170
Lot dimensions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 170
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 171
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 171
Lot coverage and building area. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 171
10.260. Hamlet Zoning Districts ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 173
Principles of Traditional Neighborhood Design. -------------------------------------------------------------------------- 173
10.261. HAM-R (Hamlet Residential) Zoning District -------------------------------------------------------------------------- 174
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 174
Permitted uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 174
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 174
Lot dimensions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 175
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 175
Building height. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 175
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 175
10.262. HAM-M (Hamlet – Mixed-Use) Zoning District ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 177
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 177
Permitted uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 177
Conditional Uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 177
Lot dimensions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 178
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 178
Building height and area limitations. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 179
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 179
10.270. Commercial Zoning Districts ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 180
Provisions applicable to all Commercial Districts ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 180
10.271. LC (Limited Commercial) Zoning District ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 181
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 181
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
16
Permitted Uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 181
Conditional Uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 181
Building height and area limitations. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 182
Lot dimensions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 182
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 182
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 182
10.272. GC (General Commercial) Zoning District ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 183
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 183
Permitted Uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 183
Conditional Uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 183
Building size and area limitations. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 184
Lot dimensions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 184
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 185
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 185
10.273. HC (Heavy Commercial) Zoning District -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 186
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 186
Permitted Uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 186
Conditional Uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 187
Building size and area limitations. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 187
Lot dimensions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 187
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 187
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 187
10.280. Processing, Manufacturing and Industrial Zoning Districts ------------------------------------------------------- 188
Provisions applicable to all Processing, Manufacturing and Industrial Districts ---------------------------------- 188
Rezones to Processing, Manufacturing and Industrial Zoning Districts. -------------------------------------------- 188
10.281. RI (Rural Industry) Zoning District---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 189
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 189
Permitted Uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 189
Conditional Uses ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 189
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
17
Building size and area limitations. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 190
Lot dimensions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 190
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 190
Lot coverage. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 190
10.282. MI (Manufacturing and Industrial) Zoning District ------------------------------------------------------------------ 191
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 191
Permitted Uses --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 191
Conditional Uses ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 192
Building size and area limitations. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 192
Lot dimensions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 192
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 193
10.290. Special Use Zoning Districts ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 194
10.291. PUD (Planned Unit Development) Zoning District ------------------------------------------------------------------ 194
Purpose. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 194
Permitted uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 194
Other standards. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 194
Criteria for approval of PUDs. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 194
Planned unit development approval process. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 195
10.292. UTR (Utility, Transportation and Right-of-Way ) Zoning District ----------------------------------------------- 200
Purpose ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 200
Permitted uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 200
Conditional uses ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 200
Building size and area limitations. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 200
Lot dimensions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 200
Setbacks and required yards. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 201
10.300. Overlay Districts --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 202
10.301. AED (Adult Entertainment) Overlay District -------------------------------------------------------------------------- 202
Statement of Purpose. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 202
Findings. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 202
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
18
Limitations. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 203
Determination of obscenity. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 204
Applicability. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 204
Permitted Uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 204
Standards for siting of adult entertainment establishments. --------------------------------------------------------- 204
Severability. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 205
10.302. HD (Historic) Overlay District ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 206
Statement of purpose. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 206
Designation. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 206
Indication. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 206
Protection of historic sites. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 206
Protection of historic structures. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 207
10.303. NR-I (Natural Resource Identification) Overlay District ----------------------------------------------------------- 208
Purpose ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 208
Permitted and conditional uses ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 208
Additional application information. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 208
Performance standards. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 208
10.304. TDR-S (Transfer of Development Rights Sending) Overlay District--------------------------------------------- 209
Statement of purpose. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 209
Areas affected. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 209
Applicable zoning districts. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 209
Permitted uses. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 209
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 210
Area regulations. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 210
10.305. TDR-R (Transfer of Development Rights Receiving) Overlay District ------------------------------------------ 211
Statement of purpose. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 211
Areas affected. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 211
Applicable zoning districts. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 211
Applicability near incorporated municipalities. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 211
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
19
Permitted uses. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 211
Conditional uses. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 212
10.400. Changes and Amendments ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 213
10.500. Roles, Responsibilities and Duties --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 213
Zoning Administrator ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 213
Zoning and Land Regulations Committee ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 214
Town Government ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 215
County Board of Supervisors --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 215
County Executive ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 216
Board of Adjustment ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 216
10.600. Reserved for future use. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 217
10.700. Reserved for future use. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 217
10.800. Subchapter II Sign Regulations -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 218
Title ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 218
Purpose ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 218
Applicability ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 218
Severability -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 218
Substitution ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 218
10.801. Definitions ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 219
Sign ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 219
Abandoned sign. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 219
Air dancer ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 219
Apartment complex sign -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 219
Appendage sign -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 219
Auxiliary sign ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 219
Awning sign ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 219
Back-to-back sign ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 219
Billboard ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 219
Directional sign --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 219
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
20
Double decked sign --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 219
Electronic message sign --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 220
Feather flag or feather banner------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 220
Graphic sign ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 220
Ground ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 220
Ground sign ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 220
Intersection ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 220
Logo ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 220
Marquee sign ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 220
Nit ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 220
Obscene ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 220
Off-premise advertising sign --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 221
On-premise advertising sign ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 221
Private property protection sign ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 221
Projecting sign ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 221
Pylon sign ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 221
Road classification----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 221
Side-by-side signs ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 221
Sign area ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 221
Sign face ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 221
Temporary signs ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 221
Trim ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 222
V-shaped frame -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 222
Vehicle sign ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 222
Vision clearance triangle -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 222
Wall sign ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 222
10.802. Standards and Requirements for Signs in All Zoning Districts --------------------------------------------------- 223
Prohibited signs -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 223
Computation and Rules of Measurement ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 223
Location standards for all signs ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 224
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1) Table of Contents
21
Design Standards ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 224
Maintenance ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 225
10.803. Signs Allowed Without a Permit------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 227
Exempt Signs. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 227
The following signs are permitted without requirement for a permit, subject to any listed standards. -- 227
Temporary signs. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 227
10.804. Signs allowed with apermit ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 229
Table 1: Signs Permitted with a Permit by Zoning District ------------------------------------------------------------- 229
Auxiliary signs ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 230
Awning signs ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 230
On-premise ground signs -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 230
On-premise pylon signs ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 231
On-premise wall signs ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 231
Billboards ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 232
Directional Signs ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 233
10.805. Nonconforming Signs and Use -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 233
Nonconforming signs ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 233
Signs advertising a nonconforming use ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 233
New copy ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 233
Change of use ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 233
10.806. Administration ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 234
Variances ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 234
Applications and Permits -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 234
Penalties ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 235
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.000(1) General Provisions
22
10.000. General Provisions
10.001. Title, Purpose and Statutory Authorization
Title.
This ordinance is known as the “Dane County Zoning Ordinance.”
Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
(a)promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare;
(b)encourage planned and orderly land use development;
(c)protect property values and the property tax base;
(d)permit the careful planning and efficient maintenance of highway systems;
(e)ensure adequate highway, utility, health, educational and recreational facilities;
(f)recognize the needs of agriculture, forestry, industry and business in future growth;
(g)encourage uses of land and other natural resources which are in accordance with theircharacter and adaptability;
(h)provide adequate light and air, including access to sunlight for solar collectors and to windfor wind energy systems;
(i)encourage the protection of groundwater resources;
(j)preserve wetlands;
(k)conserve soil, water and forest resources;
(l)protect the beauty and amenities of landscape and man-made developments;
(m)provide healthy surroundings for family life; and
(n)promote the efficient and economical use of public funds.
(o)to promote creation of employment opportunities;
(p)to support the continued existence of strong and economically viable towns as vitalcommunities of Dane County.
Statutory Authority.
This ordinance is adopted under, but not limited to, the following statutes: ss.59.69, 59.694, 59.698 and Chapter 91, Wisconsin Statutes.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.002(1) Reenactment And Repeal
23
10.002. Reenactment And Repeal
Rights and liabilities under previous code.
It is the intention of this chapter to continue in force such existing provisions of the previous code known as "Chapter 10, Dane County Zoning Ordinance" so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued there under are preserved and may be enforced, unless explicitly surrendered by specific provisions of this chapter or altered by the Official Zoning Map.
Prior ordinance temporarily in effect.
As provided in s. 59.69(5)(d), Wis. Stats., the previous code known as “Chapter 10, Dane County Zoning Ordinance” shall remain in effect for up to one year from [clerk to insert effective date] in all towns, or until the town board adopts this ordinance, whichever comes first.
Repeal of provisions not reenacted.
All provisions of the Chapter 10 of the Dane County Code of Ordinances which existed prior to (clerk to insert effective date), and which are not reenacted herein are hereby repealed.
Violations under previous code.
The adoption of this chapter shall not adversely affect the County's right to prosecute any violation of the predecessor Chapter 10, provided that such violation occurred while that chapter was in effect. Declarations of rights and injunctions abating violations shall not be invalidated by the repeal and recreation of Chapter 10.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.003(1) Jurisdiction, Effective Date and Interpretation
24
10.003. Jurisdiction, Effective Date and Interpretation
Applicability and effective dates.
(a)Unincorporated areas.This chapter is applicable to all territory, except for areas under city or village extraterritorial zoning under s. 62.23(7a), Wisconsin Statutes, located within those portions of the unincorporated areas of Dane County in which the associated town board has adopted this chapter pursuant to s. 59.69(5), Wis. Stats. The following towns have adopted this ordinance as of the effective date listed below:1.Town of Albion: February 5, 20192.Town of Berry: Not adopted as of January 23, 2020.3.Town of Black Earth: Not adopted.4.Town of Blooming Grove: February 13, 20195.Town of Blue Mounds: Not adopted as of January 23, 2020.6.Town of Bristol: Not adopted as of January 23, 2020.7.Town of Burke: March 20, 20198.Town of Christiana: April 19, 20199.Town of Cottage Grove: February 4, 201910.Town of Cross Plains: May 17, 201911.Town of Dane: March 4, 201912.Town of Deerfield: March 11, 201913.Town of Dunkirk: March 28, 201914.Town of Dunn: December 16, 201915.Town of Madison: March 11, 201916.Town of Mazomanie: March 11, 201917.Town of Medina: March 21, 201918.Town of Middleton: March 18, 201919.Town of Montrose: April 2, 201920.Town of Oregon: March 5, 201921.Town of Perry: March 12, 201922.Town of Pleasant Springs: December 3, 201923.Town of Primrose: March 4, 201924.Town of Roxbury: April 21, 201925.Town of Rutland: March 5, 201926.Town of Springdale: November 15, 201927.Town of Springfield: Not adopted as of January 23, 2020.28.Town of Sun Prairie: Not adopted as of January 23, 2020.29.Town of Vermont: May 13, 201930.Town of Verona: July 2, 201931.Town of Vienna: March 4, 201932.Town of Westport: Not adopted as of January 23, 2020.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.003(2) Jurisdiction, Effective Date and Interpretation
25
33.Town of York: April 8, 2019
(b)Incorporated areas.
Under s. 59.69(7), Wisconsin Statutes:
1.Whenever an area which has been subject to a county zoning ordinance petitions tobecome part of a city or village, the regulations imposed by the county zoning ordinanceshall continue in effect, without change, and shall be enforced by the city or village untilthe regulations have been changed by official action of the governing body of the city orvillage.
2.In the event an ordinance of annexation is contested in the courts, the county zoningshall prevail and the county shall have jurisdiction over the zoning in the area affecteduntil ultimate determination of the court action.
(c)Municipalities And State Agencies Regulated.
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required tocomply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits for projects occurring within thischapter's jurisdiction. State agencies are required to comply when s. 13.48(13), Wis. Stats.,applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of State highways andbridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt when permits under s.30.12, Wis. Stats., are issued. Siting and construction of electric generating facilities areexempt when the Wisconsin Public Service Commission has issues a certificate of necessityand convenience under s. 196.491, Wis. Stats.
Severability.
(a)If any portion of this ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court ofcompetent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected.
(b)If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any portion ofthis chapter to a particular property, building, or structure, such judgment shall not affectthe application of said provision to any other property, water, building, or structure notspecifically included in said judgment.
(c)If any requirement or limitation attached to an authorization given under this chapter isfound invalid, it shall be presumed that the authorization would not have been grantedwithout the requirement or limitation and, therefore, said authorization shall also beinvalid.
Abrogations and other restrictions.
(a)If any other legally adopted County or town ordinance is more restrictive than this chapteror any amendments thereto, such other County or town ordinance continues in all respectsto the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(b)It is not otherwise intended by this chapter to abrogate, repeal, annul, impair or interferewith any existing plats, certified survey maps, easements, covenants, deed restrictions,agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.However, wherever this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.003(4) Jurisdiction, Effective Date and Interpretation
26
shall prevail.
Interpretation and Application.
(a) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare, and shall be liberally construed in favor of the County and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power now granted by Wisconsin Statutes and possessed by the County.
(b) Where property is affected by the regulations imposed by any provision of this chapter and by other governmental regulations, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail. Regardless of any other provision of this chapter, no land shall be developed or used, and no structure erected or maintained in violation of any State or Federal regulations.
(c) Word usage. In the interpretation of words used in this chapter:
1. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms.
2. Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words in the plural number shall include the single number.
3. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
4. The words "shall", "must" and "will" are mandatory.
5. The words "may", "can", "should", and "might" are permissive.
6. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, associations, trusts, and any other legal entity.
7. If there is any ambiguity between the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, table, or appendix, then the text shall control.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(1) Definitions
27
10.004. Definitions
Abandoned or discontinued use.
(a) Except as described in (b) below, when the nonconforming use of a property has ceased for twelve months or longer, a use shall be considered abandoned and discontinued.
(b) Mineral extraction uses shall be considered abandoned or discontinued if the use ceases for twelve months or longer, unless the landowner or operator complies with all of the following:
1. Within twelve months of the effective date of this ordinance has submitted a reclamation plan under Chapter 74, Dane County Code;
2. By January 31 of each year after submitting a reclamation plan, submits an annual report that meets all the requirements of s.74.251, Dane County Code.
3. Within twelve months of the receipt of notice under s. 10.102(7)(b)2., records a deed notice document, that:
(a) indicates the presence of a nonconforming mineral extraction site;
(b) describes the boundaries of the nonconforming mineral extraction site, and;
(c) is signed by the landowner and the zoning administrator.
4. By January 31 of each year after submitting a reclamation plan, provide to the zoning administrator evidence, subject to inspection, that all of the following conditions are met:
(a) Verification of property ownership or an active mineral lease, as recorded with the Dane County Register of Deeds, between the landowner and a mineral extraction operator.
(b) The driveway accessing the subject site shall either be paved or covered with crushed asphalt for a minimum distance of 100 feet from the public right-of-way.
(c) There shall be a safety fence around the entire extraction area at all times.
(d) Driveway access points to the site shall be gated. All gates shall be signed “no trespassing.”
(e) The operator shall post clearly visible signage indicating the presence of mineral extraction activity.
Accessory building.
A subordinate or supplemental building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building on the same lot or the use of the premises on which it is located. Except for accessory dwelling units, accessory buildings may not be used for human habitation.
Accessory dwelling unit - attached.
(a) A second dwelling unit, limited in size, which is physically attached to an existing principal dwelling.
(b) Accessory dwelling units have their own entrance, and do not share a main entrance with the principal residence on the lot.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(4) Definitions
28
Accessory dwelling unit - detached.
(a) A second dwelling unit, limited in size, which is in a freestanding accessory building, located on the same lot as a principal dwelling.
(b) This definition includes accessory buildings constructed in connection with a private garage or a private garage converted into a dwelling unit.
Accessory structure.
A structure associated with an accessory use.
Accessory use.
A land use incidental to, and customarily associated with, a specific principal use. Accessory uses must be located on the same lot or parcel and in the same zoning district as the principal use.
Active recreation.
(a) Non-motorized leisure and athletic activities, usually performed with others, often requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed, developed sites, fields, courts, courses or facilities. Active recreational uses may involve relatively large numbers of participants or spectators.
(b) Examples of such land uses include, but are not limited to: baseball or softball diamonds, field sports, gymnasiums, ice rinks or arenas, tennis courts, golf courses, swimming pools, velodromes and similar land uses.
(c) Active recreation does not include indoor entertainment and assembly or outdoor entertainment, as defined in this ordinance.
Adult book store.
An establishment which is used for selling or renting, for monetary consideration, the following materials, when such activity constitutes a significant part of the business conducted therein:
(a) Any picture, photograph, drawing, motion picture film or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of human body which depicts sexual conduct, sadomasochistic conduct or nudity in the context of sexual activity, whether or not the same is intended to be viewed on or off the premises; or
(b) Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however reproduced, or any sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in para. (a) above or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse.
(c) As used in paragraphs (a) and (b), sexual conduct has the meaning set forth in s. 944.21 (2)(e), Wis. Stats., and as used in this subsection, significant part of the business means dedication or use of more than 10% of the available floor space to the sale or rental of the subject matter referenced herein, including space devoted to viewing of videotapes or films.
(d) Material, however distributed, which is published by a medical products manufacturer, a
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(9) Definitions
29
medical or health association, an insurance company, or by a consumer education organization shall not be considered part of the business of operating an adult book store.
Adult entertainment establishment.
(a) Any establishment which regularly features for monetary consideration performances or presentations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on exposure to view of less than completely or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic area, anus, vulva, female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if opaquely covered; or on acts of or acts which simulate the fondling of another person’s genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts, sexual intercourse, masturbation, flagellation, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, sadomasochistic abuse, fellatio, cunnilingus, or any sexual conduct as defined by s. 944.21(2)(e), Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) The term regularly features as used in this subsection means giving special prominence at uniform, orderly intervals on a permanent basis, or always features.
Adopted town and county comprehensive plan.
A town comprehensive plan adopted by both the affected town board and the Dane County Board of Supervisors under s. 66.1001, Wis. Stats., and Chapter 82, Dane County Code.
Agricultural use.
Means any of the following activities conducted for the purpose of producing an income or livelihood:
(a) Crop or forage production.
(b) Keeping livestock.
(c) Beekeeping.
(d) Nursery, sod, or Christmas tree production.
(e) Floriculture.
(f) Aquaculture.
(g) Fur farming.
(h) Forest management.
(i) Enrolling land in a federal agricultural commodity payment program or a federal or state agricultural land conservation payment program.
Agricultural accessory building.
A building or buildings used in the operation of a farm.
Agricultural accessory use.
Any of the following land uses on a farm:
(a) A building, structure, or improvement that is an integral part of, or incidental to, an agricultural use.
(b) An activity or business operation that is an integral part of, or incidental to, an agriculture
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(14) Definitions
30
use.
(c) Farm residence.
(d) A business, activity, or enterprise, whether or not associated with an agricultural use, which is conducted by the owner or operator of a farm, that requires no buildings, structures, or improvements other than those described in par. (a) or (c), that employs no more than 4 full-time employees annually, and that does not impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of the farm or of other protected farmland.
Agricultural entertainment.
(a) An agricultural accessory use, taking place on a farm, that combines the elements and characteristics of agriculture and tourism.
(b) Examples of agricultural entertainment include, but are not limited to: corn mazes, pick-your-own operations, hay rides, sleigh rides, petting farms, on-farm tours, agricultural related museums, demonstrations of farming practices, techniques and methods, educational activities about farm animals and camps centered around interaction with farm animals, fee based fishing and hunting, horseback riding, nature trails, haunted barns, farm breakfasts and luncheons, and similar activities which are related to agriculture.
Agriculture-related use.
A facility, whether or not located on a farm, that has at least one of the following as a primary, and not merely incidental, purpose:
(a) Providing agricultural supplies, agricultural equipment, agricultural inputs or agricultural services directly to farms, including farms in the farmland preservation zoning district.
(b) Storing, processing or handling raw agricultural commodities obtained directly from farms, including farms in the farmland preservation zoning district.
(c) Processing agricultural by-products or wastes received directly from farms, including farms in the farmland preservation district.
Airport, landing strip or heliport.
A transportation facility that provides takeoff, landing, servicing, storage and other services to any type of air transportation.
(a) Seaplane operation below the ordinary highwater mark of a navigable water is not included in this definition, but such use may be regulated under Chapter 72, Dane County Code.
(b) Except for emergency and rescue operations, the operation of any type of air vehicle requiring Federal Aviation Administration pilot certification shall occur only in conjunction with an approved airport, landing strip, or heliport.
Amusement park.
An outdoor entertainment use, publicly or privately owned, containing amusement and recreational facilities and devices, whether operated for profit or not.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(18) Definitions
31
Animal boarding, domestic pet.
Any premises that accommodates six or more domestic pets during the daytime hours or overnight, including both indoor and outdoor facilities. May also include accessory retail sales of pet food, pet supplies and related items, limited to 250 square feet of floor space.
(a) Examples of these land uses include: commercial kennels, pet breeding operations and pet day-care operations.
(b) Domestic pet animal boarding does not include:
1. the keeping of six or more domesticated songbirds, aquarium fish or reptiles, kept indoors and owned by a resident of the property;
2. temporary foster care not to exceed a residence of six weeks per animal;
3. overnight or observational care for patients of a veterinary clinic;
4. large animal boarding, domestic fowl or beekeeping, colony houses, small-scale farming or agricultural livestock operations.
Animal boarding, large animal.
Any premises that accommodates six or more of any animals, not owned by the owner of the property, not including domestic pets, domestic fowl or domestic bees. Exercise yards, fields, training areas, and trails associated with such land uses are considered accessory to such land uses and do not require separate consideration.
(a) Examples of these land uses include commercial stables, livestock boarding, wildlife rehabilitation centers and game farms.
(b) Large animal boarding does not include: temporary foster care not to exceed a residence of six weeks per animal, overnight or observational care for patients of a veterinary clinic, domestic pet boarding, domestic fowl or beekeeping, colony houses, small-scale farming or agricultural livestock operations .
Animal unit.
One animal unit shall be defined as being the equivalent of 1 cow, 4 hogs, 10 sheep, 10 goats, 100 poultry, 1 horse, 1 pony, 1 mule or 100 rabbits or an equivalent combination thereof. The WI DNR Animal Unit Worksheet shall be used to determine animal unit if not defined above.
Apartment.
A room, or a suite of rooms, with toilet and culinary accommodations, used or designed for use as a residence by a family or individual, and located in either:
(a) a building containing two or more such rooms or suites or;
(b) a building devoted primarily to nonresidential use.
Apartment building.
A building containing accommodations for more than two (2) families living independently of each other.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(23) Definitions
32
Bed and breakfast. (See Transient or tourist lodging.)
Boathouse.
A permanent accessory structure used solely for the personal storage of
watercraft and associated materials.
Boat slip.
A mooring accommodation for the in-water storage of a boat or other water craft which is owned by other than a resident or owner of the premises.
Building.
(a) Any structure having a roof supported by posts, columns or walls and its appendages including, but not limited to balconies, porches, decks, stoops, fireplaces and chimneys.
(b) For permit and locational purposes, the following are also considered buildings: swimming pools, both above and below ground, permanent hunting blinds with a foundation, and towers, including communication towers.
(c) The following are not considered buildings: poles, towers and posts for lines carrying telephone messages or electricity and recreational structures of open construction and without walls, such as swing sets, slides, yard gyms, climbers, sand boxes and teeter totters.
Building envelope.
The three dimensional space within which a building is constructed.
Building footprint.
The entire area of ground covered by a structure, expressed in square feet, including appurtenances such as, but not limited to, balconies, porches, decks, stoops, fireplaces, and chimneys.
Building height.
(a) The vertical distance, measured from the mean elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building to the highest point on the roof for flat roofs; to the mean height level between the highest ridge and its associated eave for gable and hip roofs; to the deck line for mansard roofs.
(b) The front of the building shall be the side directly facing the public or private thoroughfare which affords primary means of access to the property, excluding the driveway.
Building line.
(a) The building line shall be the point at which the building wall or any appendage of the building such as steps, chimneys, decks, porches or covered patios meet the ground.
(b) For earth sheltered homes, the building line is a line where the exterior walls of the building if extended vertically would be located on the lot or zoning parcel.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(31) Definitions
33
Building setback line.
(a) A line that is parallel to the front or street lot line and is located at a distance from either the center line of the adjacent highway or the front lot line as provided for in s. 10.102(9) of this ordinance.
(b) For triangular or gored lots that do not have the required lot width at the required building setback line, the building setback line shall be a line that is parallel to the front lot line or if the front lot line is a curve it shall be parallel to the chord of the arc of the curve of the front lot line and located at the point on the lot where the length of the line meets the lot width requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
Bus terminal.
A building or facility where passengers may board or leave intercity buses, also facilities for baggage handling, bus package services and ticket sales.
Campground.
Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by 2 or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area. Campgrounds may include buildings to provide services to the patrons, such as restrooms, bathing, laundry and commissary facilities.
Campground, primitive.
Any campground which is accessible only by hiking, boating or canoeing.
Camping unit.
(a) Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter for a period not exceeding 180 days within any calendar year.
(b) Camping units include, but are not limited to, a tent, camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, or pickup truck that is fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use.
Caretaker’s residence.
A dwelling on a nonresidential property occupied by the person who oversees the nonresidential property 24 hours a day, and his or her family.
Cemetery.
(a) Any land, that is used, or intended to be used, for the burial of human remains.
(b) Examples of cemeteries include, but are not limited to, cemeteries, mausoleums, columbarians and burial chapels.
Clear area.
An area adjacent to and completely surrounding each and every physical structure comprising part or all of an historic site. No building or structure of any kind, whether or not a permit therefor is required under this chapter, shall be erected in the clear area and no obstacle of any
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(39) Definitions
34
kind, whether attached to an allowed structure or not, shall be placed in the airspace above the clear area, and no soil disturbance shall occur in the clear area.
Colony house.
A building for the breeding and raising of experimental and laboratory animals, such as white mice and rats, guinea pigs and the like, and for the storage of feed and accessory materials.
Committee.
The Zoning and Land Regulations Committee of the Dane County Board of Supervisors, or any other committee of the Dane County Board of Supervisors designated to act as the county zoning agency and delegated the responsibility for zoning matters under ss.59.69, 59.692, 87.30 and 144.26 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Communications tower.
(a) Except as exempted below, any of the following:
1. A mobile service support structure, as defined in s.66.0404(1)(n),Wisconsin Statutes.
2. A radio broadcast service facility as defined in s. 66.0406(1), Wisconsin Statutes.
3. Any structure, whether free-standing or attached to an existing building or structure, that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas.
4. Communications towers may include, but are not limited to: self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, fixed wireless towers, or cellular telephone towers.
(b) Exemptions.
The following are not considered communication towers for the purposes of this ordinance:
1. Amateur radio towers installed, erected, maintained and/or operated in association with any permitted or conditional residential use, by a federally-licensed amateur radio operator, so long as all the following conditions are met:
a. The antenna use involved is accessory to the primary use of the property which is not a telecommunication facility;
b. In a residential zone, no more than one support structure for licensed amateur radio operator is allowed on the parcel;
c. Sufficient anti-climbing measures have been incorporated into the facility, as needed, to reduce potential for trespass and injury.
2. Publicly owned and operated telecommunications facilities required in the public interest to provide for and maintain a radio frequency telecommunication system, including digital, analog, wireless or electromagnetic waves, for police, fire and other municipal services.
3. Broadcast signal receivers, including satellite dishes or antennas that are one (1) meter or less in diameter and satellite earth station antennas that are two (2) meters or less in diameter
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(42) Definitions
35
4. Towers erected on municipally owned property, or on private property as part of a municipally sponsored project, for the primary purpose of providing wireless internet services to town residents, so long as all the following conditions are met:
a. The tower is under 100’ in height;
b. The tower does not require nighttime lighting per Federal Aviation Administration standards;
c. Is located a minimum distance of 300’ from any principal residential structure located on neighboring property; and
d. The town board has submitted a resolution in support of the proposal.
Communications tower, substantial modification.
The modification of a communications tower, including the mounting of an antenna on such a structure, that does any of the following:
(a) For structures with an overall height of 200 feet or less, increases the overall height of the structure by more than 20 feet.
(b) For structures with an overall height of more than 200 feet, increases the overall height of the structure by 10 percent or more.
(c) Measured at the level of the appurtenance added to the structure as a result of the modification, increases the width of the support structure by 20 feet or more, unless a larger area is necessary for collocation.
(d) Increases the square footage of an existing equipment compound to a total area of more than 2,500 square feet.
Community living arrangements.
(a) Any of the following facilities licensed or operated, or permitted under the authority of the Wisconsin Department of Health and Social Services:
1. a community living arrangement for adults, as defined in s. 46.03 (22), Wis. Stats. and s. 50.01(1g), Wis. Stats.
2. a community living arrangement for children, as defined in s. 48.743 (1), Wis. Stats.
3. a foster home, as defined in s. 48.02 (6), Wis. Stats, or
4. or an adult family home, as defined in s. 50.01 (1), Wis. Stats.
(b) Community living arrangements do not include:
1. day care centers,
2. nursing homes,
3. hospitals,
4. prisons or jails.
Community garden.
A private or public facility for cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables or ornamental plants by more than one person or family.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(45) Definitions
36
Composting facility.
A commercial or public solid waste processing facility where yard, kitchen or garden waste is transformed into soil conditioner or fertilizer by biological decomposition.
Condominium.
Individual ownership of a structure, a unit in a multi-unit structure, or a piece of real property located on a commonly held parcel of land organized under Chapter 703, Wisconsin Statutes. Buildings in a condominium shall meet the density and locational requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.
Consistent with.
Furthers or does not contradict:
(a) The purposes and standards of this ordinance, or
(b) the policies contained in relevant town comprehensive plans, the Dane County Comprehensive Plan or the Dane County Farmland Preservation Plan.
Construction equipment.
(a) A type of commercial vehicle that is primarily designed and used for commercial, construction, or industrial operations or activities.
(b) Construction equipment includes, but is not limited to, front end loaders, dumpster haulers, forklifts, augers, tractor-trailers, dump trucks, wreckers, bulldozers, cranes, bobcats, trenchers, stump grinders, backhoes, and cement mixers tractors, both wheeled and crawler types, graders, end loaders, scrapers, bulldozers, cranes, back hoes, drag lines, trucks, including dump, stake body or semi-trailer lowboys of more than two and one-half (2-½) ton capacity, "cherry picker" vehicles and air compressors.
(c) Equipment used in connection with a farm operation and not leased or contracted for use on any other property shall not be considered construction equipment.
Contiguous.
Lots or parcels that share a common boundary for a distance of at least 66 feet.
Day care centers.
A place or home which provides care for eight (8) or more children under the age of seven (7) years for less than 24 hours a day and is licensed as provided for in s. 48.65 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Development.
Any activity requiring any of the following:
(a) a zoning permit, conditional use permit or certificate of compliance under this ordinance;
(b) a shoreland zoning permit under Chapter 11, Dane County Code
(c) a floodplain zoning permit under Chapter 17, Dane County Code
(d) an erosion control permit or stormwater management permit under Chapter 14, Dane County Code
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(52) Definitions
37
(e) a sanitary permit under Chapter 46, Dane County Code.
Development plan.
A scale drawing of the premises which accurately depicts:
(a) the shape and dimensions of the lot, zoning parcel, tax parcels, or condominium units, as appropriate;
(b) the location and dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures;
(c) the location and dimensions of all parking areas, loading areas, circulation areas, and access drives;
(d) the distance in feet between all structures, and between all structures and parking areas, abutting streets and highway rights-of-way or easements and side and rear lot lines, and;
(e) any other information as the zoning administrator deems necessary to determine the nature of the development.
Development right.
(a) A potential new residential building site available under the policies of an adopted town and county comprehensive plan, subject to the standards of this ordinance and chapters 11, 17 and 75.
(b) For purposes of participating in a transfer of development rights program, a development right exists on a particular property if adopted town and county comprehensive plans would support a rezone petition to allow residential development on the property.
(m) Distribution Center
Any land use where goods are received and/or stored for delivery to the ultimate customer at remote locations.
Divided highway
A highway with 2 or more roadways separated by spaces not intended for the use of vehicular traffic.
Domestic beekeeping.
The keeping of honeybees in a residential zoning district.
Domestic fowl.
Female chickens, ducks, and quail. Geese, turkeys, and pea fowl are not considered domestic fowl for the purposes of this ordinance.
Domestic pets.
(a) Any animal that:
1. has been bred or raised to live in or near the habitations of humans,
2. is not kept for slaughter, milk, eggs or the harvesting of fur, wool or plumage, and;
3. is dependent on humans for food and shelter.
(b) Domestic pets include, but are not limited to: dogs, cats and domestic ferrets.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(58) Definitions
38
(c) Domestic pets do not include: horses, sheep, any animal equivalent to one-half animal unit or larger, endangered species, wildlife, livestock, domestic fowl or bees.
Drive-in establishment.
(a) An establishment which accommodates motor vehicles from which the occupants may obtain or receive a service or product which may be used or consumed in the vehicle on the same premises, or
(b) An establishment which accommodates motor vehicles for the purpose of fueling or providing minor motor vehicle services.
Duplex.
A dwelling designed or intended to be occupied by two families, but without a shared entrance.
Dwelling.
A building, or part of a building, containing living, sleeping, housekeeping accommodations and sanitary facilities for occupancy by one or more families.
Electric generating facility.
Any equipment together with associated structures, buildings, grounds and other facilities intended to produce electricity consumed primarily off the premises.
Explosive materials.
(a) Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion, except as exempted below.
(b) Explosive materials include, but are not limited to, dynamite and other high explosives, slurries, emulsions, water gels, blasting agents, black powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating cord, igniter cord and igniters.
(c) Exemptions.
(d) For the purposes of this ordinance, the following are not considered explosive materials:
1. Fireworks, as defined in s.167.10, Wis. Stats.
2. Fuel or a lubricant.
3. A firearm cartridge or shotgun shell.
4. A flare used or possessed or sold for use as a signal in an emergency or in the operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or motor vehicle.
5. A match, cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space heater.
6. A cap containing not more than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture, if the cap is used or possessed or sold for use in a device which prevents direct bodily contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion.
7. A toy snake which contains no mercury.
8. A model rocket engine.
9. Tobacco and a tobacco product.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(63) Definitions
39
10. A sparkler on a wire or wood stick not exceeding 36 inches in length that is designed to produce audible or visible effects or to produce audible and visible effects.
11. A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and which contains less than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture.
12. A fuseless device that is designed to produce audible or visible effects or audible and visible effects, and that contains less than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture.
13. A device that is designed primarily to burn pyrotechnic smoke-producing mixtures, at a controlled rate, and that produces audible or visible effects, or audible and visible effects.
14. A cylindrical fountain that consists of one or more tubes and that is classified by the federal department of transportation as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50.
15. A cone fountain that is classified by the federal department of transportation as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50.
16. A novelty device that spins or moves on the ground
17. Propellants for airbags in a motor vehicle.
Family.
A single housekeeping unit, living together on the premises, comprised of either:
(a) Any number of individuals related by blood, adoption, foster care, domestic partnership or marriage, or
(b) No more than five unrelated individuals.
Farm.
All land under common ownership that is primarily devoted to agricultural use. For the purposes of this ordinance, “primarily devoted” means that a majority of the land is in agricultural use.
Farm operator.
A person who, or a family at least one member of which, earns substantial farm income from farm operations on the farm.
Farm residence.
Any of the following structures that is located on a farm:
(a) A single-family residence that is occupied by any of the following:
1. A person who is both the owner and farm operator of the farm.
2. A parent or child of the owner and farm operator of the farm.
3. An individual who earns more than 50 percent of his or her gross income from the farm.
(b) A migrant labor camp that is certified under s. 103.92, Wis. Stats.
Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses.
A facility, land or premises that provides a public service and is operated by a:
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(68) Definitions
40
(a) federal, state, county, city, village, town or tribal government,
(b) public or private utility, commission or authority,
(c) public or private school, university, college or school district,
(d) church or religious institution
(e) public or quasi-public agency, or
(f) tax-exempt organization.
Gross floor area.
(a) The aggregate area of all horizontal levels of a building, expressed in square feet, not including any horizontal level where the average floor to ceiling height is less than 6 feet.
(b) When used as a basis of measurement for off-street parking and loading spaces for any use, gross floor area shall be the sum of the areas of the several floors of the buildings devoted to such use, including all areas devoted to restrooms, storage, utilities and circulation.
Gross income.
Wisconsin Adjusted Gross Income, as defined in s. 71.01, Wis. Stats.
Gross vehicle weight.
The weight of any truck or road tractor and its semitrailer plus the load that the vehicle is rated to haul.
Heavy industrial.
(a) A processing, manufacturing or assembly use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw materials, or any other processing, manufacturing or assembly use where any of the following conditions apply:
1. operations are conducted wholly or partially outdoors;
2. operations are potentially associated with significant nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, pollution or radiation which are detectable at the property line;
3. operations may pose a significant safety hazard (such as danger of fire, toxic spills or explosion).
(b) Heavy industrial uses include, but are not limited to: paper, pulp or paperboard producers; chemical and allied product producers including poison or fertilizer producers but not including drug producers; petroleum and coal product producers; permanent asphalt, concrete or cement producers; tanneries; stone, clay or glass product producers; primary metal producers; heavy machinery producers; electrical distribution equipment producers; electrical industrial apparatus producers; transportation vehicle producers; commercial sanitary sewage treatment plants; power production facilities; railroad switching yards; and commercial recycling facilities not involving the on-site storage of salvage materials.
(c) Heavy industrial uses do not include agriculture, agriculture-related, small-scale domestic energy generation, utility services, or light industrial uses.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(72) Definitions
41
Home occupation.
A home occupation is any activity carried on by a member of the family residing on the premises, which meets all of the following conditions:
(a) The occupation is conducted within a dwelling and not in an accessory building;
(b) Only members of the family residing on the premises may be employed on the premises, plus a maximum of one other unrelated person;
(c) No stock-in-trade is kept or commodities sold, other than those made on the premises;
(d) Samples may be kept but not sold on the premises;
(e) No mechanical equipment is used except such as may be used for purely domestic or household purposes;
(f) Such occupation shall not require internal or external alterations, or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling;
(g) No more than 25 percent (25%) of the floor area of one (1) story of the dwelling is devoted to the occupation;
(h) The entrance to the space devoted to the occupation is from within the building;
(i) There is no evidence, other than the sign referred to in subsection (j) below, that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; and
(j) One (1) sign shall be permitted, which sign shall be attached to the building, shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area and shall not be lighted at night.
Incidental room rental.
Rental or leasing of rooms within a single-family residence, provided all of the following are met:
(a) All rooms offered for rent are within, and share a main building entrance with, the landowner’s primary residence
(b) No more than two bedrooms are offered for rent
(c) One off-street parking space is provided for each rental room.
Indoor commercial lodging.
(a) A building or premises that provides lodging to transient or tourist guests, that meets at least one of the following criteria:
1. Provides more than eight rooms available for transient guests; or
2. Provides accommodations for more than twenty transient or tourist guests at a time.
(b) Indoor commercial lodging may include, but is not limited to: hotels, motels, inns or resorts.
(c) Indoor commercial lodging does not include: incidental room rental, transient or tourist lodging, campgrounds, rooming houses, duplexes or multifamily residences.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(75) Definitions
42
Indoor entertainment or assembly.
(a) All land uses which provide entertainment services, 10 or more days per calendar year, entirely within an enclosed building. Such activities often have:
1. operating hours which extend significantly later than other commercial land uses and;
2. event-driven attendance of 50 or more people, who typically arrive and leave the premises as a group, and may congregate outside before and after events.
(b) Examples of such land uses include, but are not limited to: restaurants, taverns, theaters, dance clubs, music or performance venues and auditoriums.
Indoor sales.
Includes all principal land uses that conduct or display sales or rental merchandise or equipment completely or nearly completely within an enclosed building. Indoor sales operations may provide incidental service and indoor repair as an accessory use.
(a) Indoor sales include, but are not limited to: general merchandise stores, grocery stores, bait shops, sporting goods stores, antique stores, gift shops, laundromats, artisan studios, and bakeries.
(b) Indoor sales do not include adult bookstores, personal or professional services.
Indoor storage and repair.
Uses that are primarily oriented to the receiving, holding and shipping of materials for a single business. Such uses are not for retail sales, storage of personal belongings of others, or warehousing of materials for others. With the exception of loading facilities, such uses are contained entirely within an enclosed building.
Institutional residential.
(a) A congregate residential use that provides some level of human, health or social service to non-transient residents, in addition to basic housing.
(b) Institutional residential uses include, but are not limited to: group homes, convents, monasteries, nursing homes, convalescent homes, rehabilitation centers, assisted living facilities, congregate care facilities and retirement communities.
(c) Institutional residential uses do not include: community living arrangements, day care centers, duplexes, multifamily residences, rooming houses, adult family homes, foster homes or treatment foster homes.
Junk.
Garbage, waste, refuse, trash, any used motor vehicle upon which no current license plate is displayed, any inoperable motor vehicle, any used tire or used motor vehicle part, and any scrap material such as metal, paper, rags, cans or bottles.
Junkyard. (See Salvage yard.)
Kennel. (see Animal boarding, domestic pet)
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(82) Definitions
43
Land disturbing activity.
Any alteration or disturbance that may result in soil erosion, sedimentation or change in runoff including, but not limited to, removal of ground cover, grading, excavating or filling of land.
Light industrial.
(a) The processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or fabrication of materials and products, from previously processed or previously manufactured materials. All operations (with the exception of loading operations):
1. are conducted entirely within an enclosed building;
2. are not potentially associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and radiation which are detectable at the property line;
3. do not pose a significant safety hazard (such as danger of explosion); and
4. include no retail sales.
(b) Light industrial uses do not include agriculture-related, limited family businesses, Limited farm businesses, small workshops accessory to a permitted use, or heavy industrial uses.
Limited family business.
A small family-run commercial operation, accessory to a permitted principle use, that takes place entirely within an accessory building. All employees, except up to one or one full-time equivalent, must be a member of the family residing on the premises.
Limited farm business.
An agricultural accessory use that meets all of the following criteria:
(a) Consists of a business, activity, or enterprise, whether or not associated with an agricultural use, that is conducted by the owner or operator of a farm,
(b) Requires no buildings, structures, or improvements other than existing agricultural buildings or a farm residence
(c) Employs no more than 4 full-time equivalent employees annually, who are not members of the family residing on the farm, and;
(d) Does not impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of the farm or of other protected farmland.
Livestock.
(a) Except as listed below, bovine animals, equine animals, goats, poultry, sheep, swine, farm-raised deer, farm-raised game birds, camelids, ratites, and farm-raised fish.
(b) For the purposes of this ordinance, the following are not considered livestock:
1. Five or fewer equine animals on a premises in the Rural Mixed-Use Districts;
2. Domestic fowl;
3. Domestic pets;
4. Domestic beekeeping.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(87) Definitions
44
Location survey.
Survey information prepared by a licensed surveyor indicating the location of property lines and building location distances from those property lines for the specific portions of the building indicated in this ordinance.
(a) Such surveys need not provide all the parcel information set forth by Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter A-E 7.02 Minimum Standards for Property Surveys item A-E 7.01(2), but may exclude unnecessary information as permitted in A-E 7.01(2).
(b) All location surveys must comply with the accuracy standard required by A-E 7.06 Measurements.
Long-term care facility.
Any of the following:
(a) A nursing home, as defined in s. 50.01 (3), Wis. Stats.
(b) A community-based residential facility, as defined in s. 50.01 (1g), Wis. Stats.
(c) A facility, as defined in s. 647.01 (4), Wis. Stats.
(d) A swing bed in an acute care facility or extended care facility, as specified under 42 USC 1395tt.
(e) A hospice, as defined in s. 50.90 (1) (c), Wis. Stats.
(f) An adult family home, as defined in s. 50.01 (1), Wis. Stats.
(g) A residential care apartment complex, as defined in s. 50.01 (6d), Wis. Stats.
Lot.
A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one principal building and its accessory buildings or uses, except for commercial zoning districts. A parcel or tract of land that is defined by metes and bounds, certified survey, recorded subdivision plat, or other means of description recorded with the Register of Deeds and legally separated from other lots by such description. No land included in any public road, street, highway or railroad right-of-way shall be included when computing lot area. Also referred to as a "lot of record."
Lot depth.
The lot depth is the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line measured within the lot boundaries.
Lot width.
(a) The distance between the side lot lines measured along a line that is parallel to the front lot line at the required building setback line.
(b) On triangular or gored lots, the lot width shall be measured along a line that is parallel to the chord of the arc of the front lot line at the required building setback line. The lot width at this point shall not be less than that required by the zoning district in which the lot is located.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(92) Definitions
45
Lot line, front.
The lot line adjoining, and parallel to, the right-of-way that provides primary vehicular access to the lot.
Lot line, rear.
(a) The rear lot line shall mean that lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
(b) In the case of an irregular, triangular or gore shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and most distant from the front lot line shall be considered to be the rear lot line for the purpose of determining depth of rear yard.
(c) In cases where none of these definitions is applicable, the zoning administrator shall designate the rear lot line.
Lot line, side.
Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line
Manufactured home.
(a) A residential dwelling for one family as is defined in s. 101.91(2), Wis. Stats., that:
1. Is fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site,
2. bears a HUD label or insignia certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction Standards under 42 U.S.C. ss. 5401 to 5425, and
3. was built after June 14, 1976.
(b) A manufactured home is considered a single-family dwelling for the purposes of this chapter.
Manufactured home communities.
(a) Any plot or plots of ground upon which two (2) or more manufactured dwellings, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located.
(b) Exceptions. Manufactured home communities do not include manufactured homes used for any of the following uses, with an approved conditional use permit:
1. Accessory dwelling units
2. Secondary farm residences.
Marina.
(a) A commercial shoreside facility that provides accommodation and service for multiple boats.
(b) Marinas may include, but are not limited to, docks; boat slips; inside or outside storage of boats, boat trailers, storage cradles and other related marina items; sale of boats, boating equipment, fuel and supplies.
(c) Marinas do not include noncommercial boathouses, docks, or piers intended for watercraft owned by the landowner and accessory to a permitted principal use.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(98) Definitions
46
Mineral extraction.
(a) Quarrying, excavation or removal of sand, gravel, limestone, earth, soil or other mineral resources.
(b) Mineral extraction does not include:
1. Site preparation for residential or commercial plats,
2. Construction or landscaping projects,
3. Soil conservation practices
4. Stream, lake or shoreline protection projects
5. Agricultural land leveling projects conducted in accordance with NR 151, Subchapter II, Wisconsin Administrative Code, provided materials are not removed from the site.
6. Composting, storage or processing of materials that meet the definition of an agriculture-related use.
7. Solid waste disposal operations.
Mineral extraction accessory uses.
(a) When conducted entirely within the boundaries of an approved Conditional Use Permit for a mineral extraction site, the following are considered permitted accessory uses:
1. washing, crushing, screening and other processing of extracted mineral materials,
2. stockpiling and processing concrete and asphalt pavements for the purpose of recycling for reuse in asphalt or concrete mixtures or base course products
3. importing and dumping of clean fill materials
4. the erection of structures and the installation or storage, or both, of the necessary machinery and equipment used in the mineral extraction operation
5. soil blending for production of bioretention products
6. activities associated with an approved erosion control or stormwater management plan under Chapter 14, Dane County Code.
7. activities associated with site reclamation under an approved reclamation plan under Chapter 74, Dane County Code.
(b) At their own initiative or at the applicant’s request, town boards and the committee may further limit or prohibit any of the above accessory uses on a particular mineral extraction site, as part of the conditions on an individual Conditional Use Permit.
Mini-warehouse. (See Personal storage facility.)
Mobile home.
(a) A transportable factory built structure as is defined in s. 101.91(10), Wis. Stats., designed for long-term occupancy by one family and either:
1. was built prior to June 15, 1976, or
2. does not comply with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act.
(b) A mobile home is not considered to be a type of single-family dwelling for the purposes of this chapter.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(102) Definitions
47
Motel. (See Indoor commercial lodging.)
Motor vehicle.
Cars, trucks, buses, semi-tractors and semi-trailers which may be used to transport goods, materials, freight or passengers
Multiple family dwelling.
A dwelling designed or intended to be occupied by more than two families.
Native wildlife rehabilitator.
A facility operated under a rehabilitator license approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or the U.S. Department of the Interior under s.169.24, Wis. Stats. and Chapter NR 19, Subchapter II, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
Nursing home. (See also Institutional residential.)
(a) An institutional residential facility for the aged, chronically ill or incurable person in which three (3) or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation.
(b) Nursing homes do not include any of the following:
1. A convent or facility owned or operated exclusively by and for members of a religious order that provides reception and care or treatment of an individual.
2. A hospice, as defined in s. 50.90 (1), Wis. Stats., that directly provides inpatient care.
3. A residential care apartment complex
4. Hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured .
Nonconforming parcel.
A lot or zoning parcel lawfully created prior to the time this ordinance or relevant amendments took affect, and which does not conform to current area or lot width standards of this ordinance. Also known as a “substandard parcel.”
Nonconforming structure.
A structure lawfully erected prior to the time this ordinance or relevant amendments took effect, and which does not conform to the setback, side yard, rear yard, lot coverage, height or other dimensional requirements of this ordinance.
Nonconforming use.
A lawfully created use that existed prior to the time this ordinance or relevant amendments took effect, and which does not conform to the current standards of this ordinance.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(110) Definitions
48
Notice document.
A recorded instrument to notify future landowners and others of unusual features, policies, regulations or other characteristics that may affect future development potential or other speculative use of a specific property. All notice document instruments must meet the minimum recording standards of the Dane County Register of Deeds.
Occupiable floor area.
(a) When used as a basis of measurement for off-street parking spaces, the sum of the areas of the several floors of the buildings designed or intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients, patients or members.
(b) Occupiable floor area includes areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for the sale of merchandise, or in the case of office uses those areas occupied or used by employees.
(c) Occupiable floor area does not include areas used principally for non-public purposes such as restrooms, locker rooms, storage, utilities and areas behind counters.
Office.
An exclusive indoor land use whose primary function is the handling of information or administrative services. Such uses do not typically provide services directly to customers on a walk-in or on-appointment basis.
Outdoor assembly event.
(a) Any organized activity, not including agricultural entertainment events, of more than one hundred (100) persons, occurring 10 or more days per calendar year, that occurs entirely or partially outdoors.
(b) Examples of such land uses include, but are not limited to: outdoor concerts or performances, fairs, festivals, weddings, parties, banquets, circuses, sporting events, races and amusement parks.
Outdoor entertainment.
(a) All land uses which provide, on a permanent or ongoing basis, entertainment services partially or wholly outside of an enclosed building. Such activities often have the potential to be associated with nuisances related to noise, lighting, dust, trash and late operating hours.
(b) Examples of such land uses include, but are not limited to: shooting ranges, outdoor swimming pools, driving ranges, miniature golf facilities, volleyball courts, amusement parks, drive-in theaters, go-cart tracks and racetracks.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(115) Definitions
49
Outdoor passive recreation.
Outdoor activities that generally do not require a developed site, and have minimal impact on natural resources and surrounding properties. Such land uses may include, but are not limited to: arboretums, natural areas, wildlife areas, hiking trails, bike trails, cross country ski trails, horse trails, open grassed areas not associated with any particular active recreational land use, picnic areas, picnic shelters, gardens, fishing areas, and similar land uses.
Outdoor sales, display, or repair.
(a) Includes uses that conduct or display merchandise outside of an enclosed building that is for sale or rent and land uses that conduct maintenance or repairs on merchandise or equipment outside of an enclosed building.
(b) Examples of such land uses include, but are not limited to, vehicle sales, vehicle rental, manufactured and manufactured home sales, monument sales, and lawn mower repair.
(c) Such land uses do not include uses where the outdoor sales or display area is less than 15 percent of the gross floor area of any principal building where sales are also conducted, which are instead classified in the "indoor sales" land use category; motor vehicle repair or maintenance, which are instead classified in the "Drive-in establishment" category; drive-in theaters, which are instead classified in the "outdoor commercial entertainment" category; or the storage or display of inoperative vehicles or materials typically associated with a junkyard or salvage yard.
Outdoor storage.
(a) Any activity located primarily outdoors involving the receiving, holding and shipping of materials for a single business.
(b) Outdoor storage does not include loading and parking areas, storage of materials typically associated with a salvage or junkyard, salvage recycling centers or solid waste recycling centers.
(c) Outdoor storage of materials is not permitted within any building setback area.
Person.
Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the word person shall include the plural, or a company, firm, corporation or partnership.
Personal and professional services.
(a) All exclusively indoor land uses whose primary function is the provision of services directly to an individual on a walk-in or on-appointment basis.
(b) Examples of such land uses include, but are not limited to: professional services, insurance services, realty offices, financial services, repair and maintenance of small items conducted indoors; medical offices and clinics, veterinary clinics, barbershops, beauty shops, and related land uses.
(c) Personal and professional services do not include adult entertainment or vehicle repair and maintenance services.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(120) Definitions
50
Personal storage facility.
A facility that provides indoor storage of personal items entirely within partitioned buildings having an individual access to each partitioned area. Also known as "mini-warehouses."
Planned unit development.
(d) A form of land development, conceived and implemented as a cohesive, unified project and permitted only after following the procedures for creating a planned unit development district as provided in s. 10.291 of this ordinance.
(e) Within a planned unit development, regulations on permitted or conditional land uses, setbacks, lot or zoning parcel sizes or other development standards may vary to suit the proposed use and the site, as determined in the General Development Plan and Specific Improvement Plan approved by the County Board specifically for that project.
Principal building.
A building within which a majority of the principal use of a premises or lot is conducted.
Principal use.
The primary use of a premises.
Property maintenance shed.
A small utility structure, no larger than 600 square feet, used exclusively for storage of materials or equipment in conjunction with the maintenance of the property. Property maintenance sheds may be allowed on properties without a principal residence. Property maintenance sheds have no plumbing fixtures and cannot be used for living or sleeping purposes.
Racetrack.
An outdoor entertainment activity consisting of any location hosting a gathering of more than three people for the purpose of repetitive motor vehicular activity over a fixed course or area, which persists for periods in excess of 30 minutes in any one 24 hour period.
Recorded.
Recorded with the Dane County Register of Deeds.
Recreational equipment.
Boats, canoes, watercraft, snowmobiles or camping and luggage carrying trailers intended to be towed by an automobile or truck or a camper unit to be mounted on a truck. Any motor driven camper or motor home shall be considered as recreational equipment
Recreational racetrack.
A defined or fixed course for the driving of a motorcycle, automobile, ATV, snowmobile, go-cart, or any other similar motorized craft used for personal use.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(129) Definitions
51
Refuse. (See also Solid waste.)
Combustible and noncombustible rubbish including, but not limited to, paper, wood, metal, glass, cloth and products thereof, litter and street rubbish, ashes and lumber, concrete and other debris resulting from the construction or demolition of structures.
Rendering plant.
A plant for the reduction of dead animals or slaughtered animals not suitable for human consumption, to by-products such as hide, skin, grease, bones, glue and soap, and for the storage of such by-products
Renewable energy.
Electricity, heat, steam, gas or other power derived from any of the following:
(a) A fuel cell that uses, as determined by the Wisconsin Public Service Commission under s.196.378, Wis. Stats., a renewable fuel.
(b) Tidal or wave action.
(c) Solar thermal electric or photovoltaic energy.
(d) Wind power.
(e) Geothermal technology.
(f) Biomass.
(g) Synthetic gas created by the plasma gasification of waste.
(h) Densified fuel pellets made from waste material that does not include garbage, as defined in s. 289.01(9), Wis. Stats., and that contains no more than 30 percent fixed carbon.
(i) Fuel produced by pyrolysis of organic or waste material.
Roadside stand.
A structure having a ground area of not over 200 square feet, not permanent by being attached to the ground, readily removable in its entirety and to be used solely for the sale of farm and garden products produced on the premises. Such structures may be located within the setback lines of roads but shall not interfere with visibility along the highway.
Rooming house.
A building or premises, with a common, shared kitchen area, that rents three or more rooms:
(a) For definite, extended periods of time, typically 180 days or more
(b) To no more than twenty unrelated individuals, and
(c) Is not open to transients, tourists or to the general public
School (See also Governmental, institutional, religious or nonprofit community use).
(d) Any private, public or religious educational institution.
(e) Schools do not include either truck driving schools or construction equipment operator schools, unless expressly stated otherwise in this chapter.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(135) Definitions
52
Salvage yard.
An area where junk, waste or scrap materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, recycled, baled, packed, disassembled or handled.
(f) For the purposes of this definition, waste or scrap materials may include, but are not limited to: garbage, waste, refuse, trash, any used motor vehicle upon which no current license plate is displayed, any inoperable motor vehicle, any used tire or used motor vehicle part, and any scrap material such as metal, paper, rags, cans or bottles
(g) A salvage or junk yard may include a motor vehicle wrecking or dismantling yard
(h) A salvage or junk yard does not include a solid waste recycling center, composting facilities or processing operations meeting the definition of an agriculture-related use.
Sanitary fixture.
Any plumbing fixture that requires discharge to a private onsite wastewater treatment system or public sanitary sewer system pursuant to state or county plumbing code.
Setback.
The minimum horizontal distance from the front line or from the center of the highway, measured parallel to the highway or front lot line, to the front of the building.
Single family residential.
Land use characterized by individual, standalone dwellings designed for and occupied for a period of more than 30 days, exclusively by one family.
Slaughterhouse.
Any building or premises used commercially for the killing or dressing of cattle, sheep, swine, goats or horses, for human consumption and the storage, freezing and curing of meat and the preparation of meat products.
Small-scale farming.
Any agricultural use operated for recreational, hobby or supplementary income purposes on a site with a non-agricultural principal use. Animal use is limited to one animal unit per acre.
Solid waste.
Garbage, refuse and all other discarded or salvageable solid materials, including solid waste materials resulting from industrial, commercial, operations and other domestic use and public service activities. Solid waste does not include solids or dissolved material in waste water effluents or other common water pollutants.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(142) Definitions
53
Solid waste disposal operation.
A site or facility for the collection, storage, utilization, processing or final disposal of solid waste.
(a) Solid waste disposal operations include, but are not limited to: sanitary landfills, land disposal, incinerator, transfer, air curtain destruction, composting reduction, shredding, compression, processing and salvage.
(b) Solid waste disposal operations do not include: agriculture-related uses or in-house re-use of the imperfect finished products to make a merchantable finished product.
Solid waste recycling center. (See also Salvage yard.)
A solid waste disposal operation at which temporary storage and processes such as baling of paper, grinding of glass and flattening of cans, are conducted on segregated solid waste to facilitate reuse of the segregated solid waste as raw material.
Stormwater runoff.
Waters derived from rains falling, snowmelt or icemelt occurring within the drainage area, flowing over the surface of the ground and collected in channels, watercourses or conduits.
Story.
The vertical distance of a building included between the surface of any floor, except the basement, and the floor next above it. For top stories, the story is the space between the floor and the ceiling.
Story, half.
A story under a gable or hip or mansard roof, where the wall plates of which on at least two (2) sides are not more than two (2) feet above the floor of that story for at least 70% of the wall line.
Street.
A public or private thoroughfare, not including driveways, which affords primary means of access to abutting property.
Street line.
The dividing line between the street and the lot.
Structure.
(a) Any human-made object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream bed or lake bed.
(b) Structures include, but are not limited to, any building, dwelling, manufactured building, manufactured home, mobile home, house trailer, recreational vehicle, boathouse, boat shelter, advertising sign, deck, patios, driveways, fences, retaining walls, or other improvements or any part of such structure.
(c) A structure includes any permanent or temporary attachments, including but not limited to awnings, extensions, porches or decks.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(150) Definitions
54
Structural alteration.
Any change in the dimensions of a structure or in the interior layout or floor plan of a structure.
Substantial farm income.
A minimum of $10,400 gross farm income/year for the past three (3) years currently derived from the farming operation on the farm where the residential use is proposed. Rental income may not be used to meet the income requirement.
Tax parcel.
A parcel of land identified by a Parcel Identification Number assigned by the Dane County Property Listing Division for the purpose of assessing real property taxes. The boundaries of a tax parcel may or may not coincide with a lot, lot of record or zoning parcel.
TDR agricultural conservation easement.
(a) A holder’s non-possessory interest in real property imposing any limitation or affirmative obligation, the purpose of which may include any or all of the following:
1. retaining or protecting natural, scenic or open space values of real property;
2. assuring the availability of real property for agricultural, forest, recreational or open space use;
3. protecting natural resources;
4. maintaining or enhancing air or water quality;
5. preserving a burial site, as defined in s.157.70(1)(b), Wis. Stats.; or,
6. preserving the historical, architectural, archaeological or cultural aspects of real property.
(b) TDR agricultural conservation easements need not include any requirements for public access or restrictions on agricultural or forestry practices.
Temporary batch asphalt or concrete production.
Production of asphalt or concrete, using portable equipment, for a period not to exceed six months per calendar year and associated with time-limited, specific projects identified by project number.
Temporary or portable building.
(a) A building or structure that is not attached to the ground by anchors, bolts, footings, foundation piers, pilings, posts or other means of attaching permanently to the ground.
(b) Lawn and yard buildings not attached, anchored or affixed to the ground shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area on a lot in a residential district.
Temporary outdoor display and sales.
Outdoor sales events limited to two (2) events per year. For purposes of this paragraph, a single event is one which is held on consecutive days of not more than ten (10) days in duration.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(157) Definitions
55
Topography.
The configuration of the ground surface and relations among human-made and natural features that may determine ground slope and the direction of runoff flow.
Transfer of development rights (TDR).
(a) The conveyance of development rights by TDR agricultural conservation easement from one parcel of land to another and the recording of that conveyance with the Dane County Register of Deeds and other land records of Dane County.
(b) Any individual transfer of development rights transaction may, at the discretion of the parties involved, also include the conveyance of additional rights not enumerated in this ordinance.
Transient or tourist.
(a) A person who travels to a location away from his or her permanent or legal address for a short period of time, not to exceed twenty-nine days, for vacation, pleasure, recreation, culture, business or employment.
(b) For the purposes of this ordinance, transients or tourists do not include:
1. Nonpaying guests of the family occupying a dwelling unit;
2. Patients, clients or residents of permitted indoor institutional, institutional residential, or community living arrangement land uses ;
3. Employees who receive room and/or board as part of their salary or compensation.
Transient or tourist lodging.
(a) A residence that rents more than two, but not more than eight, bedrooms to transient guests or tourists, where all of the following apply:
1. Rooms are rented to no more than a total of 20 individuals who are not members of the landowner’s family.
2. Length of stay does not exceed twenty-nine (29) consecutive days for each registered guest.
(b) Transient lodging houses may include, but are not limited to: bed and breakfasts, hostels and recreational cabins.
(c) Transient lodging does not include: incidental room rental, campgrounds, duplexes, multifamily housing, institutional residential, indoor institutional, community living arrangements, rooming houses or indoor commercial lodging .
Truck terminal.
Buildings or land which is used for the storage or distribution of freight or goods by a common carrier.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(162) Definitions
56
Urban service area.
Areas identified and mapped by the Capitol Area Regional Planning Commission, or successor agency designated by the State of Wisconsin in accordance with the federal Clean Water Act, that are planned for urban development and capable of being provided with a full range of services.
Use, conditional.
A land use, which because of the potential for unusual or site-specific impacts, may be lawfully established only with an approved conditional use permit and subject to specific limitations or conditions.
Use, permitted.
A land use which may be lawfully established and that conforms with all requirements and standards of this ordinance and the zoning district in which the use is located.
Use, principal.
The main or primary use of land or buildings, as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
Utility services.
Transmission, distribution and small-scale renewable generation facilities both above and below ground which carry electricity, liquid or gaseous fuel, steam, water, data, heat, sewage, telephone messages, television or radio signals, or other similar services.
(a) Utility services Include, but are not limited to:
1. Services necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity, and that involve only minor structures, as necessary to operate transmission and distribution lines such as substations, transformer installations, repeater stations, and pumping stations.
2. Renewable energy systems, such as solar, wind, geothermal or other systems intended primarily for generation of energy, fuel or heat consumed on the premises. Incidental or occasional provision of energy to a utility company or electric grid is included within this definition.
3. Public sewer systems and private onsite wastewater treatment systems.
4. Collocation of an antenna array on an existing communication tower, provided there is no substantial modification of the tower.
(b) Utility services do not include offices, garages, manually operated exchanges, terminal distribution facilities, new or substantially modified communication towers, electric generating facilities, heat generating plants or sewage disposal plants.
Variance.
Permission, as granted by the Board of Adjustments under s. 10.101(10), to depart from the dimensional standards of this ordinance.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(168) Definitions
57
Vehicle, farm or off-road.
An operational motor vehicle that is used only on private property and is not licensed for use on a public right-of-way.
Vehicle repair or maintenance service.
Includes all principal land uses that perform repair, maintenance, or painting services to motorized vehicles.
Veterinary clinic.
An establishment for the medical or surgical treatment of animals. Boarding and care is limited only to animals undergoing active treatment or observation.
(a) Veterinary clinics include, but are not limited to: animal hospitals and clinics for the treatment of domestic pets or livestock and wildlife rehabilitation centers.
(b) Veterinary clinics do not include: animal boarding facilities, breeding operations, colony houses, domestic fowl or beekeeping, small-scale farming or agricultural livestock operations.
Warehousing.
Any land use oriented to the short-term indoor storage, shipment, and possible repackaging of commercial materials, household goods or personal property.
Vision clearance triangle.
The area in each quadrant of an intersection which is bounded by the right-of-way lines of the highways or streets and a vision clearance setback line connecting points on each right-of-way line which are located a distance back from the intersection equal to the setback required on the road or highway.
Yard.
An open space on a zoning parcel which is unoccupied or unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise provided herein. For the purpose of this ordinance, a yard extends along a zoning parcel line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations.
Yard, front.
A yard paralleling the full length of the front zoning parcel line between the side lot lines.
Yard, rear.
A rear yard is a yard paralleling the full length of the rear zoning parcel line between the side lot lines.
Yard, side.
A yard paralleling along a side zoning parcel line from the front yard to the rear yard.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.004(177) Definitions
58
Zoning lot.
(a) A parcel of land under single ownership and in a single zoning district, occupied or intended to be occupied by:
1. One principal building or principal use;
1. Buildings and uses customarily accessory or incidental to the principal use; and
2. Open spaces, yards or setback areas normally associated with the principal use or as required by this ordinance.
(b) The boundaries of a zoning parcel may or may not coincide with a lot of record or tax parcel.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.100(1) Standards and Requirements for All Land Uses
59
10.100. Standards and Requirements for All Land Uses
10.101. Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
Zoning Permits
(a) Zoning permits required. Unless specifically exempted below, the following activities may not occur until the zoning administrator, or his or her designee, issues a zoning permit specific to the use and premises:
1. Erection or construction of any new building
2. The addition to, or structural alteration or expansion, horizontally or vertically of, any existing building.
3. Change of land use for any building, structure or premises
4. The erection, replacement, or reconstruction of a sign.
5. Erection of covered enclosures for domestic fowl. Notwithstanding the exemption set forth in section 10.101(1)(b), zoning permits shall be required prior to the erection, placement or construction of covered enclosures for domestic fowl, regardless of size.
(b) Exceptions. Zoning Permits under this chapter are not required for accessory buildings equal to or less than 120 square feet on non-permanent foundations, provided they meet all setback, height, and lot coverage requirements.
(c) Unresolved violations or arrears. The Zoning Administrator may not issue a zoning permit for any property upon which there are:
1. Unresolved violations of this ordinance, or Chapters 11, 17, 14, 74, 75 or 46, Dane County Code, or
2. Delinquent real estate taxes.
(d) Application materials. An application for a zoning permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator on a form prescribed by the zoning administrator. Only complete applications will be accepted. At a minimum, applications for a zoning permit must include the following:
1. Name and address of the owner of the property; Contractor name; Legal description of the property; project description; and cost of construction.
2. A scaled site plan of the property showing the location all existing buildings, proposed buildings, and location of the well and septic system, as applicable. The plan shall show an accurate dimension of the proposed building’s location in relation to the property lines, floodplain, lake, stream, or wetland.
3. Floor plans of the proposed building. The plan shall identify each room and the proposed use.
4. Elevation drawings of the building. The elevation drawing shall show the vertical dimension from the roof eave and peak to the finish ground elevation. The height of the building is based on the elevation which faces the public or private thoroughfare which affords primary means of access to the property, excluding the driveway.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(2) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
60
5. Evidence of compliance with other applicable regulations, including, but not limited to County Sanitary Code, land division regulations, stormwater and erosion control regulations, floodplain regulations, wetland/shoreland regulations, access to State/County/Town highways, or site approval by Town.
6. Any other information, as determined by the zoning administrator or designee, necessary to determine compliance of the proposed use with the standards or purposes of this ordinance.
7. Appropriate application fees as noted in Chapter 12, Zoning Fees.
(e) Application review.
The application shall be reviewed to determine if the proposed use of the building and location meets the applicable ordinance requirements and applicable regulations. If the proposal does not meet the requirements or regulations, the application shall be denied and information shall be provided to the applicant identifying the reasons for the denial.
(f) Permit posting.
1. Once a zoning permit is issued, the zoning administrator or designee shall prepare a placard that identifies the permit number and construction and premises covered by the permit.
2. The applicant shall post the permit placard in a conspicuous place on the premises prior to the start of, and for the entire duration of, any construction associated with the project. No construction shall begin until the permit placard is posted.
3. For purposes of this section, start of construction shall be when any earth disturbing activity takes place that will lead to the installation of footings, piers, posts, pilings or foundations. Earth disturbing activity for the purpose of soil evaluation or testing shall not be considered the start of construction.
(g) Expiration and Voiding of Permits
1. Any permit obtained through material misrepresentation shall be null and void.
2. Zoning permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance if construction has not started or two years from the date of construction.
3. Any project which has an expired or revoked permit shall not continue unless a new zoning permit is issued.
Location Surveys
(a) Location survey required. Unless waived by the zoning administrator under (c) below, applicants must submit a location survey for any development located within ten (10) feet of any of the following:
1. Road setback lines under s. 10.102(9).
1. Side and rear yard setback lines required in the applicable zoning district
2. Navigable water setback, wetland setback or vegetative buffer lines required under Chapter 11, Dane County Code.
(b) Timing of survey. The survey shall be done at the time when foundations or basement walls are completed. Such survey shall be submitted to the zoning office prior to the continuation of work on the project.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(3) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
61
(c) Waivers from location survey requirements. At his or her discretion, the zoning administrator may waive the requirement for a location survey for accessory buildings under 120 square feet in gross floor area not located on a foundation, concrete slab, pilings, or footings. If a location survey is waived, the owner shall demonstrate, at the zoning administrator’s request, compliance with all setback requirements.
Inspection
(a) The Zoning Administrator or his or her designee may inspect premises of existing or proposed land uses regulated under this chapter to ascertain compliance with this ordinance or to investigate an alleged violation.
(b) Application for any approvals from the Zoning Division constitutes the landowner’s consent to allow zoning staff on site, before a certificate of compliance is issued, for the purposes of conducting inspections under this ordinance.
(c) Zoning staff will abide by any applicable workplace safety rules or standards for the site.
(d) Upon completion of a permitted project, the owner or their agent must notify the zoning division and request an inspection. The owner or his or her agent shall have all lot corners visibly staked prior to requesting an inspection. If the zoning administrator is unable to accurately verify the location of a building on its lot, he or she may post a stop work order where appropriate and require that a survey map be prepared by a registered land surveyor that will show the location of the building on its lot before allowing construction to continue or issuing of a certificate of compliance.
Violations and Penalties
(a) Continuing violations.
1. Each day a non-permitted structure, building, addition, alteration or activity or any other violation of this ordinance exists shall constitute a separate offense.
2. A non-permitted structure, building, addition, alteration or activity is one which requires the issuance of a permit under this ordinance but which permit has not been issued by the zoning administrator.
(b) Stop work order.
1. Whenever the zoning administrator, or designee, finds that any development activity does not comply with the provisions of this ordinance or Chapters 11, 17 or 75, Dane County Code, the zoning administrator or designee shall post a stop work order in a conspicuous place on the premises. Once a stop work order is issued, all development activities on the premises must cease until all construction is in compliance.
2. The stop work order card shall provide the following information: date of issuance, town and section number, reason for posting, a description of rights to appeal to the Board of Adjustment under s. 10.101(9) and the signature of the inspector posting the card.
3. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for anyone to remove a stop work-order card from the premises without specific authorization from the zoning administrator or designee.
(c) Citation authority.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(4) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
62
The zoning administrator and any of his or her designees may enforce violations of this chapter, Chapter 11, Chapter 17, Chapter 75, and Chapter 78, Dane County Code by citation as described in Chapter 2, Dane County Code and s. 66.0113, Wis. Stats.
(d) Forfeitures.
Any person or persons, firm, company or corporation, owner, occupant or other user of the premises who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than fifty (50) dollars and not more than two hundred (200) dollars per offense.
(e) Court injunction.
Compliance with this ordinance may be enforced by injunctional order at suit of the county or occupant of real estate within the district affected by the regulations of this ordinance. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture before resorting to injunctional proceedings.
(f) Jail.
1. Any person who has the ability to pay any forfeiture entered against him or her under this ordinance but refuses to do so may be confined in the county jail until such forfeiture is paid, but in no event to exceed thirty (30) days.
2. In determining whether an individual has the ability to pay a forfeiture, all items of income and all assets may be considered regardless of whether or not such income or assets are subject to garnishment, lien or attachment by creditors.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(5) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
63
Certificates of Compliance
(a) No building or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date of this ordinance and no addition to a previously existing building shall be occupied, except accessory buildings used exclusively for farming or agricultural purposes and no vacant land, except that used exclusively for farming or agricultural purposes on the effective day of this ordinance, shall be used for any purposes until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the county zoning administrator. Every certificate of compliance shall state the use and occupancy and the location of the building or buildings and indicate that the use of land complies with all of the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) Every application for a zoning permit shall be an application for a certificate of compliance.
(c) An application for a certificate of compliance for a new use or a change in use of land or a building shall be made directly to the zoning administrator.
(d) No certificate of compliance for a building or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date of this ordinance shall be issued until construction has been substantially completed and the premises inspected and certified by the zoning administrator to be in conformity with the specifications on which the permit was issued.
(e) The zoning administrator may establish rules by which a temporary certificate of compliance may be issued for a part of a building.
Site Plans
(a) Site plans required. Applicants must submit site plans with any of the following applications:
1. Any Zoning Permit application within the CO-1, NR-I or UTR zoning districts
2. Any Conditional Use Permit application.
3. Any rezone petition to the HAM-R, HAM-M, LC, GC, HC, RI or MI zoning districts.
4. Any rezone petition within the NR-I overlay zoning district, except for petitions to rezone to the FP-35, FP-1 or NR-C districts.
(b) Information included. Site plans must be drawn to a scale large enough to show sufficient detail on 11” by 17” paper, that includes, at a minimum the following information, as applicable:
1. A small vicinity map that clearly identifies the site’s location within Dane County
2. Location of subject property, tax parcel number(s), and any relevant certified survey (CSM) or plat information related to the identification of the property.
3. Scale and north arrow;
4. Date the site plan was created and/or last revised;
5. Existing subject property lot lines and dimensions;.
6. Existing and proposed wastewater treatment systems and wells;
7. All buildings and all outdoor use and/or storage areas, existing and proposed, including provisions for water and sewer. Existing and proposed uses must be clearly labeled.
8. All dimensions and required setbacks, side yards and rear yards.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(6) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
64
9. Location and width of all existing and proposed driveway entrances onto public and private roadways, and of all interior roads or driveways. Traffic flow patterns must be indicated.
10. Location and dimensions of any existing utilities, easements or rights-of-way.
11. Parking lot layout in compliance with s. 10.102(8).
12. Proposed loading/unloading areas.
13. Zoning district boundaries in the immediate area. All districts on the property and on all neighboring properties must be clearly labeled.
14. All relevant natural features, including but not limited to:
a. Navigable waters, including ordinary highwater marks and shoreland setbacks required under Chapter 11, Dane County Code, for all lakes, ponds, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams) and springs within 300 feet of the property.
b. Non-navigable water features, including drainage ditches, culverts and stormwater conveyances
c. Floodplain boundaries and field-verified elevations, including floodfringe, floodway, flood storage and general floodplain districts as described in Chapter 17, Dane County Code
d. Delineated wetland areas , including wetland setbacks required under Chapter 11, Dane County Code
e. Natural drainage patterns
f. Archaeological features and
g. Slopes over 12% grade.
15. If required by s. 10.102(12), location and type of proposed screening, landscaping, berms or buffer areas.
16. The Zoning Administrator may require, at his or her discretion, site plans to show additional detail, including, but not limited to contours, drainage, screening, fences, landscaping, lighting, signs, refuse dumpsters, and possible future expansion areas.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(7) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
65
Conditional Use Permits
(a) Purpose. The development and execution of this ordinance is based upon the division of the county into districts, within which districts the use of land and buildings, and bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are mutually compatible and substantially uniform. Certain uses, because of their unusual nature and potential for impacts on neighboring lands, public facilities, the environment or general welfare, warrant special consideration and review. With appropriate limitations on siting, development and operation, such uses may be compatible with other uses in a particular zoning district. Such uses are classified as conditional uses and are subject to the following provisions.
(b) Application Requirements. An application for a conditional use shall be filed with the zoning administrator on a form prescribed by the zoning administrator. Only complete applications will be accepted. The application shall be accompanied by such plans and other information as required by this section, by requirements for particular uses or as prescribed by the zoning administrator, and shall include, at a minimum, the following:
1. Statement. The applicant shall provide a written statement and adequate evidence demonstrating that the proposed conditional use conforms to:
(a) the standards for approval described in s. 10.101(7)(d),
(b) any standards applicable to the particular use under s. 10.103, and
(c) any additional standards required in the applicable zoning district.
2. Legal description. The applicant shall provide a written legal description accurately describing the specific area on the property where the conditional use will operate and the conditional use permit will be effective. Conditional use permit areas should be the minimum size necessary to accommodate the proposed use, and need not conform to lot, zoning lot or tax parcel boundaries.
3. Site plan. All applications for a conditional use permit must be accompanied by a site plan, meeting all the standards described in s. 10.101(6).
4. Operational plan. All applications for a conditional use permit must be accompanied by an operational plan that describes, at a detail acceptable to the Zoning Administrator, the following characteristics of the operation, as applicable:
a. Hours of operation.
b. Number of employees, including both full-time equivalents and maximum number of personnel to be on the premises at any time.
c. Anticipated noise, odors, dust, soot, runoff or pollution and measures taken to mitigate impacts to neighboring properties.
d. Descriptions of any materials stored outside and any activities, processing or other operations taking place outside an enclosed building.
e. Compliance with county stormwater and erosion control standards under Chapter 11 or Chapter 14, Dane County Code.
f. Sanitary facilities, including adequate private onsite wastewater treatment systems and any manure storage or management plans approved by the Madison
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(7) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
66
& Dane County Public Health Agency and/or the Dane County Land and Water Resources Department.
g. Facilities for managing and removal of trash, solid waste and recyclable materials.
h. Anticipated daily traffic, types and weights of vehicles, and any provisions, intersection or road improvements or other measures proposed to accommodate increased traffic.
i. A listing of hazardous, toxic or explosive materials stored on site, and any spill containment, safety or pollution prevention measures taken.
j. Outdoor lighting and measures taken to mitigate light-pollution impacts to neighboring properties.
k. Signage, consistent with ss. 10.800….
5. Third Party Consultation. If necessary expertise is not available from county staff, public academic institutions or from appropriate regional, state or federal agencies, the committee may consult with a third party to effectively evaluate a conditional use permit application. The zoning administrator, or his or her designee, will select the consultant. The applicant for the conditional use permit shall bear all reasonable costs and expenses associated with such consultation. Applicants retain the right to withdraw a pending conditional use permit application if they choose not to pay consultant fees.
6. Property Owner Consent. If the applicant for any conditional use permit is not the owner of the property, the applicant must provide a signature(s) of the property owner(s) on the application form or a written statement from the property owner(s) granting authorization to proceed with the conditional use permit application.
(c) Approval process.
1. Hearing on application.
a. Upon receipt of a complete and acceptable application , statement, site plan and operational plan , the zoning committee shall hold a public hearing on each application for conditional use. The zoning committee shall establish, by rule, a regular schedule and location for public hearings. The zoning committee may prescribe or amend rules for the conduct of the hearing and preserving a publicly-accessible recording of the proceedings.
b. The Department of Planning Development will publish a Class 2 notice of each public hearing, as provided in chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The Department will also provide direct notice to the Town Clerk of any towns affected by the proposed conditional use. The zoning committee shall establish policies governing notice to other parties of interest.
2. Zoning Committee Action.
a. The zoning committee is authorized by s. 59.69(2)(bm), Wis. Stats. to grant conditional use permits.
b. The zoning committee, after a public hearing, shall, within a reasonable time, grant, grant with conditions or deny any application for conditional use.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(7) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
67
c. The zoning committee shall not take action on the application for conditional use until it receives action from the town board or the time period for action by the town board described in s. 10.101(7)(c)3. has expired.
i. If the town board denies the conditional use permit within the timeframes described in s. 10.101(7)(c)3 , the zoning committee need take no further action.
ii. The zoning committee may approve or deny a conditional use permit without town action if the town board fails to act within the time period set forth in s. 10.101(7)(c)3 below.
d. The zoning committee may postpone action on any conditional use permit until any unresolved violations of this Chapter or Chapters 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 74, 75 or 78 are corrected and the property brought into full compliance with applicable standards.
e. Prior to granting or denying a conditional use, the zoning committee shall make written findings of fact based on evidence presented and issue a determination whether the proposed conditional use, with any recommended conditions, meets all of the following standards:
i. General standards for approval of a conditional use under s. 10.101(7)(d);
ii. Any prescribed standards specific to the applicable zoning district.
iii. Any prescribed standards specific to the particular use under s. 10.103.
f. The zoning committee must deny a conditional use permit if it finds that the standards for approval are not met.
g. The zoning committee must approve a conditional use permit if it finds that the standards for approval are met.
3. Town Board Action.
a. The Department of Planning and Development shall provide direct notice to the town clerk of the town where a conditional use is proposed.
b. The town board may, at a properly noticed public meeting, grant, grant with conditions or deny any application for conditional use.
i. The town board shall communicate its position in writing on the conditional use application within sixty (60) days of the date of the county zoning committee public hearing.
ii. The town board may request an extension of the review period of up to forty (40) days by submitting a written request to the zoning committee.
c. Prior to granting or denying a conditional use, the town board shall make written findings of fact based on evidence presented and issue a determination whether the proposed conditional use, with any recommended conditions, meets all of the following standards:
i. General standards for approval of a conditional use under s. 10.101(7)(d);
ii. Any prescribed standards specific to the applicable zoning district.
iii. Any prescribed standards specific to the particular use under s. 10.103.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(7) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
68
d. The town board must deny a conditional use permit if it finds that the standards for approval are not met.
e. The town board must approve a conditional use permit if it finds that the standards for approval are met.
4. Appeals to Board of Adjustment.
a. Any person aggrieved by the grant or denial of a conditional use permit may appeal the decision of the town board or zoning committee to the Dane County Board of Adjustment.
b. Aggrieved parties must file their appeal with the zoning administrator within 30 days of the final action.
(d) Requirements and standards for conditional use permits
1. Standards for approval. Before approving any conditional use permit, the town board and zoning committee must find that all of the following conditions are met:
a. That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or general welfare;
b. That the uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for purposes already permitted shall be in no foreseeable manner substantially impaired or diminished by establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use;
c. That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district;
d. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary site improvements have been or are being made;
e. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; and
f. That the conditional use shall conform to all applicable regulations of the district in which it is located.
g. That the conditional use is consistent with the adopted town and county comprehensive plans.
h. If the conditional use is located in a Farmland Preservation Zoning district, the town board and zoning committee must also make the findings described in s. 10.220(1).
2. Conditions
a. Standard conditions. The town board and zoning committee shall impose, at a minimum, the following conditions on any approved conditional use permit:
i. Any conditions required for specific uses listed under s. 10.103.
ii. The physical development and operation of the conditional use must conform, in all respects, to the approved site plan, operational plan and phasing plan.
iii. New and existing buildings proposed to house a conditional use must be constructed and maintained to meet the current requirements of the
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(7) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
69
applicable sections of the Wisconsin Commercial Building Code or Uniform Dwelling Code.
iv. The applicant shall apply for, receive and maintain all other legally required and applicable local, county, state and federal permits. Copies of approved permits or other evidence of compliance will be provided to the zoning administrator upon request.
v. Any ongoing business operation must obtain and continue to meet all legally required and applicable local, county, state and federal licensing requirements. Copies of approved licenses or other evidence of compliance will be provided to the zoning administrator upon request.
vi. Existing onsite wastewater sewage disposal systems, if any, serving the conditional use must be inspected by a licensed plumber to determine its suitability for the proposed or expanded use. Deficient systems must be brought, at the owner’s expense, into full compliance with the current requirements for new development of the state plumbing code and Chapter 46, Dane County Code.
vii. All vehicles and equipment must access the site only at approved locations identified in the site plan and operations plan.
viii. Off-street parking must be provided, consistent with s. 10.102(8).
ix. If the Dane County Highway, Transportation and Public Works Department or the town engineer determine that road intersection improvements are necessary to safely accommodate the conditional use, the cost of such improvements shall be born by the landowner. Costs born by the landowner shall be proportional to the incremental increase in traffic associated with the proposed conditional use.
x. The Zoning Administrator or designee may enter the premises of the operation in order to inspect those premises and to ascertain compliance with these conditions or to investigate an alleged violation. Zoning staff conducting inspections or investigations will comply with any applicable workplace safety rules or standards for the site.
xi. The owner must post, in a prominent public place and in a form approved by the zoning administrator, a placard with the approved Conditional Use Permit number, the nature of the operation, name and contact information for the operator, and contact information for the Dane County Zoning Division.
xii. The owner or operator must keep a copy of the conditional use permit, including the list of all conditions, on the site, available for inspection to the public during business hours.
xiii.
xiv. Failure to comply with any imposed conditions, or to pay reasonable county costs of investigation or enforcement of sustained violations, may be grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit. The holder of a
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(7) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
70
conditional use permit shall be given a reasonable opportunity to correct any violations prior to revocation.If any use allowed by an approved conditional use permit is abandoned for one year or more, the associated conditional use permit shall be terminated. Future re-establishment of an abandoned conditional use shall require approval of a new conditional use permit.
b. Other conditions. In addition to the standard conditions listed above, the town board and zoning committee may, at their discretion, impose any other conditions as necessary to meet the standards for approval described in s. 10.101(7)(d)1. above, including but not limited to:
i. Expiration dates on conditional use permits, except for permits for communication towers under s. 10.103(9). Continuation or extension of an expired conditional use requires re-application and approval by the town board and zoning committee.
ii. Limits on hours or days of operation, or number of events each year.
iii. Limits on numbers of employees.
iv. Limits on numbers of total people, vehicles or animals on the premises at any one time.
v. Limits on total quantity or volume of product on the premises at any one time.
vi. Limits on square footage of buildings or outdoor areas devoted to the proposed use.
vii. Requirements for screening, berms or minimum setbacks as necessary to minimize disturbance to neighboring properties.
viii. Noise limits, set to a decibel [db(a)] level appropriate for the particular use and location, as provided in s. 10.102(6).
ix. Controls, limits or setbacks to control odor or fumes.
x. Surety bonds or other financial guarantees, to dismantle equipment, buildings or structures that may pose a hazard or nuisance after a conditional use permit is abandoned or revoked. Unless otherwise required under applicable state statute or administrative code:
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(7) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
71
• Any bond or other financial instrument shall expressly state that it will remain in full force and effect for a period of at least six months after the surety provides Dane County written notification of expiration or termination of the surety's obligation under the bond.
• Applicant shall remove any equipment or structure placed or erected pursuant to the conditional use permit no less than 30 days prior to the termination or expiration of the guarantee.
• Bonds or other financial instruments shall not exceed $20,000 unless it is conclusively demonstrated that a higher amount is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(8) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
72
Petitions to Rezone (Zoning Map Amendments)
(a) Who may petition to rezone. As described in s. 59.69(5)(e), Wis. Stats., petitions to amend the zoning map to change the zoning district of any new or existing parcels, or to modify the boundaries of any zoning district may be submitted by any of the following:
1. A property owner in the area affected by the proposed amendment;
2. The town board affected by the proposed amendment;
3. Any member of the zoning committee, or
4. Any county board supervisor.
(b) Petition requirements.
1. Town consultation. Prior to submitting a rezone petition, applicants must consult with the affected town clerk, town plan commission or town board, as determined by the town.
2. Application form. Zoning petitions must be submitted in a form approved by the zoning administrator, and must include, at a minimum, the following:
a. The name, address and other contact information for the owner(s) of all properties affected by the rezone;
b. The name, address and other contact information for anyone acting as the owner’s agent on the application;
c. A written legal description accurately describing the area to be rezoned;
d. A scaled drawing of the proposed rezone area, including area in acres or square feet;
e. The town(s) in which the proposed rezone is located;
f. Parcel ID numbers affected by the proposed rezone;
g. A written narrative describing the proposed use;
3. Site plan. For rezones to the HAM-R, HAM-M, LC, LC, HC, RI or MI zoning districts, the applicant must provide site plans as described in s. 10.101(6) ;
4. Land division application. If required under Chapter 75, Dane County Code, the applicant must provide draft certified survey maps, preliminary plats, land division applications and any associated fees;
5. Fees. The applicant must provide payment of all applicable fees as described in Chapter 12, Dane County Code.
6. Other information. Any other information the zoning administrator, or designee, determines necessary to evaluate the nature, location or intensity of the proposed use or consistency with the Dane County Comprehensive Plan or the Dane County Farmland Preservation Plan.
7. Incomplete applications will not be accepted.
(c) Approval process.
1. Zoning committee, town board and county board action.
(a) The zoning committee, town board and county board shall follow the process for public hearing, recommendations, amendment, approval, denial and re-referral of petitions to rezone as described in s. 59.69(5)(e), Wis. Stats.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(8) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
73
(b) The zoning committee may postpone action on any rezone petition until any unresolved violations of this Chapter or Chapters 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 74, 75 or 78 are corrected and the property brought into full compliance with applicable standards.
(c) The zoning committee or county board may adopt additional rules and procedures for petitions to rezone under the authority of Chapter 7, Dane County Code.
2. County executive action. The county executive shall, within a reasonable time of county board action, take action on the proposed rezone petition. The county executive may sign, refuse to sign or veto the rezone petition within the timelines described in s. 59.17(6), Wis. Stats.
(d) Conditions on rezone petitions.
1. The zoning committee may recommend and the county board may adopt an ordinance effecting an amendment of the zoning district map containing conditions of approval that may be appropriate or necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of the ordinance and/or consistency with applicable town and county comprehensive planning policies.
2.
3. The zoning map amendment shall indicate that the change in the map will take effect within a specified period of time from the date of county board approval, by which time all required conditions must be satisfied.Conditions on zoning map amendments may include, but are not limited to:
(a) Limits of permitted or conditional uses to less than the full range of uses otherwise allowable in the district into which the land is being placed.
(b) Limitations on the size, scope, number of employees, size of buildings or quantity of materials associated with a particular use.
(c) Requirements that the landowner record a final Certified Survey Map, Subdivision Plat, or Condominium Plat with the Register of Deeds.
(d) Requirements that the landowner record, with the Register of Deeds, restrictive covenants to enforce required conditions. The covenant controls shall be amendable or repealable upon petition of the owner of the lands subject to the controls and approval by the county board after a hearing similar to a rezoning hearing. Except as amended or repealed , the covenants shall run with the land.
4. Failure to satisfy all required conditions within the specified time period shall result in the zoning map amendment becoming null and void.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(9) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
74
Appeals of administrative decisions.
(a) Who may appeal. Any person aggrieved or any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer, may appeal that decision to the board of adjustment.
(b) Application process. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(c) Stays. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken shall certify to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
(d) Hearing appeals. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and publish a class 2 notice thereof under ch. 985, Wis. Stats., as well as give due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appeal in person or by agent or attorney.
(e) Board of Adjustment Action. The board of adjustment may, by majority vote, affirm, reverse, reverse partly or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination that is the subject of the appeal. The board may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
(f) Effect of denial. If the Board of Adjustment denies an appeal, the same, or substantially similar appeal cannot be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of denial. The Board may waive this requirement if it finds there is valid new evidence or proof of change of conditions.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(10) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
75
Variances
(a) Application. Landowners may apply, on a form approved by the zoning administrator, for a variance from the standards of this ordinance.
(b) Hearing on application. Upon receipt of a complete and acceptable petition and accompanying materials, the board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing on each variance appeal. The board of adjustment shall establish, by rule, a regular schedule and location for public hearings. The board of adjustment may prescribe or amend rules for the conduct of the hearing and preserve a publicly-accessible recording of the proceedings.
(c) Decision. The Board of Adjustment may approve, conditionally approve, or deny a variance after a public hearing.
(d) Majority vote. The concurring vote of a majority of the five-member Board of Adjustment is required to grant a variance.
(e) Findings of fact. The decision of the Board of Adjustment shall include findings of fact, related to conditions on the site, the standards for approval of a variance and any impacts on the purposes of this ordinance.
(f) Conditions on variances. The Board of Adjustment may impose conditions on the use, development or activities subject to the variance. The Board of Adjustment may require the conditions in order to comply with the standards in this section, to mitigate the effect of the variance on other property in the neighborhood, and to better carry out the general intent of this ordinance.
(g) Standards for approval of a variance. The Board of Adjustment shall not grant a variance unless it finds that all of the following standards are met:
1. There are conditions unique to the property of the applicant that do not apply generally to other properties in the district.
2. The variance is not contrary to the spirit, purpose, and intent of the regulations in the zoning district and is not contrary to the public interest.
3. For a variance from area, setback or dimensional standards in the ordinance, compliance with the strict letter of the ordinance would unreasonably prevent use of the property for a permitted purpose or would render compliance with the ordinance unnecessarily burdensome.
4. The alleged difficulty or hardship is created by the terms of the ordinance rather than by a person who has a present interest in the property.
5. The proposed variance shall not create substantial detriment to adjacent property.
6. The proposed variance shall be compatible with the character of the immediate neighborhood.
(h) Effect of denial. If the Board of Adjustment denies a variance, the same or substantially similar variance cannot be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of denial. The Board may waive this requirement if it finds there is valid new evidence or proof of change of conditions.
(i) Time limits on construction.
1. The landowner must obtain zoning permits for any construction authorized by variance within one year from the date the Board of Adjustment approved the variance.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.101(10) Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
76
2. Failure to obtain appropriate permits within one year shall render the variance null and void.
3. The board of adjustment may, upon request, extend the timeframe for a specific period, without another public hearing.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(1) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
77
10.102. General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
Accommodations for disabled persons.
(a) Where strict interpretation of this chapter would effectively deny disabled persons equal housing opportunity, and where the property does not meet the criteria for a variance under s. 10.101(10), the Zoning Administrator may grant a waiver to the dimensional standards of this chapter in order to provide reasonable accommodations as required by the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act, the Federal Housing Act and the Wisconsin Fair Housing Act. The permit shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. Only the minimum relaxation of dimensional standards needed to provide reasonable accommodation shall be approved.
2. No use, structure or other relaxation of standards shall be approved that would violate or undermine the stated purpose of this chapter.
3. Where practicable, the improvement authorized by this provision shall be removed when the premises are no longer occupied or frequented by a disabled person.
(b) If the zoning administrator denies a permit requesting an accommodation under this subsection, the denial may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to s. 10.101(9).
Buildings and structures
(a) Accessory Buildings.
1. Zoning Permit fees do not apply to agricultural accessory buildings on farms of 35 acres or larger.
2. Except for agricultural accessory buildings, or for property management sheds specifically authorized by conditional use permit, a principal building must exist or be under construction prior to the construction of an accessory building.
3. Except for accessory dwelling units, accessory buildings may not be used for living spaces. No guesthouses or apartments are allowed.
4. Except for accessory dwelling units or as specifically permitted by conditional use permit, plumbing fixtures are prohibited in accessory buildings.
5. All accessory buildings must meet size, height and lot coverage restrictions of the general provisions and applicable zoning district.
6. Accessory buildings must meet required setbacks from roads and the locational requirements of the Shoreland, Wetland, and Floodplain Districts
(b) Modifications to existing buildings.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or intended use of a building or premises for which plans have been prepared heretofore, and the construction of which shall have been diligently pursued within three (3) months after the effective date of this ordinance.
(c)
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(3) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
78
Height Measurements and ExceptionsHospitals, churches, schools, communication towers, water towers, chimneys, spires, penthouses, cupolas, silos, windmills and similar structures may be erected to a height
greater than the maximum permitted in the district in which they are located; provided,
however, that no part of that structure above such height limit shall be used for residential
purposes.
Compliance with other laws, regulations and codes.
All buildings and structures must comply with any other applicable state or federal laws, administrative code or local ordinances governing design, location, construction or use.
Junk and refuse.
Except for salvage yards, solid waste disposal operations or solid waste recycling centers under an approved conditional use permit, all properties shall be maintained to be free of accumulated junk or refuse.
Lighting.
Except for lighting of the United States flag, any outdoor lighting associated with any permitted or conditional use shall be directed downward and away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and shall be designed to minimize ambient light spill.
Noise Reduction.
(a) Town boards and the zoning committee may, as necessary, set decibel limits appropriate to the use and location as a condition on a Conditional Use Permit or on a conditional rezone petition.
(b) Town boards and the zoning committee may, as necessary, recommend decibel limits appropriate to the use and location as a condition on rezones to General Commercial, Heavy Commercial, Limited Commercial or Hamlet Mixed-Use districts.
(c) Noise abatement on blasting sites shall not conflict with or exceed the requirements of SPS 307, Wisconsin Administrative Code, as amended from time to time, or its successor administrative code regulations.
(d) Noise levels shall be set to the db(a) decibel scale and should be appropriate to the background noise level of the surrounding area, and to the nature, duration and repetition of the proposed use. Table 1 describes common uses by typical decibel level, as a reference guide for town board and zoning committee action.
Table 1: Common Indoor and Outdoor Noise Levels
Noises
Sound Level dBA
Threshold of pain
140
Leaf blower/Car horn
110
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(7) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
79
Gas lawn mower at 3 feet
100
Diesel truck at 50 feet /Food blender at 3 feet
90
Passenger Plane at 1,500 feet
85
Diesel truck at 50 feet at 40 mph
84
Noisy urban area in daytime.
80
Car at 25 feet at 65 mph
77
Vacuum cleaner at 10 feet
70
Heavy traffic at 300 feet
60
Dishwasher next room
50
Quiet suburban area, nighttime
40
Library
35
Threshold of hearing
0
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
(a) Certificate of Compliance for Nonconforming Uses and Structures
1. Any person, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a property which is nonconforming as to use or building location may request a certificate of compliance.
2. The applicant shall present documentary proof that said use was a permitted use at the time it originated or that the building has been erected prior to the adoption of this ordinance and was made nonconforming by the adoption of this ordinance or by a subsequent amendment.
3. After certifying that the use of the building or land is in fact nonconforming the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance stating the use in question or the location of buildings and the zoning of the property.
(b) Nonconforming Uses.
1. Continuation of a Legal, Nonconforming Use.
The lawful principal use of a building or premises existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance may be continued as a nonconforming use.
2. Notification of Nonconformity.
Within 30 days of the effective date of this ordinance in any town, the zoning administrator will send a notice via certified mail, return receipt requested, to all legally established, nonconforming mineral extraction operations which existed prior to 1969, and were registered with and approved by the Dane County Zoning Administrator at the time. The notice shall inform the landowner that registered nonconforming mineral extraction sites are subject to the provisions of this section.
3. Abandonment or Discontinuation of a Nonconforming Use.
a. Any use that is discontinued or abandoned for a period of one (1) year shall be considered terminated and shall lose its nonconforming status. Any future use or
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(7) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
80
reestablishment of a previously nonconforming use on the premises must conform to the provisions of this ordinance, except as specifically exempted below.
b. The relocation or expansion of any nonconforming use beyond areas where such use was originally established shall conform to all standards and requirements of this ordinance, except as otherwise provided by law.
4. Expansion of building or structure housing a nonconforming use.
a. Except as specifically exempted below, no building or premises used as a nonconforming use shall be added to or structurally altered so as to increase the facilities for such nonconforming use.
b. Exceptions. Alteration, restoration or repair of any legal structure occupied by a nonconforming use at the effective date of this ordinance is permitted; provided that the value of the structure is not increased by more than 50%, compared with the assessed value of the structure at the time it became nonconforming.
(c) Nonconforming structures.
1. Continued use of nonconforming structures.
a. Except as exempted below, any nonconforming structure may be continued in use.
b. Exceptions. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or intended use of a structure or premises for which plans have been prepared heretofore, and the construction of which shall have been diligently pursued within three (3) months after the effective date of this ordinance.
2. Demolition or destruction of a nonconforming structures.
a. Except as exempted in d. below, a structure is considered to be demolished and nonexistent if more than 50% of the pre-existing structure is removed or must be replaced to maintain structural integrity.
b. Any variance that may have been issued for said building or structure shall be null and void and any zoning permits shall be rescinded pending verification of compliance.
c. A structure subject to subs. a and c shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance.
d. Exceptions. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the restoration of a nonconforming structure damaged or destroyed by wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation, if the structure is restored to the size, location, and use that it had immediately before the damage or destruction occurred. Such restoration shall occur within 2 years of the damage or destruction.
i. A structure to which sub. d. applies may be larger than the size it was immediately before the damage or destruction if necessary to comply with applicable state or federal requirements, but no larger than necessary to comply with said requirements.
3. Repair, maintenance and renovation of nonconforming structures.
a. A nonconforming principal structure may be maintained and repaired within its existing building envelope.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(8) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
81
b. Maintenance and repair also includes such activities as interior remodeling, exterior remodeling, and the replacement or enhancement of plumbing or electrical systems, insulation, windows, doors, siding, or roof within the existing building envelope.
4. Additions or alterations to nonconforming structures. Any future additions to, or any other alterations that expand the building envelope of, a nonconforming structure shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance.
Parking and loading areas.
(a) Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide off-street vehicle parking, loading and circulation standards sufficient to prevent congestion of public rights-of-way and provide safe and efficient public access to properties, while minimizing the impact of off-street parking areas on nearby properties and the natural environment.
(b) Applicability.
In all districts, in connection with all uses, at the time any new structure is erected, any use of a structure or land is enlarged or increased in intensity, or any other use or change of use is established, off-street parking, loading and circulation areas shall be provided and located in accordance with the requirements of this section. Off-street parking areas in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance shall not hereafter be reduced below or further below the requirements for a similar new building or use.
(c) General provisions.
1. A scaled and dimensioned parking, loading and circulation plan shall be included within a development plan submitted to and approved by the zoning administrator prior to issuance of a zoning permit for construction or expansion of any use. When a use requires a conditional use permit, such plan shall be submitted with the application for the conditional use.
2. No areas designated for parking, loading or circulation may be used for any other purposes. Required parking spaces shall be used solely for the parking of licensed automobiles of occupants, patrons and employees and licensed service vehicles.
3. All parking spaces required to serve buildings erected or uses established shall be located on the same zoning lot as the building or use served, except that parking may be located off-site on another zoning lot provided all of the following criteria are satisfied:
4. Off-site parking shall be located only in the LC, HC, MI and PUD districts.
a. The zoning lots including the principal use and off-site parking shall be located no farther than 500 feet from one another;
b. Adequate pedestrian connection and directional signage between the sites exists or shall be provided;
c. The continued availability of such off-site parking areas, necessary to meet the requirements of this section, shall be ensured by an agreement among all involved property owners describing the rights and limitations of all property owners and businesses. Such agreement shall bind all heirs, successors and assigns of each
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(8) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
82
owner and shall be approved by the zoning administrator before being recorded with the register of deeds.
d. Off-site parking areas shall be subject to the same design standards as on-site parking areas.
5. The parking or storage of motor vehicles provided for in s. 10.102(8)(g) shall not occur within parking spaces otherwise required by this section.
(d) Design standards.
1. Access. Adequate ingress and egress to parking and loading areas by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided. Access drives shall be perpendicular to the public right-of-way wherever possible. Access drives shall be spaced a safe distance from street intersections and each other, shall not be located within vision corners, and may be limited in number and location according to applicable local, county, state and federal standards.
2. Surfacing. Within urban service areas, except for single family residences, duplexes and manufactured homes: all parking areas, loading areas, driveways and circulation areas shall be paved with a hard, all-weather surface such as asphalt, concrete, Portland cement or brick. Outside of urban service areas and for single family residences, duplexes and manufactured homes: gravel surfacing is also permitted unless otherwise restricted by town ordinance, and grass surfacing may be permitted for seasonal parking only. Seasonal means limited to a period no longer than six months in a twelve month period, or related to a unique or annually occurring event or condition of limited duration. All parking areas shall be maintained in a smooth and dust free condition.
3. Dimensions of parking spaces. Perpendicular (90-degree) parking is encouraged. Each required off-street parking space shall have a stall width of at least 8 feet for 90-degree and parallel parking and 9 feet for angle parking, and a stall length of at least 17 feet for 90-degree and angle parking and 23 feet for parallel parking. Parking for people with disabilities shall be provided at a size, number, location and with signage as specified by state and federal regulations, in addition to those spaces required in s. 10.102(8)(e). All spaces on hard-surfaced lots shall be striped.
4. Circulation. Minimum width of internal aisles providing two-way traffic access to parking spaces shall be 24 feet. Minimum width of internal aisles providing one-way traffic access to spaces shall be as follows: 10 feet for parallel (0-degree) to 45-degree parking, 16 feet for 46 degree to 60 degree parking, and 20 feet for 61 to 90 degree parking. Two-way traffic aisles shall not be permitted to serve angle parking. Directional marking or signage, or both, shall be provided where required to facilitate safe, efficient circulation. Uses with drive-through facilities shall provide sufficient space on-site for all vehicles queuing to be served by or otherwise waiting to do business at the facility. Such queuing space shall not interfere with the use or operation of parking spaces, circulation aisles, access drives, entrances or public roads.
5. Loading areas. Uses which involve deliveries or removal of goods, materials, supplies or waste by truck shall provide adequate off-street loading and unloading facilities on the same lot as the principal use. Space reserved for loading and unloading shall not be used
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(8) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
83
for off-street parking spaces or vehicle circulation. For such uses located in buildings with over 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, at least one loading berth shall be provided. Each off-street loading berth shall have a width of at least 10 feet and a length of at least 50 feet, and shall be located no closer than 30 feet from any residence district.
6. Drainage. Suitable grading and drainage shall be provided to collect and transmit stormwater to appropriate retention or detention basins, drainageways, ditches or storm sewers.
7. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed downward and away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.
8. Setbacks. Parking, loading and circulation areas may be provided within required front setbacks and side and rear yards. Areas for parking, loading and circulation shall be a minimum of three feet from all property lines, except where this requirement prohibits a proposed joint driveway or proposed shared parking.
9. Screening and landscaping. Screening shall be provided in accordance with specifications in s. 10.102(12). All hard-surfaced and graveled parking, loading and circulation areas with 10 or more spaces shall be provided with accessory landscape areas totaling not less than five percent of the surfaced area. Such landscaping shall consist primarily of trees, bushes and shrubs. Landscaping may be planted internal to the parking area itself within islands or around the immediate perimeter and shall be reasonably distributed. Landscaping shall be protected from damage by vehicles and shall be replaced if damaged or killed.
(e) Required off-street parking spaces.
Minimum off-street parking spaces serving uses hereinafter designated shall be provided as follows:
1. Accessory dwelling unit (attached): 1 per unit.
2. Accessory dwelling unit (detached): 1 per unit.
3. Adult book stores: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per 250 square feet.
4. Adult entertainment: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per every 6 occupants at capacity.
5. Agricultural accessory use: 1 per 1.3 employees.
6. Agricultural entertainment and special events: 1 per every 2 expected attendees
7. Agriculture uses: 1 per 1.3 employees.
8. Agriculture-related uses: 1 per 1.3 employees.
9. Airport, landing strip or heliport: 1 per 1.3 employees, 1 per vehicle stored on site, 1 per 200 square feet of lobby area.
10. Animal Boarding, Domestic Pet: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per 1,000 square feet, not including outdoor kennels or exercise areas.
11. Animal Boarding, Large Animal: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per each 4 animal stalls or bays.
12. Bio-diesel and ethanol manufacturing: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 space for every vehicle to be stored or stopped simultaneously on premises.
13. Biopower facilities for distribution, retail, or wholesale sales: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 space for every vehicle to be stored or stopped simultaneously on premises.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(8) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
84
14. Buildings which have more than 2.5 stories: Based on building use.
15. Buildings which have more than 4 stories: Based on building use.
16. Bus terminals: 1 per 1.3 employees, 1 per vehicle stored on site, 1 per 200 square feet of lobby area.
17. Campgrounds: 1 per campsite, 1 per 1.3 employees, 1 per vehicle stored on site, 1 visitor space per each 10 campsites.
18. Caretaker's residence: 1 per residence.
19. Commercial Indoor Lodging: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per rooming unit.
20. Community living arrangements for less than nine (9) persons: 1 per resident with a driver's license.
21. Community living arrangements for nine (9) to fifteen (15) persons: 1 per resident with a driver's license.
22. Contractor, landscaping or building trade operations 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per vehicle stored on site
23. Daycare center: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per each 10 children.
24. Dead stock hauling services: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per vehicle stored on site.
25. Demolition material disposal sites: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 space for every vehicle to be stored or stopped simultaneously on premises.
26. Distribution center: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 space for every vehicle to be stored or stopped simultaneously on premises.
27. Drive-in establishment: 1 per 1.3 employees, 1 per each service area, fuel dispenser or drive-through window, plus required spaces for associated uses.
28. Dumping grounds: 1 per 1.3 employees.
29. Farm residence (primary or secondary): See single-family or two-family residence.
30. Fertilizer manufacturing plants: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 space for every vehicle to be stored or stopped simultaneously on premises.
31. Fertilizer mixing or blending plants: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 space for every vehicle to be stored or stopped simultaneously on premises.
32. Freight and passenger bus terminal: 1 per 1.3 employees, 1 per vehicle stored on site, 1 per 200 square feet of lobby area.
33. Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses: For office or service uses, 1 per each 1.3 employees, 1 per each vehicle stored on site, plus 1 per 300 square feet. For assembly halls, churches, convention centers and similar gathering spaces, 1 per every 6 occupants at capacity.
34. Heavy industrial: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 space for every vehicle to be stored or stopped simultaneously on premises.
35. Home occupations: 1 space for an employee, if any, plus adequate space to accommodate all customers on the site at peak periods.
36. Incidental room rental: 1 space per rented room.
37. Incinerator sites: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 space for every vehicle to be stored or stopped simultaneously on premises.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(8) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
85
38. Indoor entertainment or assembly: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per every 6 occupants at capacity.
39. Indoor sales: 1 per 1.3 employees, 1 per 300 square feet of indoor occupiable floor area.
40. Indoor storage and repair: 1 per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area.
41. Institutional residential: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per every 4 residents.
42. Light industrial: 1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area.
43. Limited family business: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per anticipated customer at peak.
44. Limited farm business: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per anticipated customer at peak.
45. Manufactured home communities: 1 per 1.3 employees, 2 per residential unit (tandem parking permitted), plus 1 visitor space per every 4 units.
46. Manufacturing: 1 per 600 square feet of gross floor area.
47.Manure processing facilities: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 space for every vehicle to be stored or stopped simultaneously on premises.
48.Marinas: 0 .6 per boat slip
49.Mineral extraction: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 space for every vehicle to be stored or stopped simultaneously on premises.
50.Mixed use developments: For uses with no overlap in hours of operation, the largest number of spaces required for each individual use. For uses with overlap in hours of operation, 75% of the total required for all individual uses.
51.Multifamily residential: 1.5 per dwelling unit.
52. Office: 1 per 300 square feet of occupiable floor area.
53. Off-site parking lot: Based on associated use.
54. Outdoor active recreation: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per every 4 spectators and participants at capacity.
55. Outdoor assembly events: 1 per every 2 expected attendees.
56. Outdoor entertainment: 1 per every 1.3 employees, plus 1 per every 2 customers at capacity.
57. Outdoor passive recreation: 1 per every 1.3 employees, plus additional parking as determined by the zoning administrator based on anticipated site use.
58. Outdoor sales, display, or repair: 1 per every 2,000 square feet of area devoted to outdoors sales, display or repair.
59. Outdoor Storage: 1 per 20,000 square feet devoted to outdoor storage.
60. Personal or professional service: 1 per 1.3 employees, 1 per 300 square feet of indoor occupiable floor area.
61. Personal storage facility: 1 per storage unit, which may be directly in front of unit entrance.
62. Processing or composting of organic byproducts or wastes: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 space for every vehicle to be stored or stopped simultaneously on premises.
63. Residential uses in a commercial zone: 1.5 per dwelling unit.
64. Rooming house: 1 per bed.
65. Salvage recycling centers: 1 per 1.3 employees, 1 for each operational vehicle stored on site, plus 3 visitor spaces.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(8) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
86
66. Sanitary landfills: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per vehicle stored on site.
67. Single family residential: 1 per dwelling unit.
68. Solid waste recycling centers and disposal: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per recycling dropoff container.
69. Stock yards, livestock auction facilities: 10 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
70. Storage of explosive materials: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 1 per each truck or other vehicle at premises at peak.
71. Storage of vehicles and pieces of construction equipment: 1 per stored vehicle.
72. Storage of recreational equipment and motor vehicles not owned by resident: 1 per stored vehicle.
73. Temporary asphalt and concrete production: 1 per 1.3 employees at peak shift, plus 1 for every truck, or vehicle on site at peak.
74. Tourist or transient lodging: 1 per 1.3 employees, 1 per resident family plus 1 per guest room.
75. Transportation, utility, communication or similar use: 1 per 1.3 employees if working on site, 1 per maximum number of vehicles anticipated to be onsite at any time.
76. Two-family residential: 1 per dwelling unit.
77. Vehicle repair or maintenance: 1 at each fuel dispenser, 3 per service bay, 1 per vehicle stored on premises, 1 per 1.3 employees.
78. Veterinary clinics: 1 per 1.3 employees, plus 3 per examination or treatment room.
(f) Potential reductions in required spaces.
The zoning administrator may decrease the required number of off-street parking spaces by up to 25 percent of the requirement based on one or more of the following criteria:
1. Technical documentation supplied by the applicant indicates, to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator, that actual parking demand for that particular development is less than the standard would suggest;
2. Bicycle parking facilities will be provided through racks, lockers or equivalent structures located convenient to the proposed use;
3. A public transportation route is located within 1,000 feet of the property;
4. Shared parking for more than one use will be implemented, provided that the applicant(s) demonstrate that the same spaces may adequately serve two or more uses by reason of the hours of operation of such uses. The continued availability of such shared parking areas shall be ensured by an agreement among all involved property owners describing the rights and limitations of all property owners and businesses, and providing that if any of the uses sharing the parking changes, the agreement shall become null and void. Such agreement shall bind all heirs, successors and assigns of each owner and shall be approved by the zoning administrator before being recorded with the register of deeds.
5. Reserve area. In the event the number of required spaces is reduced as allowed by s. 10.102(8)(f), the zoning administrator may also require that sufficient area be held in reserve for potential future development of parking to meet the requirements under s. 10.102(8)(e). If required, such reserve area shall be shown and noted on the
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(8) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
87
development plan, maintained in open space use and developed with parking spaces when the zoning administrator determines that such development is necessary due to parking demand which exceeds original expectations, the loss of bicycle or public transit access or facilities, or the dissolution of a shared parking agreement.
(g) Parking and storage of trucks, buses and special vehicles.
1. In the Residential and Rural Residential districts, and on any lot in the Rural Mixed Use districts where the principal use is residential, motor vehicles used for personal transportation and recreational vehicles and trailers owned by a person residing on the premises may be parked or stored within an accessory building, provided that the gross vehicle weight shall not exceed 12,000 pounds.
2. In the Residential, Rural Residential, Recreational, Farmland Preservation-Business, Hamlet Mixed-Use and General Commercial districts, only motor vehicles that are accessory to a permitted and principal use on any lot may be stored or parked.
3. Any automobile licensed as an antique or special interest vehicle under s. 341.266, Wis. Stats., or parts cars therefore, can be stored on a lot in any district provided that such vehicle is stored in such a manner that it does not constitute a health hazard and is screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means, as required by s. 341.266(4), Wis. Stats.
4. Farm trucks or trailers licensed under ss. 341.26(3) or 341.30, Wis. Stats., may be parked on lots in agriculture districts.
5. Trucks with gross vehicle weight exceeding 12,000 pounds may be stored or parked only in the LC, HC, RI and MI districts, except that parking or storage of one truck and one road tractor and its trailer in excess of 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight shall be permitted in the residence, rural homes and agricultural districts, subject to the following conditions:
a. The vehicle shall be owned and operated by a person residing on the premises.
b. In the residence districts, the lot area shall be not less than one acre.
c. The vehicle shall not be parked or stored within the required highway or road setback area.
d. The vehicle shall not be parked closer than 100 feet to another residence.
e. New accessory buildings may be constructed to house the vehicle, provided such buildings comply with all applicable setback, lot coverage and building height limitations for that zoning district.
f. Before the vehicle may be parked or stored on the property, a certificate of compliance shall be issued by the zoning administrator.
6. One racing vehicle and spare parts for such vehicle may be stored in the residence and rural homes districts, provided that such vehicle and spare parts are screened from public view in an enclosed building.
7. Storage of no more than two racing vehicles and spare parts for such vehicles is permitted in any district except the residence and rural homes districts, provided that such vehicles and spare parts are screened from public view in an enclosed building.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(9) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
88
8. In any district, one school bus driven by a person residing on the premises may be parked provided that in residence districts the minimum lot area for bus parking is one acre.
9. Except as provided in s. 341.266(4), Wis. Stats., a motor vehicle that is inoperable or unlicensed is considered salvage or junk and shall only be stored in a licensed salvage recycling center. Trucks licensed on a monthly or quarterly basis shall be considered currently licensed if they have been licensed for at least one period during the previous year.
Road setbacks / required front yards.
(a) Except as indicated in (a)1.c. and (b) below, or as permitted by variance, all structures shall be set back from public roads as follows:
1. Divided highways.
a. Except as exempted in c. below, all principal residential buildings must be at least 200 feet from the right-of-way line.
b. Accessory buildings must meet the setbacks described for undivided highways below.
c. Exceptions. Principal dwellings meeting either of the following criteria must meet the setbacks for undivided highways in 2. below:
i. Principal dwellings on lands originally zoned for residential use prior to May 1, 1992.
ii. Lands where noise control barriers effectively reduce the noise level from traffic to 67 decibels [db(a)] or less.
2. Undivided highways.
a. State and Federal Highways. All structures must be at least 100 feet from the centerline, or 42 feet from the right-of-way line, whichever is greater.
b. County Trunk Highways. All structures must be at least 75 feet from the centerline, or 42 feet from the right-of-way line, whichever is greater.
c. Town Roads. All structures must be at least 63 feet from the centerline, or 30 feet from the right-of-way line, whichever is greater.
d. Service or Other Roads. All structures must be at least 30 feet from the right-of-way line.
(b) Exceptions.
1. In lots or platted subdivisions created before (insert date) where a building line shall have been established by the construction of buildings on 30 percent of the lots in any one (1) block, such established setback line shall be the setback for that block, but in no event shall such setback be less than 20 feet.
2. For lots in the HAM-M or HAM-R zoning districts, setbacks shall be as described in ss. 10.261(5) and 10.262(5)
(c) Private roads or driveways within a multiple family dwelling complex shall not be considered a road for determining setback.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(10) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
89
Setback measurements and exceptions.
(a) For purposes of entry to buildings, steps, stoops, decks or ramps may be constructed in such a manner that they intrude into required front yard or road setback or areas provided that all of the following limitations and conditions are satisfied:
1. Height shall not exceed 5 feet aboveground level, not including railings.
2. Width shall not exceed 12 feet side to side.
3. Structure shall extend no farther than 10 feet from the front of the building to which it is attached or up to the front property line, whichever is less.
4. Structure shall not be enclosed. Railings which do not exceed 3 1/2 feet in height and which are of open architecture and not solid in appearance are permitted.
5. Structure shall not interfere with existing or planned roads, sidewalks, gas and electrical lines, sewers, drainageways, and other utilities or public improvements. The zoning administrator may require written verification from appropriate agencies before issuing a zoning permit.
6. No part of the structure shall extend into any required vision clearance triangle.
(b) For single family residences or duplexes, single story bay windows may be constructed in such a manner that they project three (3) feet or less into a required yard or setback area provided that such windows do not occupy, in the aggregate, more than one-third (1/3) of the wall of the building.
(c) Roof overhangs, soffits and awnings that are not supported to the ground may extend into any required setback or yard by not more than three (3) feet.
(d) More restrictive setback requirements may be required under Chapters 11 or 17, Dane County Code.
(e) Corner lots
1. When the long side of a corner lot is formed by a federal, state, county or town highway the side yard on that street shall conform to the setback requirements for such highway.
2. 2. When the long side of a corner lot is formed by a road other than a federal, state, county, or town road not included within the boundaries of a recorded subdivision or plat, the setback from the lot line of the long side shall not be less than one-fifth (1/5) of the lot depth measured from the long side except on lots of less than 60 feet, then the setback shall not be less than 12 feet. For buildings with attached garages facing the long side and having access to the long side of the lot, the minimum setback of the garage from the lot line shall be not less than 20 feet.
(f) On waterfront lots, accessory buildings may be located in the front yards subject to the reduced side yard setbacks described in the district it is located in, provided, however, that the setback requirements are met.
(g) On interior lots less than 60 feet in width no accessory building shall be erected, moved, or added to so as to be nearer than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet to a side or rear lot line, provided, however, if the front building line of any accessory building is located closer than 10 feet from the rear building line of a residence, the same side and rear yards as required for a principal or residential building shall be maintained.
(h) Uncovered swimming pools both above and below ground may be located no closer than
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(11) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
90
10 feet from any side or rear lot line.
(i) Free-standing solar collectors may be located no closer than 3 feet from any lot line and may not exceed the maximum height for an accessory building in the applicable zoning district.
Topography Near Property Lines.
(a) Purpose.
The purpose of this subsection is to set forth the minimum requirements for preserving existing topography near property lines whenever development is planned, and to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. This sub-section is intended to regulate development:
1. to protect adjacent property owners from possible damage due to changes to the existing topography of adjoining lands;
2. to retain stormwater runoff on each property undergoing development; and
3. to preserve the general character of neighborhoods.
(b) Standards.
1. Except as authorized in sub. (c), the topography, including both surface and subsurface structure, within five (5) feet of any property line at the commencement of any development shall remain unchanged.
2. When land disturbing activities associated with development occur within five (5) feet of any property line, finished grades in that area shall be restored to the topography in existence before the land disturbing activity began.
3. The established grade of the adjoining property shall determine the finished grade at the property line for any development. The owner of the property under development bears the burden of proof as to the established grade at the property line and the topography within five (5) feet of the property line. The Zoning Administrator may require detailed site grading plans of existing and proposed conditions prior to commencement of land disturbing activities.
4. Natural watercourses along property lines shall be maintained. Existing drainage ways and drainage easements along property lines including, but not limited to, stormwater management areas shown on subdivision plats and certified survey maps, shall be maintained.
(c) Exceptions.
1. A positive slope of one-half (1/2) inch vertical per one (1) foot horizontal within five (5) feet of the property line is allowed to provide proper drainage away from a one or two family residence.
2. Development in Floodplain Districts requiring fill to comply with chapter 17 is exempt from this section.
3. Upon written application, the Zoning Administrator may authorize exceptions resulting in changes to the existing topography at and within five (5) feet of any property line that would promote the purposes stated in this ordinance, only if the results do not direct additional stormwater runoff toward adjacent properties. Proposed exceptions may
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(12) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
91
include, but are not limited to, retaining walls, berms and other structures, and other changes to existing grade at and within five (5) feet of a property line. The Zoning Administrator may require the submittal of detailed site grading plans of existing and proposed conditions including, but not limited to, detailed topographical information of the subject and adjoining properties, before land disturbing activities commence.
Visual Screening
(a) Purpose.
Visual screening is intended to protect enjoyment and use of neighboring properties by reducing the visual impact of utilitarian, commercial facilities near residential areas.
(b) Applicability and waivers.
1. Unless specifically waived under 3. below, screening is required along the interior boundary of any lot in the Limited Commercial (LC), General Commercial (LC), Heavy Commercial (HC) and Manufacturing/Industrial (MI) districts that are adjacent to land in the Single Family Residential (SFR), Two Family Residential (TFR), Multi Family Residential (MFR), Rural Residential (RR) or Rural Mixed-Use (RM) Districts.
2. At the town board and zoning committee’s discretion, screening may also be required as a condition on any conditional use permit, where appropriate to minimize visual impact to neighboring properties.
3. 3. Waivers. If the town board and zoning committee find that there will be no significant visual impact, or no negative impact on neighborhood or rural character from the proposed use, the town board and zoning committee may:
a. Approve alternative landscaping plans, differing from the specific standards in this section, or
b. Waive visual screening requirements entirely.
(c) When a use requires a vegetative screening, the requirements of this section shall apply. A vegetative screening plan shall be submitted at the time of permit application, and no permit shall be issued until an acceptable vegetative screening plan has been approved. The plan shall provide for a minimum of 15 feet in depth, parallel to any area used for vehicles or buildings. The vegetative screening area shall not be used for any purpose other than screening, except at designated points of ingress and egress delineated in the plan. Vegetative screens that are within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high water mark of a lake, pond or flowage, or 300 feet of the ordinary high water mark of a navigable river or stream, must comply with applicable portions pursuant to Chapter 11, Dane County Code.
(d) Dimensions and design.
1. Vegetative screening. Within the screening area, vegetation shall consist of:
c. A minimum of 2 parallel rows of trees, with all rows planted 10 feet apart.
d. Within any given row, there shall be a minimum of one tree every 12 feet.
e. Vegetative screening densities along the front of the property adjacent to the road right-of-way may be reduced to not less than one tree every 20 feet.
f. Not less than 75% of the trees shall be evergreens.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.102(12) General Provisions Applicable to All Uses in All Zoning Districts
92
g. A minimum of 2 different species of evergreens shall be utilized.
h. Non-native species which have the potential to be invasive shall not be utilized as part of the screening.
i. Deciduous trees shall be either single stem or multi-stem trees, with the smallest trunk measured at a minimum of a one-inch diameter at the time of planting. The trunk shall be measured 6 inches above the ground.
j. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of 4 feet tall at the time of planting.
k. There shall be a ground cover of either native grasses and flowers, or lawn grasses.
2. Vegetative screens shall not interfere with applicable vision triangle requirements.
3. Within the screening area, vegetation shall be maintained in viable growing conditions. Maintenance of the ground cover shall be completed in a manner so as to maintain the shape or appearance of trees within the buffer area.
4. Screens shall be maintained along the interior boundaries of the lot to a point 15 feet from the street right-of-way.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(1) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
93
10.103. Special Requirements for Particular Uses
Accessory dwelling units.
(a) On lots zoned for single-family residential use, no more than one accessory dwelling unit may be created per lot.
(b) Multiple accessory dwelling units per lot may be created only in the Multi-Family Residential (MFR) , Hamlet Residential (HAM-R) or Hamlet Mixed-Use (HAM-M) districts, or within a manufactured home community permitted under s. 10.103(14).
(c) A detached accessory dwelling unit may be included in either an existing or new dwelling unit.
(d) Lots accommodating an accessory dwelling unit must meet the minimum lot size for the applicable zoning district.
(e) In no case shall an accessory dwelling unit exceed 800 square feet of occupiable floor area.
(f) No accessory dwelling unit shall have more than two bedrooms.
(g) Accessory dwelling units shall not be sold separately from the principal dwelling unit, nor from the property on which it sits.
(h) A lot or parcel of land containing an accessory dwelling unit shall be occupied by the owner of the premises. The owner may live in either the accessory dwelling unit or the principal residence.
(i) The orientation of the proposed accessory dwelling unit shall, to the maximum extent practical, maintain the privacy of residents in adjoining dwellings. The town board and zoning committee may, as necessary, require screening, consistent with s. 10.102(12) between a property containing an ADU and adjacent properties.
(j) Off-street parking shall be provided consistent with s. 10.102(8).
(k) Accessory dwelling units must meet applicable residential building codes and sanitary codes.
Adult book stores.
(a) The County of Dane, relying upon the experience of other local governments in this state and throughout the country, finds that adult book stores have an adverse secondary effect on the surrounding community and that regulations are necessary to minimize this secondary effect. The experience of other cities are summarized in the case of Northend Cinema, Inc. v. Seattle, 585 P. 2d 1153 (1978).
(b) This ordinance does not regulate the content of materials held for sale or rent in adult book stores.
(c) Adult book stores shall meet all of the following requirements:
1. Location of any particular adult book store must be not less than 1,000 feet from any church, synagogue, temple, mosque or any other place of worship, any residentially zoned district, park, school, playground, day care center, public library and any other adult book store;
2. Exterior windows shall not be covered or made opaque in any way;
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(3) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
94
3. No material referenced in paragraphs (a), (b) or (c) of s. 10.004(8) shall be placed in any exterior window, provided that material which is not so referenced may be placed in a window;
4. The business may have only one (1) nonflashing business sign which sign may only indicate the name of the business and identify it as an adult book store and which shall be not larger than 4 feet by 4 feet;
5. A one square foot sign shall be placed on each public entrance which shall state "Admittance to adults only" and may include other pertinent business information; and
6. There shall be no doors on any viewing booths and each booth must be lighted by a source emitting at least 10 candlepower at all times.
Agricultural entertainment, special events, tourism or assembly.
(a) For any such activities planned or anticipated to have attendance of more than 200 persons at any one time during a day, the landowner shall file an event plan, approved by the zoning administrator, addressing, at a minimum the following issues:
1. the number of events proposed each year
2. the maximum expected attendance at each event
3. off-street parking, to meet standards in s. 10.102(8)
4. days and hours of operation
5. ingress and egress
6. sanitation
7. trash / recycling collection and disposal
8. proposed signage
9. other public safety issues
(b) Event plans must be filed with the following:
1. the zoning administrator,
2. town clerk,
3. servicing fire department,
4. emergency medical service provider,
5. Dane County Sheriff’s Department and
6. any local law enforcement agency.
(c) Event plans for such activities must be filed at least 30 days prior to the start of any activities in each calendar year.
Airport, landing strip or heliport.
(a) All buildings, structures, outdoor airplane or helicopter storage areas shall conform to the setbacks, maximum building height and lot coverage requirements for agricultural or commercial accessory buildings in the underlying zoning district.
(b) Runways shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
(c) Runways must be laid out to provide sufficient clear space, either within the property boundaries, or through the use of a recorded avigation easement for safe takeoff and landing. Clear space must meet current WISDOT Bureau of Aeronautics distance-to-height
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(5) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
95
ratios appropriate to the speed of the proposed aircraft.
(d) All proposed airports, landing strips or heliports must meet all current requirements of Chapter 114, Wisconsin Statutes, TRANS 57, Wisconsin Administrative Code, or its successor and any applicable standards from the Federal Aeronautics Administration.
(e) Applicants must submit, with their conditional use permit application, copies of Wisconsin Department of Transportation airport review applications or approved certificates.
(f) The committee and town board may require visual screening, per the standards in s. 10.102(12), provided that such screening will not interfere with airport operations.
Animal boarding, domestic pets.
(a) Use shall be enclosed by a fence or other suitable enclosure to prevent animals from leaving the site.
(b) Each animal shall be provided with an indoor containment area if the use is located within 500 feet of an existing residence or any lot in the Single Family Residential, Two-Family Residential, Multi-Family Residential, Rural Residential or Hamlet districts.
(c) Each animal shall be provided with adequate exercise space
(d) Applicant shall submit a manure management plan.
(e) At their discretion, and where necessary to minimize impacts to neighboring properties, the town board and zoning committee may:
1. impose noise limits under s. 10.102(6),
2. require visual screening, consistent with s. 10.102(12), and/or;
3. establish hours where animals must be kept indoors.
(f) The committee and town board will impose limits on the total number of animals that may be present at any one time, as appropriate to the site and neighboring land uses.
Animal boarding, large animal.
(a) Use shall be enclosed by a fence or other suitable enclosure to prevent animals from leaving the site.
(b) Each animal shall be provided with adequate exercise space
(c) The committee and town board will impose limits on the total number of animals that may be present at any one time, as appropriate to the site and neighboring land uses.
(d) Operations exceeding one animal unit per acre must comply with the standards of s. 10.103(7).
Animal use in excess of one animal unit per acre
(a) Applicant must submit and maintain a site-specific manure management plan.
(b) Applicant must maintain a Farm Conservation Plan, compliant with NR 151, Subchapter II, Wisconsin Administrative Code, that is approved by the County Conservationist.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(8) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
96
Campgrounds.
Campgrounds must meet all current standards and permitting requirements of:
(a) ATCP 79, Wisconsin Administrative Code, or its successor.
(b) Chapter 11, Dane County Code. Camping units must meet all principal structure setbacks from ordinary high water marks or wetland boundaries.
(c) Chapter 17, Dane County Code, including all applicable flood warning, evacuation, record-keeping and notice standards.
Communication towers.
(a) Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the development and installation of telecommunication towers and related facilities, including, but not limited to broadcast radio and television facilities, mobile service support structures and facilities, and fixed wireless internet facilities. The provisions of this section are intended to ensure that telecommunication facilities are located, constructed, maintained and removed in a manner that:
1. Protects and promotes public health, safety, community welfare and the quality of life in Dane County as set forth within the goals, objectives and policies of the Dane County Comprehensive Plan and this ordinance;
2. Respects the rights and interests of towns, neighboring property owners, and existing land uses on adjoining properties in the decision making process;
3. Recognizes the public necessity for telecommunication facilities and the numerous benefits and opportunities a robust wireless infrastructure make possible for county residents, including improved public safety, efficient production and distribution of goods and services, access to educational resources, and economic development opportunities;
4. Allows appropriate levels of service to be obtained throughout the County, including expansion to rural areas seeking access to personal communications and broadband internet service, as such services are defined by the Federal Communications Commission;
5. Minimizes the number of transmission towers throughout the County;
6. Encourages the joint use of new and existing telecommunication facilities as a preferred siting option;
7. Ensures that all telecommunication facilities, including towers, antennas, and ancillary facilities are located and designed to minimize the visual and environmental impact on the immediate surroundings and throughout the county;
8. Avoids potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure or ice falls through sound engineering and careful siting of structures, and;
9. Provides a public forum to assure a balance between public concerns and private interests in establishing commercial telecommunications and related facilities.
(b) New construction or substantial modification of communication towers.
1. Application Process. New or substantially modified communication towers require approval of a conditional use permit.. In addition to materials required under s10.101(6),
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(9) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
97
the applicant must provide, in a form acceptable to the zoning administrator, the following:
a. Application. Completed communications tower conditional use permit application form, that includes, at a minimum:
i. The name and business address of, and the contact individual for, the applicant. If the applicant is a tower company or site acquisition consultant, the name(s), address(es), and contact individual(s) for the anchor tenant(s) along with the FCC license number(s) of the carrier(s) or service provider(s).
ii. The precise location and base ground elevation above mean sea level of the proposed or affected support structure. Location information shall be provided in latitude/longitude coordinates.
iii. The specific type(s) of communication service(s) to be provided by the proposed facility, the operating frequency or frequencies at which the service(s) will be provided, and the minimum required elevation above mean sea level necessary to provide the services.
b. Project narrative. A signed project narrative explaining the need for a new or modified communication tower. The narrative should also include the following information:
i. An explanation why the particular site was selected.
ii. For an application to construct a new tower, an explanation as to why the applicant chose the proposed location and why the applicant did not choose collocation, that addresses the requirements of section 10.103(9)(c)1, below. The narrative must include a sworn statement from an individual who has responsibility over the placement of the mobile service support structure attesting that collocation within the applicant's search ring would not result in the same mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity; is technically infeasible; or is economically burdensome to the mobile service provider. For the purposes of this ordinance, cost savings or increased profitability shall not be considered an economic burden.
c. Search ring map. Applicants must submit a search ring map drawn to a measurable scale, showing the area in which the applicant seeks to locate their equipment. The map must show and include road names, municipal boundaries, all existing telecommunication facilities within 1 mile of the search ring, and any tall structure over 100’ in height within the search ring. The map must document and assign an identification number to all existing towers within the designated radius and include a brief statement explaining why the tower is not viable for collocation. The zoning administrator may require that the map be accompanied by a table providing additional data for each existing tower within 1.5 miles of the search ring, including but not limited to, the following: simple description of the tower, existing and maximum design height, FCC registration number; owner’s name and contact information; number of collocation spots occupied and available on the
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(9) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
98
tower; present percentage of use of the tower, available aperture at the requester’s preferred height, type of communication technology being used.
d. Radio frequency propagation maps. Two radio frequency (RF) propagation plots depicting the carrier’s current service (clearly highlighting the existing service area void), and the service to be gained by the proposed facility. These plots shall be prepared in accordance with accepted industry standards and shall be accompanied by a clear and simply written description by an RF engineer explaining the plots and how to read them.
e. Site plan. In addition to all of the information required under s. 10.101(6), site plans must include the following information:
i. Existing or proposed zoning and conditional use permit area and proposed or existing lease area
ii. Existing and/or proposed tower compound area depicting location and layout of existing and/or proposed tower and related facilities including distances to the lease and CUP area;
iii. Existing and/or proposed residences (if any) on both the subject property and neighboring properties within .5 mile of the subject property – distances should be shown to neighboring residences located within 1,500’ per 100’ of tower height;
f. Preliminary Design / Construction Plans site photos and photo simulations. A description of the tower design and height. The description shall include:
i. A preliminary scaled elevation drawing of the proposed tower showing the location and elevation (feet Above Ground Level and Above Mean Sea Level) of each potential antenna array and any anticipated lighting. The drawing should also identify the proposed color and surfacing of the tower and ancillary facilities;
ii. A statement indicating the anticipated design capacity of the tower in terms of the number, type and height of collocations it is designed to accommodate;
iii. Preliminary drawings showing the dimensions and design details for all tower facilities, including the specific types of communications equipment to be mounted on the tower.
iv. Information regarding any anticipated or proposed lighting, including types and color of lights, and whether lighting is nighttime only or both day / night and any difference between time periods.
v. Site photos and photo simulations showing the proposed location of the tower from adjoining properties and depicting the appearance of the tower following installation. Photo simulations shall include a scaled representation of the tower superimposed on the site photos taken from adjoining properties.
vi. Statement of compliance with Federal Communications Commission guidelines on radio frequency exposure and interference. Compliance
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(9) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
99
statement must be on letterhead of the licensed carrier(s) proposing to provide telecommunications services on the tower.
g. Notification to Other Carriers. Applicants shall provide written notification to other carriers licensed to provide wireless services in Dane County informing them of the intent to construct a new telecommunication tower. The zoning administrator shall maintain a list of licensed carriers, including contact information and a standard form that may be used to fulfill this requirement.
h. Notification to Nearby Airports. The applicant shall provide written notification to all operators and owners of airports located within 5 miles of the proposed site.
i. Aeronautic Hazards. The applicant shall provide copies of a determination of no hazard from the federal aviation administration, including any aeronautical study or other findings, if applicable.
j. Other information – Depending upon the proposal, the county Zoning & Land Regulation Committee may request additional information from the applicant prior to acting on a Conditional Use Permit application.
k. Fees. Application fees as required in Chapter 12.
2. Determination of completeness. Within 10 days of receipt of an application for a new or substantially modified communication tower, the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall provide the applicant with a written determination of completeness. If an application is not complete, the notification shall specify in detail the required information that was incomplete.
3. Third party radio frequency engineering review. Unless waived by the committee, all applications shall be reviewed by the county’s third party radio frequency engineering consultant for completeness and compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations. All reasonable costs and expenses associated with such consultation, except travel expenses, shall be borne by the applicant. Failure to pay such costs and expenses, or provide information requested by the committee shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a conditional use permit.
4. Existing and Proposed Network Buildout. The committee may require that an applicant for a conditional use permit provide a written description, map, and attribute table documenting the applicant’s existing network in Dane County. Describe and show on a map generally where gaps in service currently exist. Describe and show on a map the applicant’s future plans for placement or construction of communication towers in Dane County and one mile surrounding the County’s border in addition to the proposed tower that is the subject of the application.
5. Action on Conditional Use Permit application. Within 90 days of receipt of a complete application for a new or substantially modified communication tower, the committee will make a final decision whether to approve or disapprove the application. Committee decisions shall be supported by substantial evidence. The 90 day time period may be extended upon mutual agreement of the applicant and county.
6. Failure to provide information or materials required under this section shall be grounds for disapproval of a Conditional Use Permit application.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(9) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
100
(c) General standards.
1. No conditional use permit for the placement or construction of a telecommunication tower shall be issued unless the applicant presents to the committee substantial evidence establishing to a reasonable degree of certainty the following:
a. No existing communication tower is located within the area in which the applicant's equipment must be located; or
b. No existing communication tower within the area in which the applicant's equipment must be located is of sufficient height to meet applicant's requirements and the deficiency in height cannot be remedied at a reasonable cost; or
c. No existing communication tower within the area in which the applicant's equipment must be located has sufficient structural strength to support applicant's equipment and the deficiency in structural strength cannot be remedied at a reasonable cost; or
d. The applicant's equipment would cause electromagnetic interference with equipment on the existing communication tower(s) within the area in which the applicant's equipment must be located, or the equipment on the existing communication tower(s) would cause interference with the applicant's equipment and the interference, from whatever source, cannot be eliminated at a reasonable cost; or
e. The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to collocate on an existing communication tower are unreasonable relative to industry norms; or
f. The applicant demonstrates that there are other factors that render existing communication towers unsuitable or unavailable and establishes that the public interest is best served by the placement or construction of a new communication tower.
2. The cost of eliminating physical or technical impediments to collocation referenced in subsection (c)1.b, c, and d, above, shall be deemed reasonable if it does not exceed by 25 percent the cost of constructing a new tower on which to mount applicant's equipment. Applicants must provide substantial evidence in the form of detailed cost estimates for structural or technical improvements from firms qualified and authorized to perform such services.
3. Any application for a new telecommunication tower being made on the basis of unreasonable fees, costs, or contractual provisions for collocation on an existing tower as referenced in subsection (c)1e, above, must provide substantial evidence to the Zoning and Land Regulation Committee in the form of actual estimates of said fees, costs, or contractual provisions.
4. Failure or refusal to evaluate the feasibility of collocation shall be grounds for disapproval of a conditional use permit application.
5. Height. Height shall meet any applicable airport height limitation ordinances. No tower may be more than 195 feet in height unless a waiver from this requirement is granted by
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(9) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
101
the Zoning and Land Regulation Committee based on unique transmission condition problems which cannot be overcome by another location.
6. Setbacks to property boundaries and public rights of way. All structures must meet all front, side and rear setbacks provided by this ordinance and Chapter 11, Dane County Code.
7. Minimum distance from other telecommunication towers. No telecommunication tower may be erected within 0.5 miles of an existing telecommunication tower unless a waiver from this requirement is granted by the Zoning and Land Regulation Committee based on unique transmission condition problems which cannot be overcome by another location or other reason the committee deems necessary to serve the public interest.
(d) Standard Conditions. In addition to the conditions described in s. 10.101(7)(d), the town board and zoning committee must impose the following conditions on any tower constructed under this section.
1. New or substantially modified towers must be designed to support, without substantial modification, at least three users (the primary user and two collocation sites) for mounting of equipment supporting International Telecommunications Union “International Mobile Telecommunications-Advanced” systems (a/k/a “LTE / Long-term evolution”). A Wisconsin-licensed Structural Engineer shall approve and stamp the tower design, and certify that the tower can support at least three users.
2. In applying the standards and criteria set forth in this ordinance and in section 10.101(7)(d), D. C. Ords., to applications for conditional use permits for the placement or construction of a communication tower the committee shall, unless it is shown to be unreasonable, condition the grant of the permit upon the applicant placing or constructing the communication tower so as to accommodate, at a minimum height of 150 feet, the collocation of two additional antenna arrays similar in size and function to that placed on the tower by the applicant. Collocation sites need not be available on the tower as initially placed or constructed, provided that the tower will support at the specified minimum height the later addition of the required number of collocation sites. Notwithstanding the height and number of collocation sites on the tower as initially placed or constructed, the communication tower design approved and permitted under this ordinance shall be for a tower of 150 feet in height and shall include the required collocation sites. The holder of a permit under this section shall make the collocation sites required hereunder available for the placement of technologically compatible antenna arrays and equipment upon contractual provisions which are standard in the industry and at prevailing market rates allowing the permit holder to recoup the cost of providing the collocation sites and a fair return on investment..
3. The committee may require, unless it is shown to be unreasonable, modifications to the tower design, including but not limited to visual screening or landscaping, that it deems necessary to minimize the aesthetic impact of the tower.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(10) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
102
4. No lease or deed restriction on property that is proposed for the location of a mobile service support structure or mobile service facility shall preclude the owner or lessee from entering into agreements, leases, or subleases with other providers or prohibit collocation of other providers.
5. Upon written inquiry by the committee, the holder of a Conditional Use Permit issued under this section shall have the burden of presenting to the committee credible evidence establishing to a reasonable certainty the continued compliance with all applicable standards and conditions placed upon the conditional use permit. Failure to establish compliance with the standards and conditions shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. In the event the committee determines that it is necessary to consult with a third party to ascertain compliance with the standards and conditions, all reasonable costs and expenses, except travel expenses, associated with such consultation shall be borne by the holder of said conditional use permit. Failure to pay such costs and expenses or provide information requested by the committee shall be grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit.
6.
Conditional use permits issued under this section shall identify the primary type or types of transmission equipment which is to be placed on the subject communication tower. Any communication tower on which the transmission equipment so identified is no longer placed or used for a continuous period of 12 months shall, upon notification by the committee, be removed by the holder of the conditional use permit issued under this section. If the tower is not removed within 60 days of such notification, the county may remove the tower at the expense of the holder of the conditional use permit. Financial surety bonds or other security instruments, as described in s. 10.101(7)(d)2.b.x., will be required.Domestic fowl and beekeeping.
(a) Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a listing of standards that shall apply to the keeping of domestic fowl and bees in residential yards. The standards are designed to ensure that the keeping of fowl and insects is done in a responsible manner that protects the public health, safety, and welfare and avoids conflicts with neighboring uses.
(b) Fowl. The keeping of 8 domestic fowl in the yards of single family residences or duplexes located in any zoning district shall be a permitted use, if such use complies with the following:
1. Domestic fowl shall not be slaughtered on the premises.
2. Domestic fowl must have access to a covered enclosure.
3. Domestic fowl shall not be allowed to roam free and must be kept in a covered enclosure or fenced enclosure at all times.
4. Covered and fenced enclosures must be clean, dry and odor-free, and kept in a manner that will not disturb the use or enjoyment of adjacent lots.
5. Roosters are prohibited.
(c) Bees. The keeping of honeybees in the yards of single family residences or duplexes
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(11) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
103
located in any zoning district shall be a permitted use, if the use complies with the following:
1. Each residential lot shall be allowed to have at least 6 hives per lot. For residential lots over 10,000 square feet, no more than one hive per 1,600 square feet of lot area is permitted.
2. A supply of water shall be provided for all hives.
3. A flyway barrier at least six (6) feet in height shall shield any part of a property line that is within twenty-five (25) feet of a hive. The flyway barrier shall consist of a wall, fence, dense vegetation or a combination thereof and it shall be positioned to transect both legs of a triangle extending from an apex at the hive to each end point of the part of the property line to be shielded.
(d) Location of covered and fenced enclosures and hives.
1. Covered and fenced enclosures or hives shall be within the rear or side yard, and must be at least four (4) feet from any property line.
2. Covered and fenced enclosures or hives shall not be closer than 25 feet to any principal residence on an adjacent lot.
3. Covered and fenced enclosures or hives shall comply with setback requirements of Chapter 11.
4. All chicken enclosures, regardless of size, require a zoning permit.
Farm residences.
(a) Application. Applicants must provide, in a form acceptable to the zoning administrator, the following information:
1. Written description of the farm operation. The description should include the following details:
a. Location of the farm.
b. Size of the farm operation in acres.
c. Crops grown and/or livestock raised.
d. Number of employees, if any, in addition to farm family members.
e. Summary of farm income derived from the farm operation.
2. Completed Internal Revenue Service form “Schedule F – Profit or Loss from Farming,” or subsequent IRS form for reporting farm profit or loss, for the past 3 tax years.
3. Farm conservation plan obtained from the Land Conservation Division of the Dane County Land & Water Resources Department, detailing the types/location of crops grown, and any on-farm conservation measures (e.g., grass drainage swales, buffer strips, etc.).
4. Map/site plan with aerial photograph showing the farm ownership boundaries. The map should clearly identify the location of the proposed new Farm Residence and driveway access.
(b) Permit conditions.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(12) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
104
1. Any approved conditional use permit for a farm residence shall expire on the sale of the property to an unrelated third party. Continued use of a farm residence after sale to an unrelated third party shall require approval of a new conditional use permit.
2. The Zoning Committee may revoke any Conditional Use Permit it finds in violation of this section. Continued use of residence with a revoked conditional use permit shall require approval of a rezone petition to a zoning district that allows nonfarm residential use.
3. The Zoning Committee shall require the recording of a notice document with the Register of Deeds on the subject property notifying current and future owners of the provisions of paragraph 1. And 2. of this section.
Limited family business.
(a) A conditional use permit for a limited family business is designed to accommodate small family businesses without the necessity for relocation or rezoning while at the same time protecting the interests of adjacent property owners. Applicants for this conditional use permit should recognize that rezoning or relocation of the business may be necessary or may become necessary if the business is expanded. No limited family or rural business shall conflict with the purposes of the zoning district in which it is located.
(b) The use shall employ no more than one or one full-time equivalent, employee who is not a member of the family residing on the premises.
(c) Using applicable conditional use permit standards, the committee shall determine the percentage of the property that may be devoted to the business.
(d) The conditional use permit holder may be restricted to a service oriented business and thus prohibited from manufacturing or assembling products or selling products on the premises or any combination thereof.
(e) The conditional use permit may restrict the number and types of machinery and equipment the permit holder may be allowed to bring on the premises.
(f) Structures used in the business shall be considered to be residential accessory buildings and shall meet all requirements for such buildings. The design and size of the structures is subject to conditions set forth in the conditional use permit.
(g) Sanitary fixtures to serve the limited family business use may be installed, but must be removed upon expiration of the conditional use permit or abandonment of the limited family business.
(h) The conditional use permit shall automatically expire on sale of the property or the business to an unrelated third party.
Limited farm business.
(a) Uses are limited to those listed as permitted uses in the LC or GC zoning districts, provided the use does not conflict with the overall purposes of the applicable zoning district.
(b) Area dedicated to the Limited farm business use must not exceed 10,000 square feet in indoor floor area.
(c) Limited farm businesses must be contained entirely within building(s) in existence prior to April 30, 2005.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(14) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
105
(d) The landowner must maintain, restore or enhance the existing exterior character of the building(s).
(e) No Limited farm business shall employ more than 4 non-family employees.
Manufactured home communities.
(a) Other regulations. Manufactured home communities are also subject to the provisions of chapter SPC 326, Wis. Admin. Code, or its successor. The more restrictive combination of regulations shall apply.
(b) Space size. Each space for the accommodation of a single manufactured home shall contain not less than 3,000 square feet of area.
(c) Spacing between manufactured homes and other buildings.
1. Except as exempted below, there shall be at least 20 feet of spacing between manufactured homes.
a. Exemptions. In manufactured home communities established on or before May 31, 1998, there shall be at least 10 feet of spacing between manufactured homes. Expansions of such communities after May 31, 1998, whether by increasing the land area of the community or by placing additional homes in the community, or both, shall comply with the 20 foot spacing standard.
2. Spacing between other manufactured homes and accessory buildings and structures shall not be less than five (5) feet.
(d) Road setbacks. Manufactured homes must meet all road setbacks described in s. 10.102(9).
(e) Off-street parking. Each space shall provide off-street parking as required in s. 10.102(8).
(f) Landscaping. Each space shall be landscaped with at least one fast growing tree of at least two (2) inches in diameter at ground level and two bushes or shrubs of at least three (3) feet in height. This requirement may be waived by the committee if, at the time of the application for a conditional use permit, a landscaping plan is submitted that utilizes topography, plantings of trees or shrubs and/or decorative fencing to provide a degree of privacy between spaces.
(g) Parks and recreation facilities. Each manufactured home community shall provide a park and recreation area of at least ½ acre for each 50 or fraction of 50 spaces in the community. The park and recreation area shall be located to provide easy access for all residents in the community. Additionally, the area shall be well drained to provide a clean and safe area for children to play and shall be equipped with a sufficient amount of playground equipment to accommodate the children living in the community.
(h) Interior roads and streets.
1. All interior roads and streets of a manufactured home community shall be paved in accordance with the paving standards of the town in which the community is located.
2. The landowner shall provide to Dane County a map drawn to scale of the community showing the location of all interior roads, adjacent or abutting roads and points of access. Spaces shall be clearly delineated and numbers assigned to each space in sequence beginning with number 1.
(i) Removal and replacement of manufactured homes. Manufactured homes may be removed
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(15) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
106
and replaced in a manufactured home community provided that replacement is in compliance with the regulations of this Chapter and subsection applicable to the community.
Mineral extraction.
(a) Application materials. In addition to materials required for all conditional use permits, applicants must provide, in a format acceptable to the zoning administrator, the following:
1. A legal description of the land for which the permit is requested.
a. This may be a lot in a Certified Survey Map, a lot (and block, if any) in a subdivision, or an exact “metes and bounds” description.
b. The description must include the size of the CUP area in acres or square feet.
2. Tax parcel number(s) of the lot(s) or parcel(s) where the conditional use is to be located. If the area proposed for the conditional use is a part of a larger parcel, applicant must provide the tax parcel number of the larger parcel.
3. A written statement containing the following information:
a. General description of the operation.
b. Existing use of the land.
c. Existing natural features including approximate depth to groundwater.
d. The types and quantities of materials that would be extracted.
e. Proposed dates to begin extraction, end extraction and complete reclamation.
f. Proposed hours and days of operation.
g. Geologic composition and depth to the mineral deposit.
h. Maximum proposed pit depth.
i. Identify all major proposed haul routes to the nearest Class A highway or truck route. Indicate traffic flow patterns.
j. Proposed phasing plan, if any (recommended for larger sites).
k. Types, quantities, and frequency of use of equipment to extract, process, and haul.
l. Whether and how frequently blasting, drilling, mining, crushing, screening, washing, refueling, fuel storage, asphalt batching or concrete mixing would be performed on site.
m. Whether excavation will occur below the water table and, if so, how ground water quality will be protected.
n. Any proposed temporary or permanent structures (e.g., scales, offices).
o. Any special measures that will be used for spill prevention and control, dust control, transportation, or environmental protection.
p. Proposed use after reclamation as consistent with Chapter 74.
4. Additional Site Plan Information. In addition to the submittal requirements described in s. 10.101(7)(b) , applications for a mineral extraction conditional use permit shall include a Site Plan prepared by a qualified professional, drawn to a measurable scale large enough to show detail and at least 11” by 17” in size, showing the following information:
a. Boundaries of the permit area and of the extraction site.
b. Existing contour lines (not more than 10 foot intervals).
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(15) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
107
c. All residences within 1,000 feet of the property.
d. Specific location of proposed extraction area, staging area, equipment storage.
e. Proposed location and surfacing of driveways.
f. Proposed phasing plan, if any (recommended for larger sites).
g. Proposed fencing of property, if any, and gating of driveways.
h. Proposed location of stockpiles.
i. Proposed location and type of screening berms and landscaping.
j. Proposed temporary and permanent structures, including scales and offices.
5. Erosion control plan. An erosion control plan, drawn to scale by a professional engineer, meeting all applicable state and county requirements.
6. Reclamation plan. A reclamation plan prepared in accordance with this ordinance, Chapter 74, Dane County Code and Chapter NR 135, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(b) Conditions on mineral extraction conditional use permits. In addition to conditions required for all conditional use permits, the town board and zoning committee shall impose, at a minimum, the following conditions on any approved conditional use permit for mineral extraction.
1. Topsoil, or appropriate topsoil substitute as approved in a reclamation plan under Chapter74, Dane County Code, from the area of operation shall be saved and stored on site for reclamation of the area. Topsoil or approved topsoil substitute must be returned to the top layer of fill resulting from reclamation.
2. The applicant shall submit an erosion control plan under Chapter 14, Dane County Code covering the entire CUP area for the duration of operations, and receive approval of an erosion control permit prior to commencing extraction operations.
3. The Town and Committee will set an expiration date for the conditional use permit based on the quantity of material to be removed and the expected duration of mineral extraction activities.
a. Extensions. Due to uncertainty in estimating duration for mineral extraction, conditional use permit holders who have operated without violations, may have the duration of their permit extended for a period not to exceed five years, based on an administrative review by the zoning administrator, in consultation with the town board. No more than one such extension shall be granted over the lifespan of the conditional use permit, and all conditions shall remain the same as the original permit. Further extensions or any modifications of conditions shall require re-application and approval of a new conditional use permit.
4. Reclamation shall meet all requirements of Chapter 74 of the Dane County Code of Ordinances. In addition, all reclamation plans must meet the following standards:
a. Final land uses after reclamation must be consistent with any applicable town comprehensive plan, the Dane County Comprehensive Plan and the Dane County Farmland Preservation Plan.
b. Final slopes shall not be graded more than 3:1 except in a quarry operation.
c. The area shall be covered with topsoil and seeded to prevent erosion.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(15) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
108
d. The area shall be cleared of all debris and left in a workmanlike condition subject to the approval of Dane County
e. Highwalls shall be free from falling debris, be benched at the top, and certified by a civil engineer to be stable.
5. The driveway accessing the subject site shall either be paved or covered with crushed asphalt for a minimum distance of 100 feet from the public right-of-way. The operator shall maintain the driveway in a dust free manner in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations, and shall clean any dust or mud tracked onto public roads.
6. The access to the driveway shall have gates securely locked when the extraction site is not in operation. The site shall be signed “no trespassing.”
7. All surface and subsurface operations shall be setback a minimum of 20’ from any property line that does not abut a public right of way.
8. Excavations below the grade of an abutting public street or highway shall be set back from the street or highway a distance at least equal to the distance that is required for buildings or structures under s. 10.102(9). The committee and town board may require greater setbacks where necessary to avoid subsidence, or for consistency with Chapters 11, 14, 17 or 74, Dane County Code.
9. The Town and Committee will assign hours of operation appropriate to the particular application. No operations of any kind shall take place on Sundays or legal holidays. The committee and town board may approve limited exceptions to normal hours of operations for projects associated with Wisconsin Department of Transportation or municipal road projects requiring night work. [Note: Typical hours of operation are from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8 a.m. to early afternoon on Saturday. If there are residences nearby, hours may be more limited (e.g., start at 7:00 a.m. with no Saturday hours).]
10. There shall be a safety fence around the entire extraction area at all times. That safety fence shall be a minimum of 4 feet in height.
11. Except for incidental removal associated with dust spraying or other routine operations under this permit, water shall not be pumped or otherwise removed from the site.
12. The operator shall require all trucks and excavation equipment to have muffler systems that meet or exceed then current industry standards for noise abatement.
13. The operator shall meet DNR standards for particulate emissions as described in NR 415.075 and NR 415.076, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
14. Dane County and the Town shall be listed as additional named insureds on the operator’s liability insurance policy, which shall be for a minimum of $1,000,000 combined single limit coverage per occurrence. The operator shall furnish a copy of a Certificate of Insurance as evidence of coverage before operations commence. The liability insurance policy shall remain in effect until reclamation is complete.
15. At their own initiative or at the applicant’s request, the town board and zoning committee may set further reasonable restrictions on a mineral extraction operation , or prohibit any mineral extraction accessory use.
(c) Additional conditions for particular circumstances. Where any of the following
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(16) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
109
circumstances apply, the zoning committee and town board shall also impose the following conditions on any approved conditional use permit for mineral extraction:
1. Blasting.
a. Blasting Schedule. Blasting shall occur between sunrise and sunset, as required by SPS 307. The zoning committee and town board may set further daily limits on hours when blasting may occur, to minimize impact on neighboring properties. Schedules for blasting need not conform to hours of operation for the overall mineral extraction project.
a. Notice of Blasting Events. Prior to any blasting event, notice shall be provided to nearby residents as described in SPS 307, Wisconsin Administrative Code. In addition, operators will honor the requests of residents within 500’ of the mineral extraction site to either receive or stop receiving such notices at any time.
b. Other standards. All blasting on the site must conform with all requirements of SPS 307, Wisconsin Administrative Code, as amended from time to time, or its successor administrative code regulations.
c. Fly rock shall be contained within the permitted mineral extraction area.
2. Fuel storage. All fuel storage must comply with ATCP 93, Wisconsin Administrative Code, including provisions for secondary spill containment.
3. Mineral extraction at or near groundwater. All excavation equipment, plants, and vehicles shall be fueled, stored, serviced, and repaired on lands at least 3 feet above the highest water table elevation to prevent against groundwater contamination from leaks or spills.
4. In the event that a mineral extraction operation will destroy an existing Public Land Survey Monument, witness monuments must be established in safe locations and a new Monument Record filed by a Professional Surveyor, prior to excavation and disturbance of the existing monument.
Outdoor assembly events [as defined in s. 10.004(113)
(a) The landowner shall file an event plan, approved by the zoning administrator, addressing, at a minimum the following issues:
1. the number of events proposed each year
2. the maximum expected attendance at each event
3. off-street parking, to meet standards in s. 10.102(8)
4. days and hours of operation
5. ingress and egress
6. sanitation
7. trash / recycling collection and disposal
8. proposed signage
9. other public safety issues
(b) Event plans must be filed with the following:
1. the zoning administrator,
2. town clerk,
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(17) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
110
3. servicing fire department,
4. emergency medical service provider,
5. Dane County Sheriff’s Department and
6. any local law enforcement agency.
(c) Event plans for recurring or annual activities must be filed at least 30 days prior to the start of any activities in each calendar year.
Salvage yards or junkyards
(a) Use. For purposes of this ordinance, any premises used for the storage, gathering, recycling or sale of junk, as defined in this chapter, is a salvage recycling center. A salvage recycling center need not have a commercial purpose.
1. Junk, as defined under this chapter, may be stored on any premises on which a permitted business enterprise is actually conducted, provided, that all such junk is actually used in the conduct of such permitted business enterprise, and that all such junk is at all times stored in an enclosed building on the premises, thereby securing it from public view.
2. Junk, as defined in this chapter, may be stored on any premises used chiefly for residential purposes, provided that it is stored solely for eventual use on the premises, and that all such junk is at all times stored in an enclosed building thereby securing it from public view.
(b) Location and boundaries.
1. No salvage yard or junkyard shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of the boundary of any residential district.
2. No salvage yard or junkyard with outdoor operations shall be located within the zone of contribution to a municipal well, as shown in the most current adopted version of the Dane County Water Quality Plan.
(c) License.
1. Before any premises may be used as a privately operated salvage yard or junkyard, it shall be licensed. Application for such license shall be made to the zoning administrator, setting forth the description of the premises, the nature of the business and the materials to be handled, the type of construction of any building to be used in connection with the business, the applicant's name or names, officers, if any, and address of each. The application shall be referred to the zoning committee which shall, within a reasonable time, hold a public hearing, notice of which shall be given by a class 2 notice under chapter 985, Wis. Stats. If, after such public hearing, the zoning committee finds that the premises are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, and that the site is suitable for the conduct of such business, the committee shall grant a license, and such license shall expire on July 1 of each year. Licenses may be renewed from year to year on authorization of the committee when inspection discloses that the business is being conducted in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
2. Revocation of license. Upon the complaint of any interested person, or on its own motion or after inspection discloses that the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, the zoning committee may hold a public hearing to determine whether a privately operated
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.103(18) Special Requirements for Particular Uses
111
salvage yard or junkyard license shall be revoked, notice of such hearing to be given to all interested parties. After public hearing, the zoning committee may order the license revoked.
3. Should any town elect to license salvage yard or junkyards by adoption of an ordinance pursuant to the provisions of s. 59.55(5), Wis. Stats., and file a copy of such ordinance with the zoning department, then the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) above shall not apply, but no such license shall be issued by any town for such purpose unless the area is properly zoned and unless the zoning committee, after public hearing, determines that the site is suitable. When a salvage yard or junkyard is licensed by the town, then the responsibility of controlling such salvage yard or junkyard rests with the town.
Small-scale farming.
(a) Small-scale farming is considered an accessory use to a permitted or conditional principal use and is subject to the following limitations:
(b) Except for domestic pets, domestic fowl and beekeeping, animal use shall not be permitted on parcels smaller than one acre. For parcels one acre or larger, animals shall be limited to one animal unit per acre.
(c) Accessory buildings, structures or cages housing livestock shall be at least 100 feet from any of the Residential, Rural Residential or Hamlet zoning districts.
Solid waste disposal operations.
Solid waste disposal operations shall not be located within the zone of contribution for municipal wells, as shown in the most current adopted version of the Dane County Water Quality Plan.
Temporary batch concrete and asphalt production.
(a) The zoning committee and town board shall set daily limits on hours for concrete and asphalt production, as necessary to minimize impact on neighboring properties. Schedules for concrete or asphalt production need not conform to hours of operation for the overall mineral extraction project.
(b) Operators of concrete or asphalt plants shall be responsible for any conditions placed on such operations.
(c) Asphalt production facilities must comply with all requirements, including spill containment, of Chapter ATCP 93, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.200(1) Zoning Districts
112
10.200. Zoning Districts
Purpose.
All lands located within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided into zoning districts in order to:
(a)achieve compatibility of land uses within each district
(b)implement the adopted goals, objectives and policies of the Dane County ComprehensivePlan, town comprehensive plans, and the Dane County Farmland Preservation Plan, and
(c)to achieve the other stated purposes of this chapter.
Zoning Districts
(a)Sections 10.210 through 10.292 describe the zoning districts within the jurisdiction of thisChapter.
(b)In each zoning district, land uses are divided into permitted and conditional uses.
1.Unless specifically exempted, no development intended to accommodate a permitteduse listed in the applicable zoning district may take place until the Zoning Administrator,or designee, has issued a zoning permit under s. 10.101(1).
2.No land use listed as a conditional use in the applicable zoning district may take placeuntil the town board and zoning committee approve a conditional use permit under s.10.101(7), or the board of adjustment overturns a denial of a conditional use permitunder s. 10.101(7)(c)4.
3.Land uses not listed as either permitted uses or conditional uses are considered to beprohibited in that zoning district.
Table of Land Uses by Zoning District
The following tables provide a summary of permitted and conditional uses in each zoning district. Please refer to the specific section for each zoning district for detailed standards and requirements.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.200(3) Zoning Districts
113
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.200(4) Zoning Districts
114
Zoning Maps
(a) Base and overlay zoning districts established by this chapter are shown on the Official Zoning Map of Dane County, on file with the Zoning Administrator. Together with all explanatory materials thereon, the Official Zoning Map of Dane County is hereby made part of this chapter. Where the Official Zoning Map does not indicate a zoning district for a particular area, unless the Map is in error, that area is either within the corporate limits of a city or village, within an area subject to extraterritorial zoning, and/or not subject to any rules associated with a zoning district.
Interpretation Of Zoning District Boundaries.
The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any zoning district boundary shown on the Official Zoning Map of Dane County:
(a) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following the limits of any city, village, town or County boundary shall be construed as following such limits.
(b) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following public streets or railroad lines shall be construed as following the centerline of such streets or railroad lines.
(c) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following platted lot lines, ordinary high water marks, or other property lines as shown on the Dane County parcel maps shall be construed as following such lines.
(d) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other continuously flowing watercourses shall be construed as following the channel centerlines of such watercourses, and, in the event of a natural change in the location of such streams, rivers, or other watercourses, the zoning district boundary shall be construed as moving with the channel centerline.
(e) Zoning district boundaries shown as separated from any of the features listed in paragraphs (a) through (d) above shall be construed to be at such distances as shown on the Official Zoning Map
(f) Streets, highways, roads or alleys which are shown on the zoning district maps and which heretofore have been vacated, or which may be vacated hereafter, shall be in the same zoning district as the lots, pieces or parcels abutting both sides of the street, highway, road or alley involved. If the lots, pieces or parcels abutting each side of the street, highway, road or alley were located in different zoning districts before the said street or alley was vacated, the centerline of the said vacated street or alley shall be the boundary line of the respective zoning districts.
(g) Where the exact location of a zoning district boundary, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, is uncertain, the boundary location shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(h) The zoning administrator may determine the zoning of unzoned vacated lands, based on the zoning of lands to which the vacated lands are attached.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.210(1) Natural Resource and Recreation Zoning Districts
115
10.210. Natural Resource and Recreation Zoning Districts
10.211. NR-C (Natural Resource Conservation) Zoning District
Purpose.
The purpose of the NR-C Natural Resource Conservation district is to protect, maintain, and enhance natural resource and open space areas. Limited permitted and conditional uses are offered, and regulation of these areas will serve to control erosion and promote the rural character and natural beauty of the County while seeking to assure protection of areas with significant topography, natural watersheds, ground and surface water, wildlife habitat, recreational sites, archeological sites, and other natural resource characteristics that contribute to the environmental quality of the County.
Permitted uses
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space area.
(b) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming and boating.
(c) Propagation and raising of game animals, fowl and fish.
(d) Outdoor passive recreation
(e) The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber.
(f) The harvesting of any wild crops such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops.
(g) Pasturing/grazing of livestock, limited to one (1) animal unit per each full acre.
(h) Uses permitted within a shoreland – or inland – wetland district under ss. 11.07 and 11.08, Dane County Code.
(i) Soil conservation, shoreland, wetland and ecological restoration practices under an approved permit and consistent with technical standards approved by the Director of the Land and Water Resources.
(j) Nonresidential buildings or structures accessory to any permitted use, provided any such building or structure is not located in a floodway, shoreland-wetland, or inland-wetland district.
(k) Invasive species control, when conducted according to best practices approved by the Director of Land and Water Resources or the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
Conditional uses
(a) The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, primitive campgrounds, boat access sites, natural and outdoor education areas, historic and scientific areas, wildlife refuges, game preserves and private wildlife habitat areas.
(b) Soil conservation, shoreland, wetland and ecological restoration practices, other than those listed as permitted uses above.
(c) The construction and maintenance of roads, railroads or utilities, provided that:
1. The facilities cannot as a practical matter be located outside the NR-C district; and
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.211(4) NR-C (Natural Resource Conservation) Zoning District
116
2. Any filling, excavating, ditching, draining, land disturbance or removal of vegetation that is to be done must be necessary for such construction or maintenance and must be done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural and ecological resources of the site.
Lot size requirements
(a) Minimum lot size. None.
(b) Maximum lot size. None.
Setbacks and required yards
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9). For parcels without road frontage, structures must be at least four feet from the lot line where primary access to the parcel is made.
(b) Side yard. Any permitted structures must be at least four feet from the side lot line.
(c) Rear yard. Any permitted structures must be at least four feet from the rear lot line.
Lot coverage.
No building together with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of 10 percent (10%) of the area of a lot in the NR-C district.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.212(1) RE (Recreational) Zoning District
117
10.212. RE (Recreational) Zoning District
Purpose.
The purpose of the RE Recreational District is to allow for a mix of environmental conservation and both passive and active outdoor recreation activities. Permitted uses are those typically associated with public or private parks, golf courses and similar land uses that produce limited noise, traffic, light and other potential nuisances. Conditional uses include those uses, such as lighted athletic fields, outdoor concerts and commercial uses that have the potential to generate significant noise, traffic or other impacts to neighboring properties.
Permitted uses
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space area.
(b) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming and boating.
(c) Outdoor passive recreation
(d) Propagation and raising of game animals, fowl and fish.
(e) The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber.
(f) The harvesting of any wild crops such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops.
(g) Pasturing/grazing of livestock, limited to one (1) animal unit per each full acre.
(h) Uses permitted within a shoreland or inland – wetland district under ss. 11.07 and 11.08, Dane County Code. Pasturing of livestock is subject to the animal unit limitation in sub. (g), above.
(i) Soil conservation, shoreland, wetland and ecological restoration practices.
(j) Nonresidential buildings or structures accessory to any permitted use, provided any such building or structure is not located in a floodway, shoreland-wetland, or inland-wetland district.
(k) The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas, primitive campgrounds, boat access sites, natural and outdoor education areas, historic and scientific areas, wildlife refuges, game preserves and private wildlife habitat areas.
(l) Agricultural uses
(m)Community gardens
(n) Outdoor active recreation, not lighted for nighttime activities
(o) Outdoor passive recreation
(p) Recreational accessory uses
(q) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(r) The construction and maintenance of roads, railroads, utilities, provided that:
1. The facilities cannot as a practical matter be located outside the RE district; and
2. Any filling, excavating, ditching, draining, land disturbance or removal of vegetation that is to be done must be necessary for such construction or maintenance and must be done in a manner designed to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural and ecological resources of the site.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.212(3) RE (Recreational) Zoning District
118
Conditional uses
(a) Campgrounds
(b) Caretaker's residence
(c) Cemeteries
(d) Indoor active recreation
(e) Outdoor active recreation, lighted for nighttime activities
(f) Outdoor assembly events
(g) Outdoor entertainment
Lot size requirements
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the RE-1 zoning district must be at least 15,000 square feet in area.
(b) Maximum lot size. None.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9). For parcels without road frontage, structures must be at least four feet from the lot line where primary access to the parcel is made.
(b) Side yard. Any permitted structures must be at least four feet from the side lot line.
(c) Rear yard. Any permitted structures must be at least four feet from the rear lot line.
Lot coverage.
No building together with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of 15 percent (15%) of the area of a lot in the RE district.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.220(1) Farmland Preservation Districts
119
10.220. Farmland Preservation Districts
Provisions applicable to all Farmland Preservation Districts
(a) Conditional Use Standards in Farmland Preservation Districts. In addition to the requirements of s. 10.101(7)(d), the zoning committee must find that the following standards are met before approving any conditional use permit in any Farmland Preservation zoning district.
1. The use and its location in the Farmland Preservation Zoning District are consistent with the purposes of the district.
2. The use and its location in the Farmland Preservation Zoning district are reasonable and appropriate, considering alternative locations, or are specifically approved under state or federal law.
3. The use is reasonably designed to minimize the conversion of land, at and around the site of the use, from agricultural use or open space use.
4. The use does not substantially impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of surrounding parcels of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to agricultural use.
5. Construction damage to land remaining in agricultural use is minimized and repaired, to the extent feasible.
(b) Rezones out of a Farmland Preservation Zoning District. The county board must find that the following standards are met before approving any petition to rezone any land from a Farmland Preservation Zoning district to a non-Farmland Preservation zoning district:
1. The land is better suited for a use not allowed in the farmland preservation zoning district.
2. The rezoning is consistent with the current adopted version of the Dane County Comprehensive Plan.
3. The rezoning is substantially consistent with the current state- certified Dane County Farmland Preservation Plan.
4. The rezoning will not substantially impair or limit current or future agricultural use of surrounding parcels of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to agricultural use.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.221(1) FP-1 (Small-lot Farmland Preservation) Zoning District
120
10.221. FP-1 (Small-lot Farmland Preservation) Zoning District
Purpose.
The FP-1 district is designed to:
(a) Provide for a modest range of agriculture and agricultural accessory uses, at scales consistent with the size of the parcel and compatible with neighboring land uses. The FP-1 district accommodates uses which are associated with production and harvesting of crops, livestock, animal products or plant materials. These uses may involve noise, dust, odors, heavy equipment, use of chemicals and long hours of operation.
(b) Allow for incidental processing, packaging, storage, transportation, distribution or other activities intended to add value to agricultural products produced on the premises or to ready such products for market.
(c) Preserve agricultural and open space uses on zoning lots between one (1) and thirty-five (35) acres in size.
(d) Provide for additional economic opportunities for property owners that are generally compatible with agricultural use, such as the establishment of new small-scale farming operations, including market gardens, road-side farmstands, pick-your-own operations, or Community Supported Agriculture farms.
(e) Preserve remnant parcels of productive agricultural land following development of adjoining property.
(f) Meet the criteria for certification as a Farmland Preservation Zoning District under s. 91.38, Wis. Stats.
Permitted uses.
The following are permitted uses in this district:
(a) Agricultural uses, subject to the limitations below.
1. Unless authorized under a conditional use permit, livestock are prohibited on parcels of five acres or less.
2. Unless a higher density is authorized under a conditional use permit, livestock are limited to one animal unit per acre on parcels between five and thirty-five acres.
(b) Agricultural Accessory Uses, subject to the exceptions and limitations below.
1. Exceptions.
a. Farm residences are not permitted in the FP-1 zoning district.
b. Uses listed as conditional uses below.
2. Limitations.
a. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibition of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities, must occur on ten or fewer days in a calendar year.
b. The seasonal storage of recreational equipment and motor vehicles owned by private individuals other than those residing on the premises, such storage to be in accessory farm buildings existing as of January 1, 2010. The storage of a dealer’s inventory or the construction of any new buildings for storage is prohibited.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.221(3) FP-1 (Small-lot Farmland Preservation) Zoning District
121
c. Sales of agricultural products produced on the farm.
(c) Large animal boarding.
(d) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(e) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use.
(f) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Agricultural accessory uses. In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, the following uses must meet the definition of an agricultural accessory use under s. 10.004(12).
1. Agricultural entertainment activities or special events.
2. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities, occurring on more than ten days in a calendar year.
3. Limited farm business.
4. Sale of agricultural and dairy products not produced on the premises and incidental sale of non-alcoholic beverages and snacks.
5. Sanitary facilities in an agricultural accessory building.
(b) Livestock on parcels five acres or less.
(c) Livestock in excess of one animal unit per acre on parcels between five and thirty-five acres.
(d) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
(e) Electric generating facilities, provided 100% of the production output of the facility is derived from renewable energy resources.
Lot size requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the FP-1 zoning district must be at least one acre in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Maximum lot size. All lots created in the FP-1 zoning district must be smaller than 35 acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(c) Minimum lot width. There is no minimum lot width in the FP-1 zoning district.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9). For parcels without road frontage, structures must be at least 50 feet from the lot line where primary access to the parcel is made.
(b) Side yard.
1. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.221(6) FP-1 (Small-lot Farmland Preservation) Zoning District
122
a. 100 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts,
b. 50 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c. At least 10 feet from any other side lot line.
2. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line.
(c) Rear yard.
1. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
a. 100 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts,
b. 50 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c. 10 feet from any other rear lot line.
2. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any rear lot line.
Building height.
(a) Agricultural buildings. There is no limitation on height for agricultural buildings.
Lot coverage.
(a) Parcels 2 acres or less in area. No building together with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of 30 percent (30%) of the area of an interior lot or 35 percent (35%) of the area of a corner lot.
(b) Parcels over 2 acres in area. No limitation on lot coverage.
Other restrictions on buildings.
(a) Accessory buildings.
1. There is no limitation on the number of accessory buildings in the FP-1 district, provided lot coverage standards are met.
2. Accessory buildings may be constructed on property without a principal residence only if it is clearly related to a legitimate agricultural or agricultural accessory use.
3. Sanitary facilities are prohibited in agricultural accessory buildings unless specifically authorized by conditional use permit.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.222(1) FP-35 (General Farmland Preservation) Zoning District
123
10.222. FP-35 (General Farmland Preservation) Zoning District
Purpose.
The FP-35 General Farmland Preservation district is designed to:
(a) Provide for a wide range of agriculture and agricultural accessory uses, at various scales. The FP-35 district accommodates as permitted uses all activities typically associated with the primary production and harvesting of crops, livestock, animal products or plant materials. Such uses may involve noise, dust, odors, heavy equipment, use of chemicals and long hours of operation.
(b) Allow for incidental processing, packaging, storage, transportation, distribution or other activities intended to add value to agricultural products produced on the premises or to ready such products for market. Such uses are conditional as they may have the potential to pose conflicts with agricultural use due to: volumes or speed of vehicular traffic; residential density; proximity to incompatible uses; environmental impacts; or consumption of agriculturally productive lands.
(c) Allow for other incidental activities, compatible with agricultural use, to supplement farm family income and support the agricultural community.
(d) Preserve productive agricultural land for food and fiber production.
(e) Preserve productive farms by preventing land use conflicts between incompatible uses.
(f) Maintain a viable agricultural base to support agricultural processing and service industries.
(g) Reduce costs for providing services to scattered non-farm uses.
(h) Pace and shape urban growth.
(i) Meet the criteria for certification as a Farmland Preservation Zoning District under s. 91.38, Wis. Stats.
Permitted uses.
(a) Agricultural Uses.
(b) Agricultural Accessory Uses, except those uses listed as conditional uses in subd.(3) below, and subject to the following limitations and standards.
1. Any residence lawfully existing as of February 20,2010, provided all of the following criteria are met:
a. the use remains residential,
b. the structure complies with all building height, setback, side yard and rear yard standards of this ordinance; and
c. for replacement residences, the structure must be located within 100 feet of the original residence, unless site-specific limitations or town residential siting standards in town plans adopted by the county board require a greater distance. Proposals for a replacement residence that would exceed the 100 foot limitation must be approved by the relevant town board and county zoning committee.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.222(3) FP-35 (General Farmland Preservation) Zoning District
124
2. Residential accessory buildings, home occupations, foster care for less than 5 children community living arrangements for less than 9 people or incidental room rental associated with either:
a. an existing residence permitted under 1. above, or
b. a farm residence approved by conditional use permit.
3. Rental of existing or secondary residences located on a farm, but no longer utilized in the operation of the farm.
4. Agricultural accessory buildings, including those with sanitary facilities.
5. Agricultural entertainment activities or special events under 10 days per calendar year in the aggregate, including incidental preparation and sale of beverages and food.
6. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities occurring on no more than ten days in a calendar year.
7. The seasonal storage of recreational equipment and motor vehicles owned by private individuals other than those residing on the premises, such storage to be in accessory farm buildings existing as of January 1, 2010. The storage of a dealer’s inventory or the construction of any new buildings for storage is prohibited.
8. Sales of agricultural products produced on the farm.
(c) Large animal boarding.
(d) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(e) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use.
(f) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
The following uses require a Conditional Use Permit in this district:
(a) Agricultural Accessory Uses: In addition to other requirements of this ordinance, the following uses must meet the definition of an agricultural accessory use under s. 10.004(12).
1. Agricultural entertainment activities or special events occurring 10 days or more per calendar year, in aggregate.
2. Airports, landing strips or heliports for private aircraft owned by the owner or operator of a farm.
3. Attached accessory dwelling units associated with a farm residence.
4. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities, occurring on more than ten days in a calendar year.
5. Farm Residence, subject to s. 10.103(11).
6. Limited Farm Business, subject to s. 10.103(13).
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.222(4) FP-35 (General Farmland Preservation) Zoning District
125
7. Sale of agricultural and dairy products not produced on the premises and incidental sale of non-alcoholic beverages and snacks.
8. Secondary farm residence, subject to s. 10.103(11).
(b) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
(c) Non-metallic mineral extraction operations that comply with s. 91.46(6), Wis. Stats., s. 10.103(15) and Chapter 74.
(d) Asphalt plants or ready-mix concrete plants, that comply with s. 91.46(5), Wis. Stats., for production of material to be used in construction or maintenance of public roads, to be limited in time to project duration.
(e) Electric generating facilities, provided 100% of the production output of the facility is derived from renewable energy resources.
Lot size requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the FP-35 zoning district must be at least thirty-five (35) acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Maximum lot size. None.
(c) Minimum lot width. None.
Setbacks.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yards. Any permitted structures must be set back from side property lines as follows:
1. Principal residential buildings must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line and a total of at least 25 feet from both side lot lines.
2. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
a. 100 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts
b. 50 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c.At least 10 feet from any other side lot line.
3. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line.
(c) Rear yard. Any permitted structures must be set back from rear property lines as follows:
1. Principal residential buildings must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks or porches attached to a principal residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
a. 100 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts,
b. 50 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c. 10 feet from any other rear lot line.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.222(6) FP-35 (General Farmland Preservation) Zoning District
126
4. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any rear lot line.
Building height.
(a) Residential buildings.
1. Principal residential buildings shall not exceed a height of two and a half stories or 35 feet.
2. Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
(b) Agricultural buildings. There is no limitation on height for agricultural buildings.
Lot coverage.
There is no limitation on lot coverage in the FP-35 district.
Other restrictions on buildings.
1. Principal residential buildings. Except for secondary farm residences authorized by conditional use permit, no more than one principal building is permitted per lot.
2. Accessory buildings.
a. There is no limitation on the number of accessory buildings in the FP-35 district.
b. Accessory buildings may be constructed on property without a principal residence only if it is clearly related to a legitimate agricultural or agricultural accessory use.
c. Sanitary fixtures are permitted in agricultural accessory buildings, however accessory buildings may not be used as living space.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.223(1) FP-B (Farmland Preservation – Business) Zoning District
127
10.223. FP-B (Farmland Preservation – Business) Zoning District
Purpose.
The FP-B Farmland Preservation-Business District is designed to:
(a) Provide for a wide range of agriculture, agricultural accessory and agriculture-related uses, at various scales with the minimum lot area necessary to accommodate the use. The FP-B district accommodates uses which are commercial or industrial in nature; are associated with agricultural production; require a rural location due to extensive land area needs or proximity of agricultural resources; and do not require urban services.
1. In appearance and operation permitted uses in the FP-B district are often indistinguishable from a farm.
2. Conditional uses are more clearly commercial or industrial in nature, and may involve facilities or processes that require a remote location distant from incompatible uses, proximity to agricultural products or suppliers and/or access to utility services or major transportation infrastructure.
3. Examples of activities in the FP-B district may include, but are not limited to, agricultural support services, value-added, or related businesses such as implement dealers; veterinary clinics; farm machinery repair shops; agricultural supply sales, marketing, storage, and distribution centers; plant and tree nurseries; and facilities for the processing of natural agricultural products or by-products, including fruits, vegetables, silage, or animal proteins. Such activities are characterized by:
a. Wholesale or retail sales, and outdoor storage/display of agriculture-related equipment, inputs, and products;
b. Parking areas, outdoor lighting, and signage appropriate to the scale of use;
c. Small, medium, or large utilitarian structures/facilities/workshops, appropriate to the scale of use;
d. Low to moderate traffic volumes;
e. Noises, odors, dust, or other potential nuisances associated with agriculture-related production or processing.
f. Meet the requirements for certification as a Farmland Preservation Zoning District under s. 91.38, Wis. Stats.
Permitted uses.
(a) Agricultural uses.
(b) Agricultural Accessory Uses, except those uses listed as conditional uses and subject to the limitations and standards below.
1. Any residence lawfully existing as of February 20,2010, provided all of the following criteria are met:
a. the use remains residential,
b. the structure complies with all building height, setback, side yard and rear yard standards of this ordinance; and
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.223(3) FP-B (Farmland Preservation – Business) Zoning District
128
c. for replacement residences, the structure must be located within 100 feet of the original residence, unless site-specific limitations or town residential siting standards in town plans adopted by the county board require a greater distance. Proposals for a replacement residence that would exceed the 100 foot limitation must be approved by the relevant town board and county zoning committee.
2. Agricultural entertainment activities or special events under 10 days per calendar year in the aggregate, including incidental preparation and sale of beverages and food.
3. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities occurring on no more than ten days in a calendar year.
4. The seasonal storage of recreational equipment and motor vehicles owned by private individuals other than those residing on the premises, such storage to be in accessory farm buildings existing as of January 1, 2010. The storage of a dealer’s inventory or the construction of any new buildings for storage is prohibited
5. Residential accessory buildings, home occupations, foster care for less than 5 children community living arrangements for less than 9 people or incidental room rental associated with a farm residence approved by conditional use permit.
6. Sales of agricultural products produced on the farm.
7. Large animal boarding.
(c) Agriculture-related uses, except uses listed as conditional uses below, consistent with the purpose statement for the FP-B district.
(d) Undeveloped natural resources and open space areas
(e) Utility services associated with a farm or a permitted agricultural accessory use.
(f) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Agricultural Accessory Uses: In addition to other requirements of this ordinance, the following uses must meet the definition of an agricultural accessory use under s. 10.004(12) .
1. Agricultural entertainment activities or special events occurring 10 days or more per calendar year, in aggregate.
2. Airports, landing strips or heliports for private aircraft owned by the owner or operator of the farm or agriculture-related use on the premises.
3. Attached accessory dwelling units associated with a farm residence.
4. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities, occurring on more than ten days in a calendar year.
5. Farm residence, subject to s. 10.103(11).
6. Limited farm business, subject to 10.103(13).
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.223(4) FP-B (Farmland Preservation – Business) Zoning District
129
7. Sale of agricultural and dairy products not produced on the premises and incidental sale of non-alcoholic beverages and snacks.
8. Secondary farm residence, subject to s. 10.103(11).
(b) Agriculture-related uses: In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, the following uses must meet the definition of an agriculture-related use under s. 10.004(14).
1. Bio-diesel and ethanol manufacturing;
2. Biopower facilities for distribution, retail, or wholesale sales.
3. Colony house.
4. Commercial animal boarding for farm animals, and not including boarding for domestic pets.
5. Composting facility.
6. Dead stock hauling services;
7. Manure processing facilities;
8. Stock yards, livestock auction facilities;
(c) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
(d) Non-metallic mineral extraction operations that comply with s. 91.46(6), Wis. Stats., s. 10.103(15) and Chapter 74. The application shall conform to the requirements of s. 10.103(15).
(e) Asphalt plants or ready-mix concrete plants, that comply with s. 91.46(5), Wis. Stats., for production of material to be used in construction or maintenance of public roads, to be limited in time to project duration.
(f) Electric generating facilities, provided 100% of the production output of the facility is derived from renewable energy resources.
Lot size requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the FP-B zoning district must be at least 20,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Maximum lot size. None.
(c) Minimum lot width. All lots created in the FP-B zoning district must have a minimum lot width of 100 feet.
Setbacks.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yards. Any permitted structures must be set back from side property lines as follows:
1. Principal residential buildings must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line and a total of at least 25 feet from both side lot lines.
2. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
a. 100 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts,
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.223(6) FP-B (Farmland Preservation – Business) Zoning District
130
b. 50 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c. At least 10 feet from any other side lot line.
3. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line.
(c) Rear yard. Any permitted structures must be set back from rear property lines as follows:
1. Principal residential buildings must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks or porches attached to a principal residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
a. 100 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts,
b. 50 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c. 10 feet from any other rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any rear lot line.
Building height.
(a) Residential buildings.
1. Principal residential buildings shall not exceed a height of two and a half stories or 35 feet.
2. Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
(b) Agricultural buildings. There is no limitation on height for agricultural buildings.
Lot coverage.
There is no limitation on lot coverage in the FP-B district.
Other restrictions on buildings.
(a) Accessory buildings.
1. There is no limitation on the number of accessory buildings in the FP-B district.
2. Accessory buildings may be constructed on property without a principal residence only if it is clearly related to a legitimate agricultural or agricultural accessory use.
3. Sanitary fixtures are permitted in agricultural accessory buildings, however accessory buildings may not be used as living space.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.230(1) Rural Mixed-Use & Transitional Zoning Districts
131
10.230. Rural Mixed-Use & Transitional Zoning Districts
10.231. AT-35 (Agriculture Transition, 35 acres) Zoning District
Purpose.
The AT-35 Agriculture Transition district is designed to:
(a) Accommodate, for an unspecified period of time, a wide range of agriculture and agricultural accessory uses, at various scales in areas that are ultimately planned for either:
1. nonfarm urban or suburban development,
2. a long-term mixture of agricultural and residential uses, or
3. transition to a Farmland Preservation district.
(b) The district applies to such existing or proposed uses on properties located outside of mapped agricultural preservation areas as shown in the Dane County Farmland Preservation Plan.
(c) The AT-35 district accommodates as permitted uses all activities typically associated with the primary production and harvesting of crops, livestock, animal products or plant materials. Such uses may involve noise, dust, odors, heavy equipment, use of chemicals and long hours of operation.
(d) Allow for incidental processing, packaging, storage, transportation, distribution or other activities intended to add value to agricultural products produced on the premises or to ready such products for market. Such uses are conditional as they may have the potential to pose conflicts with agricultural use due to: volumes or speed of vehicular traffic; residential density; proximity to incompatible uses; environmental impacts; or consumption of agriculturally productive lands.
(e) Allow for other incidental activities, compatible with agricultural use, to supplement farm family income and support the agricultural community.
(f) Reduce costs for providing services to scattered non-farm uses.
(g) Pace and shape urban growth.
Permitted uses
(a) Agricultural Uses.
(b) Agricultural Accessory Uses, except those uses listed as conditional uses in subd.(3) below, and subject to the following limitations and standards.
1. Any residence lawfully existing as of February 20,2010, provided all of the following criteria are met:
a. the use remains residential,
b. the structure complies with all building height, setback, side yard and rear yard standards of this ordinance; and
c. for replacement residences, the structure must be located within 100 feet of the original residence, unless site-specific limitations or town residential siting standards in town plans adopted by the county board require a greater distance.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.231(3) AT-35 (Agriculture Transition, 35 acres) Zoning District
132
Proposals for a replacement residence that would exceed the 100 foot limitation must be approved by the relevant town board and county zoning committee.
2. Residential accessory buildings, home occupations, foster care for less than 5 children community living arrangements for less than 9 people or incidental room rental associated with either:
a. an existing residence permitted under 1. above, or
b. a farm residence approved by conditional use permit.
3. Rental of existing or secondary residences located on a farm, but no longer utilized in the operation of the farm.
4. Agricultural entertainment activities or special events under 10 days per calendar year in the aggregate, including incidental preparation and sale of beverages and food.
5. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities occurring on no more than ten days in a calendar year.
6. The seasonal storage of recreational equipment and motor vehicles owned by private individuals other than those residing on the premises, such storage to be in accessory farm buildings existing as of January 1, 2010. The storage of a dealer’s inventory or the construction of any new buildings for storage is prohibited.
7. Sales of agricultural products produced on the farm.
(c) Large animal boarding.
(d) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(e) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use.
(f) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
The following uses require a Conditional Use Permit in this district:
(a) Agricultural Accessory Uses: In addition to other requirements of this ordinance, the following uses must meet the definition of an agricultural accessory use under s. 10.004(12).
1. Agricultural entertainment activities or special events occurring 10 days or more per calendar year, in aggregate.
2. Airports, landing strips or heliports for private aircraft owned by the owner or operator of a farm.
3. Attached accessory dwelling units associated with a farm residence.
4. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities, occurring on more than ten days in a calendar year.
5. Farm Residence, subject to s. 10.103(11).
6. Limited Farm Business, subject to s. 10.103(13).
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.231(4) AT-35 (Agriculture Transition, 35 acres) Zoning District
133
7. Sale of agricultural and dairy products not produced on the premises and incidental sale of non-alcoholic beverages and snacks.
8. Secondary farm residence, subject to s. 10.103(11).
(b) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
(c) Non-metallic mineral extraction operations that comply with s. 91.46(6), Wis. Stats., s. 10.103(15) and Chapter 74.
(d) Asphalt plants or ready-mix concrete plants, that comply with s. 91.46(5), Wis. Stats., for production of material to be used in construction or maintenance of public roads, to be limited in time to project duration.
(e) Electric generating facilities, provided 100% of the production output of the facility is derived from renewable energy resources.
Lot size requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the AT-35 zoning district must be at least thirty-five (35) acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Maximum lot size. None.
(c) Minimum lot width. None.
Setbacks.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yards. Any permitted structures must be set back from side property lines as follows:
1. Principal residential buildings must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line and a total of at least 25 feet from both side lot lines.
2. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
a. 100 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts
b. 50 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c. At least 10 feet from any other side lot line.
d. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line.
(c) Rear yard. Any permitted structures must be set back from rear property lines as follows:
1. Principal residential buildings must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks or porches attached to a principal residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
e. 50 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential, Rural Residential or Hamlet zoning districts, or
f. 10 feet from any other rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any rear lot line.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.231(6) AT-35 (Agriculture Transition, 35 acres) Zoning District
134
Building height.
(a) Residential buildings.
1. Principal residential buildings shall not exceed a height of two and a half stories or 35 feet.
2. Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
(b) Agricultural buildings. There is no limitation on height for agricultural buildings.
Lot coverage.
There is no limitation on lot coverage in the AT-35 district.
Other restrictions on buildings.
(a) Principal buildings. Except for secondary farm residences authorized by conditional use permit, no more than one principal building is permitted per lot.
(b) Accessory buildings.
1. There is no limitation on the number of accessory buildings in the AT-35 district.
2. Accessory buildings may be constructed on property without a principal residence only if it is clearly related to a legitimate agricultural or agricultural accessory use.
3. Sanitary fixtures are permitted in agricultural accessory buildings, however accessory buildings may not be used as living space.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.232(1) AT-B (Agriculture Transition – Business) Zoning District
135
10.232. AT-B (Agriculture Transition – Business) Zoning District
Purpose.
The AT-B Agriculture Transition - Business District is designed to:
(a) Accommodate, for an unspecified period of time, agricultural, agriculture accessory and agriculture-related uses in areas ultimately planned for nonfarm urban or rural development. The district applies to such existing or proposed uses on properties located outside of mapped agricultural preservation areas as shown in the Dane County Farmland Preservation Plan.
(b) Provide for a wide range of agriculture, agricultural accessory and agriculture-related uses, at various scales with the minimum lot area necessary to accommodate the use. The AT-B district accommodates uses which are commercial or industrial in nature; are associated with agricultural production; require a rural location due to extensive land area needs or proximity of agricultural resources; and do not require urban services.
(c) In appearance and operation permitted uses in the AT-B district are often indistinguishable from a farm.
(d) Conditional uses are more clearly commercial or industrial in nature, and may involve facilities or processes that require a remote location distant from incompatible uses, proximity to agricultural products or suppliers and/or access to utility services or major transportation infrastructure.
(e) Examples of activities in the AT-B district may include, but are not limited to, agricultural support services, value-added, or related businesses such as implement dealers; veterinary clinics; farm machinery repair shops; agricultural supply sales, marketing, storage, and distribution centers; plant and tree nurseries; and facilities for the processing of natural agricultural products or by-products, including fruits, vegetables, silage, or animal proteins. Such activities are characterized by:
1. Wholesale or retail sales, and outdoor storage/display of agriculture-related equipment, inputs, and products;
2. Parking areas, outdoor lighting, and signage appropriate to the scale of use;
3. Small, medium, or large utilitarian structures/facilities/workshops, appropriate to the scale of use;
4. Low to moderate traffic volumes;
5. Noises, odors, dust, or other potential nuisances associated with agriculture-related production or processing.
Permitted uses.
(a) Agricultural uses.
(b) Agricultural Accessory Uses, except those uses listed as conditional uses and subject to the limitations and standards below.
1. Any residence lawfully existing as of February 20,2010, provided all of the following criteria are met:
a. the use remains residential,
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.232(3) AT-B (Agriculture Transition – Business) Zoning District
136
b. the structure complies with all building height, setback, side yard and rear yard standards of this ordinance; and
c. for replacement residences, the structure must be located within 100 feet of the original residence, unless site-specific limitations or town residential siting standards in town plans adopted by the county board require a greater distance. Proposals for a replacement residence that would exceed the 100 foot limitation must be approved by the relevant town board and county zoning committee.
2. Agricultural entertainment activities or special events under 10 days per calendar year in the aggregate, including incidental preparation and sale of beverages and food.
3. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities occurring on no more than ten days in a calendar year.
4. The seasonal storage of recreational equipment and motor vehicles owned by private individuals other than those residing on the premises, such storage to be in accessory farm buildings existing as of January 1, 2010. The storage of a dealer’s inventory or the construction of any new buildings for storage is prohibited
5. Residential accessory buildings, home occupations, foster care for less than 5 children community living arrangements for less than 9 people or incidental room rental associated with a farm residence approved by conditional use permit.
6. Sales of agricultural products produced on the farm.
7. Large animal boarding.
(c) Agriculture-related uses, except uses listed as conditional uses below, consistent with the purpose statement for the FP-B district.
(d) Undeveloped natural resources and open space areas
(e) Utility services associated with a farm or a permitted agricultural accessory use.
(f) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Agricultural Accessory Uses: In addition to other requirements of this ordinance, the following uses must meet the definition of an agricultural accessory use under s. 10.004(12) .
1. Agricultural entertainment activities or special events occurring 10 days or more per calendar year, in aggregate.
2. Airports, landing strips or heliports for private aircraft owned by the owner or operator of the farm or agriculture-related use on the premises.
3. Attached accessory dwelling units associated with a farm residence.
4. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities, occurring on more than ten days in a calendar year.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.232(4) AT-B (Agriculture Transition – Business) Zoning District
137
5. Farm residence, subject to s. 10.103(11).
6. Limited farm business, subject to s. 10.103(13).
7. Sale of agricultural and dairy products not produced on the premises and incidental sale of non-alcoholic beverages and snacks.
8. Secondary farm residence, subject to s. 10.103(11).
(b) Agriculture-related uses: In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, the following uses must meet the definition of an agriculture-related use under s. 10.004(14).
1. Bio-diesel and ethanol manufacturing;
2. Biopower facilities for distribution, retail, or wholesale sales.
3. Colony house.
4. Commercial animal boarding for farm animals, and not including boarding for domestic pets.
5. Composting facility.
6. Dead stock hauling services;
7. Manure processing facilities;
8. Stock yards, livestock auction facilities;
(c) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
(d) Non-metallic mineral extraction operations that comply with s. 91.46(6), Wis. Stats., s. 10.103(15) and Chapter 74. The application shall conform to the requirements of s. 10.103(15).
(e) Asphalt plants or ready-mix concrete plants, that comply with s. 91.46(5), Wis. Stats., for production of material to be used in construction or maintenance of public roads, to be limited in time to project duration.
(f) Electric generating facilities, provided 100% of the production output of the facility is derived from renewable energy resources.
Lot size requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the AT-B zoning district must be at least 20,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Maximum lot size. None.
(c) Minimum lot width. All lots created in the AT-B zoning district must have a minimum lot width of 100 feet.
Setbacks.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yards. Any permitted structures must be set back from side property lines as follows:
1. Principal residential buildings must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line and a total of at least 25 feet from both side lot lines.
2. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.232(6) AT-B (Agriculture Transition – Business) Zoning District
138
a. 100 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts,
b. 50 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c. At least 10 feet from any other side lot line.
3. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line.
(c) Rear yard. Any permitted structures must be set back from rear property lines as follows:
1. Principal residential buildings must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks or porches attached to a principal residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
a. 100 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts,
b. 50 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c. 10 feet from any other rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any rear lot line.
Building height.
(a) Residential buildings.
1. Principal residential buildings shall not exceed a height of two and a half stories or 35 feet.
2. Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
(b) Agricultural buildings. There is no limitation on height for agricultural buildings.
Lot coverage.
There is no limitation on lot coverage in the AT-B district.
Other restrictions on buildings.
(a) Accessory buildings.
1. There is no limitation on the number of accessory buildings in the AT-B district.
2. Accessory buildings may be constructed on property without a principal residence only if it is clearly related to a legitimate agricultural or agricultural accessory use.
3. Sanitary fixtures are permitted in agricultural accessory buildings, however accessory buildings may not be used as living space.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.233(1) RM-8 (Rural Mixed-Use, 8-16 acres) Zoning District
139
10.233. RM-8 (Rural Mixed-Use, 8-16 acres) Zoning District
Purpose.
The Rural Mixed-Use 8-acre (RM-8) district is designed to:
(a) Provide for a mix of agriculture, residential, utility, limited business and accessory uses consistent with and appropriate to a rural setting, on moderately sized parcels. The RM-8 district accommodates uses which are compatible with onsite and neighboring production agriculture, are typically found in a rural location and do not require urban services.
(b) Such uses typically generate traffic, noise or other impacts similar to those produced by either a farm operation or a single-family residence.
Permitted uses.
(a) Agricultural uses. Livestock use must comply with Chapter NR 151, Subchapter II, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(b) Agricultural Accessory Uses, except those uses listed as conditional uses in subd. (3) below, and subject to the following limitations and standards.
1. Agricultural entertainment activities or special events under 10 days per calendar year in the aggregate, including incidental preparation and sale of beverages and food.
2. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities occurring on no more than five days in a calendar year.
3. The seasonal storage of recreational equipment and motor vehicles owned by private individuals other than those residing on the premises, such storage to be in accessory farm buildings existing as of January 1, 2010. The storage of a dealer’s inventory or the construction of any new buildings for storage is prohibited.
(c) Undeveloped natural resources and open space areas
(d) Single family residential
(e) Residential accessory buildings
(f) Incidental room rental
(g) Foster homes for less than five children
(h) Community living arrangements for fewer than 9 persons.
(i) Home occupations
(j) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(k) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Agricultural entertainment activities or special events occurring 10 days or more per calendar year, in aggregate.
(b) Attached accessory dwelling units
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.233(4) RM-8 (Rural Mixed-Use, 8-16 acres) Zoning District
140
(c) Cemeteries
(d) Community living arrangements for 9 or more persons.
(e) Domestic pet animal boarding.
(f) Electric generating facilities, provided 100% of the production output of the facility is derived from renewable energy resources.
(g) Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities, occurring on more than five days in a calendar year.
(h) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(i) Large animal boarding
(j) Limited family business
(k) Limited farm business
(l) Migrant farm labor camps certified under s. 103.92, Wis. Stats.
(m)Recreational racetracks.
(n) Sanitary facilities in agricultural accessory buildings.
(o) Tourist or transient lodging
(p) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
(q) Veterinary clinics.
Lot size requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the RM-8 zoning district must be at least 8 acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Maximum lot size. All lots created in the RM-8 zoning district must be smaller than 16 acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(c) Minimum lot width. All lots created in the RM-8 zoning district must have a minimum lot width of 100 feet.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yards. Any permitted structures must be set back from side property lines as follows:
1. Principal residential buildings must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line and a total of at least 25 feet from both side lot lines.
2. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
a. 100 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts,
b. 50 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in the any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c. 10 feet from any other side lot line.
3. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line.
(c) Rear yard. Any permitted structures must be set back from rear property lines as follows:
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.233(6) RM-8 (Rural Mixed-Use, 8-16 acres) Zoning District
141
1. Principal residential buildings must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks or porches attached to a principal residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
a. 100 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts,
b. 50 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c. 10 feet from any other rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any rear lot line.
Building height.
(a) Residential buildings.
1. Principal residential buildings shall not exceed a height of two and a half stories or 35 feet.
2. Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
(b) Agricultural buildings. There is no limitation on height for agricultural buildings.
Lot coverage.
The total area of all buildings and structures must not exceed 10% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
Other restrictions on buildings.
(a) Principal buildings. No more than one principal building is permitted per lot.
(b) Accessory buildings.
1. There is no limitation on the number of accessory buildings in the RM-8 district.
2. Except for agricultural accessory buildings or for property maintenance sheds specifically approved by conditional use permit , accessory buildings may not be constructed on a property without a principal residence.
3. Sanitary fixtures are not permitted in agricultural accessory buildings, unless specifically authorized by an approved conditional use permit. Accessory buildings may not be used as living space.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.234(1) RM-16 (Rural Mixed-Use, 16-35 acres) Zoning District
142
10.234. RM-16 (Rural Mixed-Use, 16-35 acres) Zoning District
Purpose.
The Rural Mixed-Use 16-acre (RM-16) district is designed to:
(a) Provide for a mix of agriculture, residential, utility, extractive, limited business and accessory uses consistent with and appropriate to a rural setting, on medium-to-large parcels.
(b) The RM-16 district accommodates uses which may require larger setbacks, buffers, berms or other siting standards to minimize conflicts with neighboring production agriculture or residential use, are typically found in a rural location and do not require urban services.
(c) Such uses may generate moderate truck traffic, noise, dust or odors.
Permitted uses
(a) Agricultural uses. Livestock use must comply with Chapter NR 151, Subchapter II, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(b) Agricultural Accessory Uses, except those uses listed as conditional uses in subd. (3) below, and subject to the following limitations and standards.
1. Agricultural entertainment activities or special events under 10 days per calendar year in the aggregate, including incidental preparation and sale of beverages and food.
2. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities occurring on no more than five days in a calendar year.
3. The seasonal storage of recreational equipment and motor vehicles owned by private individuals other than those residing on the premises, such storage to be in accessory farm buildings existing as of January 1, 2010. The storage of a dealer’s inventory or the construction of any new buildings for storage is prohibited.
(c) Undeveloped natural resources and open space areas
(d) Single family residential
(e) Residential accessory buildings
(f) Incidental room rental
(g) Foster homes for less than five children
(h) Community living arrangements for fewer than 9 persons.
(i) Home occupations
(j) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(k) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.234(3) RM-16 (Rural Mixed-Use, 16-35 acres) Zoning District
143
Conditional uses
(a) Agricultural entertainment activities or special events exceeding 10 days per calendar year, in aggregate.
(b) Airports, landing strips or heliports for private aircraft owned by the landowner.
(c) Attached accessory dwelling units
(d) Cemeteries
(e) Community living arrangements for 9 or more persons
(f) Domestic pet animal boarding
(g) Electric generating facilities, provided 100% of the production output of the facility is derived from renewable energy resources.
(h) Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities, occurring on more than five days in a calendar year.
(i) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(j) Large animal boarding
(k) Limited family business
(l) Limited farm business
(m)Migrant farm labor camps certified under s. 103.92, Wis. Stats.
(n) Mineral extraction.
(o) Recreational racetracks.
(p) Sanitary facilities in agricultural accessory buildings
(q) Temporary asphalt or concrete production.
(r) Tourist and transient lodging
(s) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
(t) Veterinary clinics.
Lot size requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the RM-16 zoning district must be at least 16 acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Minimum lot width. All lots created in the RM-16 zoning district must have a minimum lot width of 100 feet.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yards. Any permitted structures must be set back from side property lines as follows:
1. Principal residential buildings must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line and a total of at least 25 feet from both side lot lines.
2. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
a. 100 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential zoning or Hamlet zoning districts,
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.234(6) RM-16 (Rural Mixed-Use, 16-35 acres) Zoning District
144
b. 50 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c. At least 10 feet from any other side lot line.
3. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line.
(c) Rear yard. Any permitted structures must be set back from rear property lines as follows:
1. Principal residential buildings must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks or porches attached to a principal residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
a. 100 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts,
b. 50 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c. 10 feet from any other rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any rear lot line.
Building height.
(a) Residential buildings.
1. Principal residential buildings shall not exceed a height of two and a half stories or 35 feet.
2. Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
(b) Agricultural buildings. There is no limitation on height for agricultural buildings.
Lot coverage.
The total area of all buildings and structures must not exceed 10% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
Other restrictions on buildings.
(a) Principal buildings. No more than one principal building is permitted per lot.
(b) Accessory buildings.
1. There is no limitation on the number of accessory buildings in the RM-16 district.
2. Except for agricultural accessory buildings, accessory buildings may not be constructed on property without a principal residence.
3. Sanitary fixtures are not permitted in agricultural accessory buildings, unless specifically authorized by an approved conditional use permit. Accessory buildings may not be used as living space.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.235(1) AT-5 (Agriculture Transition – 5 Acres) Zoning District
145
10.235. AT-5 (Agriculture Transition – 5 Acres) Zoning District
Applicability
The AT-5 (Agriculture Transition – 5 Acres) Zoning District shall apply and be limited only to lands previously zoned in the A-1 Agriculture District (s.10.12) under the previous Dane County Zoning Ordinance.
Purpose.
(a) The purpose of the AT-5 (Agriculture Transition – 5 Acres) district is to accommodate a mix of agricultural, open space, and residential uses in areas planned for future development, areas currently in agricultural or open space uses, or areas appropriate for long term preservation due to the presence of sensitive or unique environmental features.
(b) This district applies only to lands in towns that historically did not adopt the county’s farmland preservation zoning districts. These areas have a unique land use history and pattern of development over time, traditional reliance on intergovernmental planning agreements, and continuing growth pressures.
(c) This district serves as a transitional zoning designation to accommodate the platting and development of lands as they convert from agriculture and open space uses to residential uses.
(d) Town boards with AT-5 zoning and Dane County will periodically review the status of lands that have been platted and developed to consider other appropriate zoning classifications based on the resulting land use and size of the property.
Permitted uses
(a) Single family residential on lots of at least 25,000 square feet.
(b) Residential accessory buildings.
(c) Home occupations.
(d) Foster care for less than 5 children.
(e) Community living arrangements for less than 9 people.
(f) Incidental room rental.
(g) Agricultural uses on parcels of at least 5 acres in area. Livestock use must comply with Chapter NR 151, Subchapter II, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(h) Agricultural Accessory Uses, except those uses listed as conditional uses in subd. (4) below, and subject to the following limitations and standards. The minimum lot size shall be 5 acres.
1. Agricultural accessory buildings. One agricultural accessory building may be constructed on a property without a principal residence.
2. Agricultural entertainment activities or special events under 10 days per calendar year in the aggregate, including incidental preparation and sale of beverages and food.
3. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities under 10 days per calendar year in the aggregate.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.235(4) AT-5 (Agriculture Transition – 5 Acres) Zoning District
146
4. The seasonal storage of recreational equipment and motor vehicles owned by private individuals other than those residing on the premises, such storage to be in accessory farm buildings existing as of January 1, 2010. The storage of a dealer’s inventory or the construction of any new buildings for storage is prohibited.
5. Sales of agricultural products produced on the premises.
(i) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(j) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use.
(k) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Attached accessory dwelling units.
(b) Cemeteries.
(c) Day care centers.
(d) Domestic pet animal boarding. A minimum lot size of 5 acres is required for this conditional use.
(e) Limited Family Business. A minimum lot size of 1 acre is required for this conditional use.
(f) Transient or tourist lodging.
(g) Agricultural Accessory Uses. In addition to other requirements of this ordinance, the following uses must meet the definition of an agricultural accessory use under s. 10.004(12), and must be on parcels of at least 5 acres in area.
1. Agricultural entertainment activities or special events occurring 10 days or more per calendar year, in aggregate.
2. Airports, landing strips or heliports for private aircraft owned by the owner or operator of a farm.
3. Farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities, occurring 10 days or more per calendar year, in aggregate.
4. Limited farm business.
5. Large animal boarding.
6. Sale of agricultural and dairy products not produced on the premises and incidental sale of non-alcoholic beverages and snacks.
7. Sanitary facilities in agricultural accessory buildings.
(h) Communication towers.
(i) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses.
(j) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
(k) Non-metallic mineral extraction operations that comply with s. 91.46(6), Wis. Stats., s. 10.103(15) and Chapter 74. A minimum lot size of 16 acres is required for this conditional use.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.235(5) AT-5 (Agriculture Transition – 5 Acres) Zoning District
147
(l) Asphalt plants or ready-mix concrete plants, that comply with s. 91.46(5), Wis. Stats., for production of material to be used in construction or maintenance of public roads, to be limited in time to project duration. A minimum lot size of 16 acres is required for this conditional use.
(m)Electric generating facilities, provided 100% of the production output of the facility is derived from renewable energy resources. A minimum lot size of 1 acre is required for this conditional use.
(n) Native wildlife rehabilitation facilities.
Lot size requirements.
Minimum lot size requirements differ based on the land use as specified below and elsewhere in this section. Note: the maximum density of development is controlled by county and local town ordinances. The maximum density of development shall not exceed the more restrictive ordinance.
(a) Minimum lot size – residential or open space uses. The minimum lot size shall be at least 25,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Minimum lot size – renewable energy electric generating facilities, limited family businesses. The minimum lot size shall be at least 1 acre, excluding public rights-of-way.
(c) Minimum lot size – agricultural and agricultural accessory uses, seasonal storage of recreational equipment, domestic pet animal boarding, and sanitary facilities in agricultural accessory buildings. The minimum lot size shall be at least 5 acres, excluding public rights-of-way.
(d) Minimum lot size – Non-metallic mineral extraction operations, asphalt plants or ready-mix concrete plants, and large animal boarding. The minimum lot size shall be at least 16 acres, excluding public rights-of-way.
(e) Maximum lot size. None.
(f) Minimum lot width – Agricultural uses: 250 feet width at location of agricultural accessory building.
(g) Minimum lot width – Residential uses: 90 feet at building setback line.
Setbacks.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yards.
1. Except as exempted in 2 below, all principal and accessory buildings must be at least 10 feet from any one side lot line with a total of at least 25 feet from both side lot lines.
2. Accessory buildings in the rear yard that are at least 10 feet from the principal residence must be at least:
a. 4 feet from any side lot line on lots 90 feet or more in width, or
b. 2.5 feet from any side lot line on lots less than 90 feet in width
3. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.235(7) AT-5 (Agriculture Transition – 5 Acres) Zoning District
148
a. 100 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts
b. 50 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning districts, or
c. At least 10 feet from any other side lot line.
(c) Rear yard. Any permitted structures must be set back from rear property lines as follows:
1. Principal residential buildings must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks or porches attached to a principal residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Except as detailed in 4 and 5 below, accessory buildings must be at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings in the rear yard that are at least 10 feet from the principal residence must be at least:
a. 4 feet from any rear lot line on lots 90 feet or more in width, or
b. 2.5 feet from any rear lot line on lots less than 90 feet in width.
5. Structures housing livestock must be at least:
a. 100 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential or Hamlet zoning districts
b. 50 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Rural Residential zoning district, or
c. 10 feet from any other rear lot line.
Building height.
(a) Residential buildings.
1. Principal residential buildings shall not exceed a height of two and a half stories or 35 feet.
2. Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 16 feet.
(b) Agricultural buildings. There is no limitation on height for agricultural buildings.
Lot coverage.
(a) On parcels less than 2 acres in size, no building together with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of thirty percent (30%) of the area of an interior lot or thirty-five percent (35%) of the area of a corner lot.
(b) On parcels over 2 acres in size, no building together with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of ten percent (10%) of the area of a lot.
Other restrictions on buildings.
(a) Principal buildings. There shall be no more than one principal building permitted per lot.
(b) Accessory buildings.
1. There is no limitation on the number of agricultural accessory buildings in the AT-5 district.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.235(9) AT-5 (Agriculture Transition – 5 Acres) Zoning District
149
2. One agricultural accessory building may be constructed on property without a principal residence only if it is clearly related to a legitimate agricultural or agricultural accessory use.
3. Except as specifically approved by conditional use permit, accessory buildings cannot have sanitary facilities. Accessory buildings cannot be used for human habitation.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.240(1) Rural Residential Zoning Districts
150
10.240. Rural Residential Zoning Districts
10.241. RR-1 (Rural Residential, 1 to 2 acres) Zoning District
Purpose.
The Rural Residential 1 district is designed to:
(a) Provide for single-family residential principal uses and a variety of accessory or ancillary uses, including small-scale farming, appropriate to a rural setting, on relatively small parcels. The RR-1 district accommodates uses which are compatible with both residential and farming practices, are typically found in a rural location and do not require urban services.
(b) Such uses typically generate traffic, noise or other impacts similar to those produced by a single-family residence.
Permitted uses
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(b) Small-scale farming.
(c) Single family residential
(d) Residential accessory buildings
(e) Home occupations
(f) Incidental room rental
(g) Foster homes for less than five children
(h) Community living arrangements for fewer than 9 persons.
(i) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(j) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Attached accessory dwelling units
(b) Cemeteries
(c) Limited family business
(d) Day care centers
(e) Community living arrangements for nine (9) or more persons.
(f) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(g) Transient or Tourist Lodging
(h) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Lot size requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the RR-1 zoning district must be at least 1 acre in area,
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.241(5) RR-1 (Rural Residential, 1 to 2 acres) Zoning District
151
excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Maximum lot size. All lots created in the RR-1 zoning district must be smaller than 2 acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(c) Minimum lot width. All lots created in the RR-1 zoning district must have a minimum lot width of 100 feet.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least a total of 25 feet from both side lot lines, and not less than 10 feet from any one side lot line.
2. Accessory buildings housing livestock must be at least:
a. 50 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential, Rural Residential or Hamlet zoning districts, or
b. 10 feet from any other side lot line.
3. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line.
(c) Rear yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks and porches attached to a permitted residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Accessory buildings housing livestock, must be at least:
a. 50 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential, Rural Residential or Hamlet zoning districts, or
b. 10 feet from any other rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.
Building height.
(a) Residential buildings.
1. Principal residential buildings shall not exceed a height of two and a half stories or 35 feet.
2. Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 16 feet.
(b) Agricultural buildings. There is no limitation on height for agricultural buildings.
Lot coverage.
No building together with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of 30 percent (30%) of the area of an interior lot or 35 percent (35%) of the area of a corner lot, excluding public right-of-way. ."
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.242(1) RR-2 (Rural Residential, 2 to 4 acres) Zoning District
152
10.242. RR-2 (Rural Residential, 2 to 4 acres) Zoning District
Purpose.
The Rural Residential 2 district is designed to:
(a) Provide for single-family residential principal uses and a variety of accessory or ancillary uses, including small-scale farming, appropriate to a rural setting, on compact parcels. The RR-2 district accommodates uses which are compatible with both residential and farming practices, are typically found in a rural location and do not require urban services.
(b) Such uses typically generate traffic, noise or other impacts similar to those produced by a single-family residence.
Permitted uses
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(b) Small-scale farming.
(c) Single family residential
(d) Residential accessory buildings
(e) Home occupations
(f) Foster homes for less than five children.
(g) Community living arrangements for fewer than 9 persons.
(h) Incidental room rental
(i) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(j) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Attached accessory dwelling units
(b) Animal use exceeding one animal unit per acre
(c) Cemeteries
(d) Limited family business
(e) Day Care Centers
(f) Community living arrangements for nine (9) or more persons.
(g) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(h) Transient or Tourist Lodging
(i) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Lot size requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the RR-2 zoning district must be at least 2 acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Maximum lot size. All lots created in the RR-2 zoning district must be smaller than 4 acres
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.242(5) RR-2 (Rural Residential, 2 to 4 acres) Zoning District
153
in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(c) Minimum lot width. All lots created in the RR-2 zoning district must have a minimum lot width of 100 feet.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least a total of 25 feet from both side lot lines, and not less than 10 feet from any one side lot line.
2. Accessory buildings housing livestock must be at least:
a. 50 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential, Rural Residential or Hamlet zoning districts, or
b. 10 feet from any other side lot line.
3. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line.
(c) Rear yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks and porches attached to a permitted residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Accessory buildings housing livestock, must be at least:
a. 50 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential, Rural Residential or Hamlet zoning districts, or
b. 10 feet from any other rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.
Building height.
(a) Residential buildings.
1. Principal residential buildings shall not exceed a height of two and a half stories or 35 feet.
2. Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
(b) Agricultural buildings. There is no limitation on height for agricultural buildings.
Lot coverage.
The total area of all buildings and structures must not exceed 10% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.243(1) RR-4 (Rural Residential, 4 to 8 acres) Zoning District
154
10.243. RR-4 (Rural Residential, 4 to 8 acres) Zoning District
Purpose.
The Rural Residential 4 district is designed to:
(a) Provide for single-family residential principal uses and a variety of accessory or ancillary uses, including small-scale farming, appropriate to a rural setting, on moderately-sized parcels. The RR-4 district accommodates uses which are compatible with both residential and farming practices, are typically found in a rural location and do not require urban services.
(b) Such uses typically generate traffic, noise or other impacts similar to those produced by a single-family residence.
Permitted uses
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(b) Small-scale farming.
(c) Single family residential
(d) Residential accessory buildings
(e) Home occupations
(f) Foster homes for less than five children
(g) Community living arrangements for fewer than 9 persons.
(h) Incidental room rental
(i) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(j) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Attached accessory dwelling units
(b) Animal use exceeding one animal unit per acre
(c) Limited family business
(d) Day Care Centers
(e) Cemeteries
(f) Community living arrangements for nine (9) or more persons.
(g) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(h) Transient or Tourist Lodging
(i) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Lot size requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the RR-4 zoning district must be at least 4 acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.243(5) RR-4 (Rural Residential, 4 to 8 acres) Zoning District
155
(b) Maximum lot size. All lots created in the RR-4 zoning district must be smaller than 8 acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(c) Minimum lot width. All lots created in the RR-4 zoning district must have a minimum lot width of 100 feet.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least a total of 25 feet from both side lot lines, and not less than 10 feet from any one side lot line.
2. Accessory buildings housing livestock must be at least:
a. 50 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential, Rural Residential or Hamlet zoning districts, or
b. 10 feet from any other side lot line.
3. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line.
(c) Rear yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks and porches attached to a permitted residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Accessory buildings housing livestock, must be at least:
a. 50 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential, Rural Residential or Hamlet zoning districts, or
b. 10 feet from any other rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.
Building height.
(a) Residential buildings.
1. Principal residential buildings shall not exceed a height of two and a half stories or 35 feet.
2. Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
(b) Agricultural buildings. There is no limitation on height for agricultural buildings.
Lot coverage.
The total area of all buildings and structures must not exceed 10% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.244(1) RR-8 (Rural Residential, 8 to 16 acres) Zoning District
156
10.244. RR-8 (Rural Residential, 8 to 16 acres) Zoning District
Purpose.
The Rural Residential 8 district is designed to:
(a) Provide for single-family residential principal uses and a variety of accessory or ancillary uses, including small-scale farming, appropriate to a rural setting, on relatively large residential parcels. The RR-8 district accommodates uses which are compatible with both residential and farming practices, are typically found in a rural location and do not require urban services.
(b) Such uses typically generate traffic, noise or other impacts similar to those produced by a single-family residence.
Permitted uses
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(b) Small-scale farming.
(c) Single family residential
(d) Residential accessory buildings
(e) Home occupations
(f) Foster homes for less than five children
(g) Community living arrangements for fewer than 9 persons.
(h) Incidental room rental
(i) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(j) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Attached accessory dwelling units
(b) Animal use exceeding one animal unit per acre
(c) Limited family business
(d) Day Care Centers
(e) Cemeteries
(f) Community living arrangements for nine (9) or more persons.
(g) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(h) Property maintenance sheds.
(i) Transient or Tourist Lodging
(j) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Lot size requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the RR-8 zoning district must be at least 8 acres in
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.244(5) RR-8 (Rural Residential, 8 to 16 acres) Zoning District
157
area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Maximum lot size. All lots created in the RR-8 zoning district must be smaller than 16 acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(c) Minimum lot width. All lots created in the RR-8 zoning district must have a minimum lot width of 100 feet.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least a total of 25 feet from both side lot lines, and not less than 10 feet from any one side lot line.
2. Accessory buildings housing livestock must be at least:
a. 50 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential, Rural Residential or Hamlet zoning districts, or
b. 10 feet from any other side lot line.
3. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line.
(c) Rear yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks and porches attached to a permitted residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Accessory buildings housing livestock, must be at least:
a. 50 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential, Rural Residential or Hamlet zoning districts, or
b. 10 feet from any other rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.
Building height.
(a) Residential buildings.
1. Principal residential buildings shall not exceed a height of two and a half stories or 35 feet.
2. Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
(b) Agricultural buildings. There is no limitation on height for agricultural buildings.
Lot coverage.
The total area of all buildings and structures must not exceed 10% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.245(1) RR-16 (Rural Residential, 16 to 35 acres) Zoning District
158
10.245. RR-16 (Rural Residential, 16 to 35 acres) Zoning District
Purpose.
The Rural Residential 16 district is designed to:
(a) Provide for single-family residential principal uses and a variety of accessory or ancillary uses, including small-scale farming, appropriate to a rural setting, on relatively large residential parcels. The RR-16 district accommodates uses which are compatible with both residential and farming practices, are typically found in a rural location and do not require urban services.
(b) Such uses typically generate traffic, noise or other impacts similar to those produced by a single-family residence.
Permitted uses
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(b) Small-scale farming.
(c) Single family residential
(d) Residential accessory buildings
(e) Home occupations
(f) Foster homes for less than five children
(g) Community living arrangements for fewer than 9 persons.
(h) Incidental room rental
(i) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(j) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Attached accessory dwelling units
(b) Animal use exceeding one animal unit per acre
(c) Limited family business
(d) Day Care Centers
(e) Cemeteries
(f) Community living arrangements for nine (9) or more persons.
(g) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(h) Property maintenance sheds.
(i) Transient or Tourist Lodging
(j) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Lot size requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the RR-16 zoning district must be at least 16 acres in
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.245(5) RR-16 (Rural Residential, 16 to 35 acres) Zoning District
159
area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Maximum lot size. All lots created in the RR-16 zoning district must be smaller than 35 acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(c) Minimum lot width. All lots created in the RR-8 zoning district must have a minimum lot width of 100 feet.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least a total of 25 feet from both side lot lines, and not less than 10 feet from any one side lot line.
2. Accessory buildings housing livestock must be at least:
a. 50 feet from the side lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential, Rural Residential or Hamlet zoning districts, or
b. 10 feet from any other side lot line.
3. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line.
(c) Rear yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks and porches attached to a permitted residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Accessory buildings housing livestock, must be at least:
a. 50 feet from the rear lot line of any parcel in any of the Residential, Rural Residential or Hamlet zoning districts, or
b. 10 feet from any other rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings not housing livestock must be at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.
Building height.
(a) Residential buildings.
1. Principal residential buildings shall not exceed a height of two and a half stories or 35 feet.
2. Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
(b) Agricultural buildings. There is no limitation on height for agricultural buildings.
Lot coverage.
The total area of all buildings and structures must not exceed 10% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.250(1) Residential Zoning Districts
160
10.250. Residential Zoning Districts
10.251. SFR-08 (Single-Family Residential, small lots) Zoning District
Purpose.
The Single Family Residential 08 district is designed to:
(a) Provide for single-family residential principal uses, compatible home occupations, and residential accessory buildings, appropriate to a compact neighborhood setting, on relatively small parcels. The SFR-08 district accommodates uses which are compatible with residential uses, are typically found in a suburban or residential neighborhood and may or may not be on public sewer.
(b) Such uses typically generate traffic, noise or other impacts similar to those produced by a single-family residence.
Permitted uses
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(b) Agricultural uses, except as listed below, lawfully existing as of December 31, 2015.
1. Exceptions. Livestock uses lawfully existing as of December 31, 2015, shall be considered a nonconforming use under s. 10.102(7)(b).
(c) Single family residential
(d) Residential accessory buildings up to 12 feet in height
(e) Domestic fowl and beekeeping
(f) Foster homes for less than five children
(g) Community living arrangements for fewer than 9 persons.
(h) Home occupations
(i) Incidental room rental
(j) Undeveloped natural resource and open space use.
(k) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(l) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Accessory buildings between 12 and 16 feet in height.
(b) Attached accessory dwelling units
(c) Community living arrangements for nine (9) or more persons.
(d) Day Care Centers
(e) Cemeteries
(f) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(g) Transient or tourist lodging
(h) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses,
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.251(4) SFR-08 (Single-Family Residential, small lots) Zoning District
161
not listed as a permitted use above.
Lot dimensions.
(a) Lots on public sewer.
1. Minimum lot size. All lots must be at least 8,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Minimum lot width. All lots must be at least 60 feet wide.
(b) Lots not on public sewer.
1. Minimum lot size. All lots must be at least 20,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Minimum lot width. All lots must be at least 100 feet wide.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yard.
1. Except as exempted in 2 or 3 below, all principal and accessory buildings must be at least 10 feet from any one side lot line.
2. Accessory buildings in the rear yard that are at least 10 feet from the principal residence must be at least:
a. 4 feet from any side lot line on lots 60 feet or more in width, or
b. 2.5 feet from any side lot line on lots less than 60 feet in width
3. Lots of nonconforming width.
a. On lots 50 feet or more in width but less that 60 feet, the minimum aggregate side yards shall be 15 feet and no single side yard shall be less than five (5) feet.
b. On lots less than 50 feet in width the minimum side yard on each side shall be five (5) feet.
(c) Rear yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least 25 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks and porches attached to a permitted residence must be at least 13 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Except as exempted in 4 below, accessory buildings must be at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings in the rear yard that are at least 10 feet from the principal residence must be at least:.
a. 4 feet from any rear lot line on lots 60 feet or more in width, or
b. 2.5 feet from any rear lot line on lots less than 60 feet in width.
Building height.
(a) Principal buildings. Residential buildings shall not exceed two and a half stories or 35 feet in height.
(b) Accessory buildings. Unless under an approved conditional use permit under s.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.251(7) SFR-08 (Single-Family Residential, small lots) Zoning District
162
10.251(3)(a), residential accessory buildings shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
Lot coverage and building area.
(a) The total area of all buildings and structures must not exceed:
1. Interior lots: 35% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Corner lots: 40% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Accessory buildings cannot exceed 100% of the area of the footprint of the principal residence.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.252(1) SFR-1 (Single-Family Residential, 1 to 2 acres) Zoning District
163
10.252. SFR-1 (Single-Family Residential, 1 to 2 acres) Zoning District
Purpose.
The Single Family Residential 1 district is designed to:
(a) Provide for single-family residential principal uses, compatible home occupations, and residential accessory buildings, appropriate to a suburban or rural subdivision setting, on lot sizes of one to two acres. The SFR-1 district accommodates uses which are compatible with residential uses, are typically found in a suburban neighborhood.
(b) Such uses typically generate traffic, noise or other impacts similar to those produced by a single-family residence.
Permitted uses.
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(b) Agricultural uses, except as listed below, lawfully existing as of December 31, 2015
1. Exceptions. Livestock uses lawfully existing as of December 31, 2015, shall be considered a nonconforming use under s. 10.102(7)(b).
(c) Single family residential
(d) Residential accessory buildings
(e) Domestic fowl and beekeeping
(f) Home occupations
(g) Foster homes for less than five children
(h) Community living arrangements for fewer than 9 persons.
(i) Incidental room rental
(j) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(k) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Attached accessory dwelling units
(b) Day Care Centers
(c) Cemeteries
(d) Community living arrangements for nine (9) or more persons.
(e) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(f) Transient or Tourist Lodging
(g) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Lot dimensions.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots must be at least one acre in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Minimum lot width. All lots must be at least 100 feet wide.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.252(5) SFR-1 (Single-Family Residential, 1 to 2 acres) Zoning District
164
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yard.
1. Except as exempted in 2 below, all principal and accessory buildings must be at least 10 feet from any one side lot line.
2. Accessory buildings in the rear yard that are at least 10 feet from the principal residence must be at least:
a. 4 feet from any side lot line on lots 60 feet or more in width, or
b. 2.5 feet from any side lot line on lots less than 60 feet in width
(c) Rear yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks and porches attached to a permitted residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Except as exempted in 4 below, accessory buildings must be at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings in the rear yard that are at least 10 feet from the principal residence must be at least:.
a. 4 feet from any rear lot line on lots 60 feet or more in width, or
b. 2.5 feet from any rear lot line on lots less than 60 feet in width.
Building height.
(a) Principal buildings. Residential buildings shall not exceed two and a half stories or 35 feet in height.
(b) Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 16 feet in height.
Lot coverage and building area.
(a) The total area of all buildings and structures must not exceed:
1. Interior lots: 35% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Corner lots: 40% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Accessory buildings cannot exceed 100% of the area of the footprint of the principal building.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.253(1) SFR-2 (Single-Family Residential, 2 to 4 acres) Zoning District
165
10.253. SFR-2 (Single-Family Residential, 2 to 4 acres) Zoning District
Purpose.
The Single Family Residential 2 district is designed to:
(a) Provide for single-family residential principal uses, compatible home occupations, and residential accessory buildings, appropriate to a suburban or rural subdivision setting, on lot sizes of two to four acres. The SFR-2 district accommodates uses which are compatible with residential uses, are typically found in a suburban neighborhood.
(b) Such uses typically generate traffic, noise or other impacts similar to those produced by a single-family residence.
Permitted uses.
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(b) Agricultural uses, except as listed below, lawfully existing as of December 31, 2015.
1. Exceptions. Livestock uses lawfully existing as of December 31, 2015, shall be considered a nonconforming use under s. 10.102(7)(b).
(c) Single family residential
(d) Residential accessory buildings
(e) Domestic fowl and beekeeping
(f) Home occupations
(g) Foster homes for less than five children
(h) Community living arrangements for fewer than 9 persons.
(i) Incidental room rental
(j) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(k) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Attached accessory dwelling units
(b) Day Care Centers
(c) Cemeteries
(d) Community living arrangements for nine (9) or more persons.
(e) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(f) Transient or Tourist Lodging
(g) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Lot dimensions.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots must be at least two acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Minimum lot width. All lots must be at least 100 feet wide.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.253(5) SFR-2 (Single-Family Residential, 2 to 4 acres) Zoning District
166
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yard.
1. Except as exempted in 2 below, all principal and accessory buildings must be at least 10 feet from any one side lot line.
2. Accessory buildings in the rear yard that are at least 10 feet from the principal residence must be at least:
a. 4 feet from any side lot line on lots 60 feet or more in width, or
b. 2.5 feet from any side lot line on lots less than 60 feet in width
(c) Rear yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least 50 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks and porches attached to a permitted residence must be at least 38 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Except as exempted in 4 below, accessory buildings must be at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings in the rear yard that are at least 10 feet from the principal residence must be at least:.
a. 4 feet from any rear lot line on lots 60 feet or more in width, or
b. 2.5 feet from any rear lot line on lots less than 60 feet in width.
Building height.
(a) Principal buildings. Residential buildings shall not exceed two and a half stories or 35 feet in height.
(b) Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 16 feet in height.
Lot coverage and building area.
(a) The total area of all buildings and structures must not exceed:
1. Interior lots: 35% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Corner lots: 40% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Accessory buildings cannot exceed 100% of the area of the footprint of the principal building.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.254(1) TFR-08 (Two-Family Residential) Zoning District
167
10.254. TFR-08 (Two-Family Residential) Zoning District
Purpose.
The Two Family Residential 08 district is designed to:
(a) Provide for single-family or duplex residential principal uses, compatible home occupations, and residential accessory buildings, appropriate to a compact neighborhood setting, on relatively small parcels. The TFR-08 district accommodates uses which are compatible with residential uses, are typically found in a suburban or residential neighborhood and may or may not be on public sewer.
(b) Such uses typically generate traffic, noise or other impacts similar to those produced by a single-family residence.
Permitted uses.
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(b) Single family residential
(c) Duplexes
(d) Attached accessory dwelling units
(e) Residential accessory buildings
(f) Domestic fowl and beekeeping
(g) Home occupations
(h) Foster homes for less than five children
(i) Community living arrangements for fewer than 9 persons.
(j) Incidental room rental
(k) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(l) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Accessory buildings between 12 and 16 feet in height.
(b) Cemeteries
(c) Community living arrangements for nine (9) or more persons.
(d) Day Care Centers
(e) Detached accessory dwelling units
(f) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(g) Transient or Tourist Lodging
(h) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Lot dimensions.
(a) Lots on public sewer.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.254(5) TFR-08 (Two-Family Residential) Zoning District
168
1. Minimum lot size. All lots must be at least 8,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Minimum lot width. All lots must be at least 60 feet wide.
(a) Lots not on public sewer.
1. Minimum lot size. All lots must be at least 20,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Minimum lot width. All lots must be at least 100 feet wide.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
(b) Side yard.
1. Except as exempted in 2 below, all principal and accessory buildings must be at least 10 feet from any one side lot line.
2. Accessory buildings in the rear yard that are at least 10 feet from the principal residence must be at least:
a. 4 feet from any side lot line on lots 60 feet or more in width, or
b. 2.5 feet from any side lot line on lots less than 60 feet in width
(c) Rear yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least 25 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks and porches attached to a permitted residence must be at least 13 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Except as exempted in 4 below, accessory buildings must be at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings in the rear yard that are at least 10 feet from the principal residence must be at least:.
a. 4 feet from any rear lot line on lots 60 feet or more in width, or
b. 2.5 feet from any rear lot line on lots less than 60 feet in width.
Building height.
(a) Principal buildings. Residential buildings shall not exceed two and a half stories or 35 feet in height.
(b) Accessory buildings. Unless under an approved conditional use permit under s. 10.254(3)(a), accessory buildings shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
Lot coverage and building area.
(a) The total area of all buildings and structures must not exceed:
1. Interior lots: 35% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Corner lots: 40% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Accessory buildings cannot exceed 100% of the area of the footprint of the principal building.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.254(7) TFR-08 (Two-Family Residential) Zoning District
169
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.255(1) MFR-08 (Multi-Family Residential) Zoning District
170
10.255. MFR-08 (Multi-Family Residential) Zoning District
Purpose.
The Multi-Family Residential 08 district is designed to:
(a) Provide for single-family, duplex or multifamily residential principal uses, compatible home occupations, and residential accessory buildings, appropriate to a compact neighborhood setting, on relatively small parcels. The MFR-08 district accommodates uses which are compatible with residential uses, are typically found in a relatively dense neighborhood and may or may not be on public sewer.
(b) Such uses typically generate traffic, noise or other impacts similar to those produced by a multi-family residence.
Permitted uses
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(b) Single family residential
(c) Attached or detached accessory dwelling units
(d) Duplexes
(e) Multiple family dwellings and condominiums
(f) Residential accessory buildings
(g) Foster homes for less than five children
(h) Community living arrangements for any number of persons.
(i) Incidental room rental
(j) Transient or Tourist Lodging
(k) Home occupations
(l) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(m)A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Accessory buildings between 12 and 16 feet in height.
(b) Cemeteries
(c) Day Care Centers
(d) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(e) Institutional residential
(f) Manufactured home communities, subject to s. 10.103(14)
(g) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Lot dimensions.
(a) Lots on public sewer.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.255(5) MFR-08 (Multi-Family Residential) Zoning District
171
1. Minimum lot size. All lots must be at least 8,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Minimum lot width. All lots must be at least 60 feet wide.
(b) Lots not on public sewer.
1. Minimum lot size. All lots must be at least 20,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Minimum lot width. All lots must be at least 100 feet wide.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard.
1. Any permitted structure must comply with road setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9)
2. Multiple family dwelling buildings located in the interior of a complex shall provide a front yard of not less than 15 feet, each building shall be provided with its own front yard area irrespective of the yards required for other buildings.
(b) Side yard.
1. Except as exempted in 2 below, all principal and accessory buildings must be at least 10 feet from any one side lot line.
2. Accessory buildings in the rear yard that are at least 10 feet from the principal residence must be at least:
a. 4 feet from any side lot line on lots 60 feet or more in width, or
b. 2.5 feet from any side lot line on lots less than 60 feet in width
(c) Rear yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least 25 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks and porches attached to a permitted residence must be at least 13 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Except as exempted in 4 below, accessory buildings must be at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.
4. Accessory buildings in the rear yard that are at least 10 feet from the principal residence must be at least:.
a. 4 feet from any rear lot line on lots 60 feet or more in width, or
b. 2.5 feet from any rear lot line on lots less than 60 feet in width.
Building height.
(a) Principal buildings.
1. Single-family or two-family residential buildings shall not exceed two and a half stories or 35 feet in height.
2. Multifamily buildings shall not exceed 4 stories.
(b) Accessory buildings. Unless under an approved conditional use permit under s. 10.255(3)(a), accessory buildings shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
Lot coverage and building area.
(a) The total area of all buildings and structures must not exceed:
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.255(7) MFR-08 (Multi-Family Residential) Zoning District
172
1. Interior lots: 35% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Corner lots: 40% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Accessory buildings cannot exceed 100% of the area of the footprint of the principal building.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.260(1) Hamlet Zoning Districts
173
10.260. Hamlet Zoning Districts
Principles of Traditional Neighborhood Design.
The Hamlet Design zoning districts are intended to accommodate existing or new developments, or redevelopments that have the following characteristics:
(a) Compact and walkable. Neighborhoods should be compact enough to encourage development of pedestrian connections and destinations without excluding automobiles.
(b) A hierarchy of interconnected streets. Streets and roads function as a connected network, dispersing traffic and offering a variety of pedestrian and vehicular routes to any destination while connecting and integrating the neighborhood with surrounding communities.
(c) An identifiable neighborhood/community center and edges. A center that includes public spaces—such as a square, green or important street intersection—and public buildings—such as a library, church or community center, transit stop and retail businesses—provides a civic focus and informal place of gathering; and edges that promote neighborhood identity.
(d) A variety of housing choices within the same neighborhood. The neighborhood includes a variety of dwelling types so that younger and older people, singles and families, of varying income levels may find places to live.
(e) A diverse mix of activities (residences, shops, schools, workplaces and parks, etc.) occur in proximity. Many activities of daily living should occur within walking distance, allowing independence to those who do not drive and adding to neighborhood vitality.
(f) A range of transportation options. Streets are designed to promote the safe and efficient use by walkers, bikers, drivers and transit rider
(g) Pedestrian-friendly. Features such as safe, attractive and comfortable streets and public spaces promote walking as a viable option to auto trips.
(h) Open spaces, greens, parks, accessible and convenient to all. Significant cultural and environmental features are incorporated into the design of the development for the use, benefit, and enjoyment of the entire community. A range of parks, from tot-lots and village greens to ballfields and community gardens, are distributed within neighborhoods.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.261(1) HAM-R (Hamlet Residential) Zoning District
174
10.261. HAM-R (Hamlet Residential) Zoning District
Purpose.
The HAM-R district is intended to accommodate new or existing development, or redevelopment, on relatively small lots, with buildings close to the street. It includes a mix of single-family, two-family and multifamily residential and civic uses in compact blocks laid out in a traditional grid pattern. Many older residential neighborhoods typify the characteristics of a HAM-R district.
Permitted uses.
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(b) Single family residential
(c) Duplexes
(d) Attached accessory dwelling units
(e) Residential accessory buildings
(f) Foster homes for less than five children licensed under s. 48.62, Wis. Stats.
(g) Home occupations
(h) Domestic fowl and beekeeping
(i) Incidental room rental.
(j) Cemeteries
(k) Community living arrangements for less than nine persons.
(l) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(m)Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(n) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(o) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses.
(a) Detached accessory dwelling units.
(b) Multiple family dwellings and condominiums
(c) Day care centers
(d) Community living arrangements for more than nine persons.
(e) Institutional residential
(f) Principal buildings more than two and a half stories tall
(g) Accessory buildings between 12 and 16 feet in height.
(h) Limited family businesses
(i) Reduction of side lot setback to less than 10 feet total.
(j) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.261(4) HAM-R (Hamlet Residential) Zoning District
175
Lot dimensions.
(a) Lots on public sewer.
1. Minimum lot size. All new lots must be at least 5,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Maximum lot size. All new lots must be smaller than 10,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights of way.
3. Minimum lot width. All new lots must be at least 50 feet wide.
(b) Lots not on public sewer.
1. Minimum lot size. All new lots must be at least 20,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Maximum lot size. All new lots must be smaller than 40,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
3. Minimum lot width. All new lots must be at least 100 feet wide.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard.
1. For newly created lots, or existing lots lacking an existing pattern of development as described in 2., below, all new structures must be at least 20 feet from the right-of-way line.
2. In lots or platted subdivisions created before (insert date) where a building line shall have been established by the construction of buildings on 30 percent of the lots in any one(1) block, such established setback line shall be the setback for that block, but in no event shall such setback be less than 5 feet.
(b) Side yard. Unless exempted by conditional use permit:
1. All structures must be at least a total of 10 feet from both side lot lines.
2. Structures may be built at a zero setback from one side lot line, provided the setback from the opposite side lot line is at least 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least 16 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks and porches attached to a permitted residence must be at least 8 feet from the rear lot line.
3. Accessory buildings must be at least 6 feet from any rear lot line.
Building height.
(a) Principal buildings. Unless authorized by conditional use permit, principal buildings shall not exceed 35 feet in height or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, whichever is less.
(b) Accessory buildings. Unless authorized by conditional use permit, accessory buildings shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
Lot coverage.
The total building footprint of residential buildings and residential accessory buildings shall not exceed 60 percent of the lot area.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.261(7) HAM-R (Hamlet Residential) Zoning District
176
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.262(1) HAM-M (Hamlet – Mixed-Use) Zoning District
177
10.262. HAM-M (Hamlet – Mixed-Use) Zoning District
Purpose.
The HAM-M Hamlet-Mixed-Use District accommodates a variety of commercial activities in conjunction with civic open spaces and buildings. It is a denser, fully-mixed use part of a community. Within the HAM-M district, the predominant land and building use is commercial, but may include residential and workplace uses in deference to the purpose and character of local commercial activities. It is typically located along an important street. Many older traditional downtown or neighborhood commercial districts typify the characteristics of a HAM-M district.
Permitted uses
(a) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(b) Single family residential
(c) Duplexes
(d) Attached accessory dwelling units
(e) Residential accessory buildings
(f) Home occupations
(g) Foster homes for less than five children licensed under s. 48.62, Wis. Stats.
(h) Indoor Sales.
(i) Incidental room rental
(j) Cemeteries
(k) Community living arrangements for less than nine persons.
(l) Personal or Professional Service
(m)Office uses.
(n) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses.
(o) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use
(p) Transient or Tourist Lodging
(q) Active or passive recreational uses.
(r) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
Conditional Uses.
(a) Detached accessory dwelling units.
(b) Multiple family dwellings and condominiums
(c) Institutional Residential
(d) Automotive services.
(e) Indoor entertainment or assembly
(f) Outdoor entertainment
(g) Limited family business
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.262(4) HAM-M (Hamlet – Mixed-Use) Zoning District
178
(h) Principal commercial buildings which have more than four (4) stories, or more than 10,000 square feet of interior floor space devoted to business or commercial use.
(i) Residential accessory buildings between 12 and 16 feet in height.
(j) Reduction of side lot setback to less than 10 feet total.
(k) Commercial Indoor Lodging.
(l) Outdoor sales events
(m)Day care centers
(n) Community living arrangements for nine (9) or more persons.
(o) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Lot dimensions.
(a) Lots on public sewer.
1. Minimum lot size. All new lots must be at least 5,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
2. Maximum lot size. All new lots must be smaller than 10,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights of way.
3. Minimum lot width. All new lots must be at least 50 feet wide.
(b) Lots not on public sewer.
4. Minimum lot size. All new lots must be at least 20,000 square feet in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
5. Maximum lot size. All new lots must be smaller than one acre in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
6. Minimum lot width. All new lots must be at least 100 feet wide.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yard.
1. For newly created lots, or existing lots lacking an existing pattern of development as described in 2., below, all new structures must be at least 20 feet from the right-of-way line.
2. In lots or platted subdivisions created before (insert date) where a building line shall have been established by the construction of buildings on 30 percent of the lots in any one(1) block, such established setback line shall be the setback for that block, but in no event shall such setback be less than 5 feet.
(b) Side yard. Unless exempted by conditional use permit:
1. All structures must be at least a total of 10 feet from both side lot lines.
2. Structures may be built at a zero setback from one side lot line, provided the setback from the opposite side lot line is at least 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard.
1. Permitted residences must be at least 16 feet from the rear lot line.
2. Uncovered decks and porches attached to a permitted residence must be at least 8 feet from the rear lot line.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.262(6) HAM-M (Hamlet – Mixed-Use) Zoning District
179
3. Accessory buildings must be at least 6 feet from any rear lot line.
Building height and area limitations.
(a) Commercial buildings. Unless authorized by conditional use permit, commercial buildings shall not exceed 10,000 square feet in total floor area and shall not exceed 70 feet in height or four and one-half (4 ½ ) stories, whichever is less.
(b) Residential buildings.
1. Principal buildings. Principal residential buildings shall not exceed 35 feet in height or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, whichever is less.
2. Accessory residential buildings. Unless authorized by conditional use permit, residential accessory buildings shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
Lot coverage.
The total building footprint of commercial buildings, residential buildings and residential accessory buildings shall not exceed 60 percent of the lot area.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.270(1) Commercial Zoning Districts
180
10.270. Commercial Zoning Districts
Provisions applicable to all Commercial Districts
(a) Site plan. All petitions to rezone to any Commercial zoning district, and any application for a zoning permit or conditional use permit within an existing Commercial zoning district must be accompanied by an approved site plan as described in s. 10.101(6).
(b) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as required in s. 10.102(8).
(c) Screening. For commercial uses within 100 feet of any residence, screening must be provided as required in s. 10.102(12).
(d) Stormwater. The Zoning Administrator may not issue a zoning permit for any development in any commercial district until the Department of Land and Water Resources issues a Stormwater Management permit for the project under Chapter 14, Dane County Code.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.271(1) LC (Limited Commercial) Zoning District
181
10.271. LC (Limited Commercial) Zoning District
Purpose.
(a) The Limited Commercial Zoning District is intended for small commercial uses that may need to locate in predominantly rural areas due to their often large service areas and their need for larger lot sizes. In appearance and operation, such uses are often similar to agricultural uses and are therefore more suitable to a rural area.
(b) Such uses include, but are not limited to, contractor, transportation, building trades and landscaping operations, which may have
1. Outdoor stockpiles of materials;
2. Storage and maintenance of large construction or transportation equipment;
3. Early morning activity, and;
4. Large, utilitarian buildings.
(c) Limited commercial uses:
1. Have no retail sales;
2. Do not create high traffic volume, and;
3. Have limited outdoor lighting and signage.
Permitted Uses.
(a) Agricultural accessory uses. Livestock is not permitted.
(b) Agricultural uses. Livestock is not permitted.
(c) Contractor, landscaping or building trade operations.
(d) Indoor storage and repair.
(e) Incidental Parking for employees, consistent with s. 10.102(8).
(f) Office uses, the number on site employees is limited to no more than six (6).
(g) Storage of no more than 12 total vehicles and pieces of construction equipment.
(h) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
(i) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(j) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use.
Conditional Uses.
(a) Caretaker’s residence.
(b) Cemeteries
(c) Communication towers.
(d) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses
(e) Light Industrial.
(f) Outdoor Storage.
(g) Storage of more than 12 total vehicles and pieces of construction equipment.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.271(4) LC (Limited Commercial) Zoning District
182
(h) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Building height and area limitations.
(a) Buildings shall not exceed 35 feet in height or two and one-half stories, whichever is less.
(b) Commercial buildings shall not exceed 10,000 square feet in total floor area.
Lot dimensions.
(c) Minimum lot area. Lots shall be not less than 20,000 square feet of lot area.
(d) Maximum lot area. Lots shall not exceed 5 acres in area.
(e) Minimum lot width. Lots must be at least 100 feet wide.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yards. Construction equipment, vehicles, or material shall not be stored between the building setback line and the front lot line of any lot.
(b) Side yards. The minimum width for any side yard shall not be less than 10 feet for any building.
(c) Rear yards.
1. For buildings used for commercial purposes and residential accessory buildings the minimum rear yard shall be not less than 10 feet.
2. For residential buildings the minimum rear yard shall be not less than 25 feet.
Lot coverage.
The total building footprint of commercial buildings, residential buildings and residential accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent of the lot area.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.272(1) GC (General Commercial) Zoning District
183
10.272. GC (General Commercial) Zoning District
Purpose.
(a) The General Commercial Zoning District is intended to accommodate retail, sales, service, lodging, and office uses, where: primary commercial activity occurs indoors; commercial uses are of moderate scale and intensity, and; uses are appropriate to a developed area. Outdoor sales are not permitted.
(b) Permitted uses are typically characterized by moderate traffic and parking requirements, with low or moderate noise, odors, vibrations, fumes or other potential direct external nuisances.
(c) Conditional uses include compatible commercial uses that have a somewhat higher amount of outdoor activity, operate outside of normal business hours, or taller or more massive buildings. As a district primarily devoted to commercial uses, residential uses are listed as conditional uses to make sure residential areas are designed for compatibility with nearby commercial areas, including provisions or designs, such as visual screening, or safe pedestrian access, to protect residents’ safety and welfare.
Permitted Uses.
(a) Agricultural uses. Livestock not permitted
(b) Agricultural accessory uses. Livestock not permitted.
(c) Contractor, landscaping or building trade operations.
(d) Day care centers
(e) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses.
(f) Indoor entertainment or assembly
(g) Indoor sales
(h) Indoor storage and repair.
(i) Light industrial
(j) Office uses
(k) Personal or professional service
(l) Transient or tourist lodging
(m)A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
(n) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(o) Utility services associated with, and accessory to, a permitted or conditional use.
(p) Veterinary clinics.
Conditional Uses.
(a) Airport, landing strip or heliport.
(b) Animal boarding, domestic pets
(c) Cemeteries
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.272(4) GC (General Commercial) Zoning District
184
(d) Commercial Indoor Lodging.
(e) Communication towers
(f) Drive-in establishment
(g) Marinas
(h) Off-site parking
(i) Outdoor active recreation
(j) Outdoor entertainment
(k) Outdoor Storage.
(l) Residential and associated accessory uses.
1. Any residential use in the GC district must meet all of the following criteria:
a. Comply with residential density standards of any applicable town comprehensive plan and the Dane County Comprehensive Plan
b. Have visual screening from adjacent commercial areas
c. Must provide appropriate parking, and internal pedestrian access for residents.
2. Residential uses may include:
a. Caretaker’s residence
b. Single family residential
c. Attached or detached accessory dwelling units
d. Two family residential
e. Multifamily residential
f. Mixed residential and commercial developments
g. Institutional Residential
h. Manufactured housing communities, subject to s. 10.103(14)
i. Rooming house.
(m)Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
(n) Vehicle repair or maintenance service
Building size and area limitations.
(a) Commercial, multifamily or mixed-use buildings: 4 stories maximum
(b) Single family residential dwelling: 2 stories or 35 feet maximum.
Lot dimensions.
(a) Minimum lot area.
1. Exclusive commercial use. There is no minimum lot area for purely commercial lots. However, lots must have sufficient room to accommodate sanitary, stormwater and parking for intended uses.
2. Residential or mixed uses.
(a) Lots on public sewer. Lots must be at least 2,000 square feet in area per each residential apartment.
(b) Lots not on public sewer. Lots must be at least 5,000 square feet per residential apartment.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.272(6) GC (General Commercial) Zoning District
185
(b) Maximum lot area. None.
(c) Minimum lot width.
1. Exclusive commercial use. There is no minimum lot width for purely commercial lots.
2. Residential or mixed uses. Lots must be at least 60 feet wide.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Side yards: 10 feet minimum
(b) Rear yards.
1. Exclusive commercial use: 10 Feet minimum
2. Residential or mixed use: 25 feet minimum
Lot coverage.
The total area of all buildings and structures must not exceed 60% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.273(1) HC (Heavy Commercial) Zoning District
186
10.273. HC (Heavy Commercial) Zoning District
Purpose.
(a) The Heavy Commercial Zoning District is intended to accommodate retail, service, light industrial lodging, and office uses, where: primary commercial activity may occur either indoors our outdoors; commercial uses are of relatively large scale and intensity, and; uses are appropriate to a highly developed area.
(b) Permitted uses are typically characterized by relatively high traffic volumes and substantial parking requirements, with some potential for noise, odors, vibrations, fumes or other potential direct external nuisances.
(c) Conditional uses include commercial uses that have a somewhat higher amount of outdoor activity, or operate outside of normal business hours.
Permitted Uses.
(a) Adult book stores, subject to s. 10.103(2).
(b) Agricultural uses. Livestock not permitted.
(c) Agricultural accessory uses. Livestock not permitted.
(d) Cemeteries
(e) Colony house.
(f) Contractor, landscaping or building trade operations.
(g) Day care centers
(h) Freight and bus terminals.
(i) Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses.
(j) Indoor entertainment or assembly
(k) Indoor sales
(l) Indoor storage and repair.
(m)Institutional residential
(n) Light industrial
(o) Off-site parking
(p) Office uses
(q) Outdoor sales, display or repair
(r) Outdoor storage
(s) Personal or professional service
(t) Personal storage facility
(u) Transient or tourist lodging
(v) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
(w)Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(x) Utility services.
(y) Vehicle repair or maintenance service
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.273(3) HC (Heavy Commercial) Zoning District
187
(z) Veterinary clinics
(aa) Warehousing and distribution facilities.
Conditional Uses.
(a) Airport, landing strip or heliport
(b) Animal boarding, domestic pet
(c) Animal boarding, large animal.
(d) Caretaker’s residence.
(e) Commercial indoor lodging.
(f) Communication towers
(g) Drive-in establishment
(h) Electric generating facilities, provided 100% of the production output of the facility is derived from renewable energy resources.
(i) Marinas
(j) Outdoor active recreation
(k) Outdoor entertainment
(l) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Building size and area limitations.
(a) Building height. Buildings shall not exceed a height of 50 feet, excluding tanks, storage bins, silos and towers.
Lot dimensions.
(a) Minimum lot area. There is no minimum lot area for lots in the HC district. However, lots must have sufficient area to accommodate sanitary, stormwater and parking for intended uses.
(b) Maximum lot area. There is no maximum lot area for lots in the HC district.
(c) Minimum lot width. There is no minimum lot width for lots in the HC district.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Side yards: 10 feet minimum
(b) Rear yard: 10 Feet minimum
Lot coverage.
The total area of all buildings and structures must not exceed 60% of the total lot area, excluding public rights-of-way.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.280(1) Processing, Manufacturing and Industrial Zoning Districts
188
10.280. Processing, Manufacturing and Industrial Zoning Districts
Provisions applicable to all Processing, Manufacturing and Industrial Districts
(a) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as required in s. 10.102(8).
(b) Screening. For commercial uses adjacent to any Residential, Rural Residential or Rural Mixed-Use district, screening must be provided as required in s. 10.102(12).
(c) Stormwater. The Zoning Administrator may not issue a zoning permit for any development in any Processing, Manufacturing and Industrial district until the Department of Land and Water Resources issues a Stormwater Management permit for the project under Chapter 14, Dane County Code.
Rezones to Processing, Manufacturing and Industrial Zoning Districts.
(a) The county board may not approve a petition to rezone to the RI or MI zoning districts on lands that are wholly or partially within the zone of contribution to a municipal well, as shown in the most current adopted version of the Dane County Water Quality Plan
(b) Where necessary to minimize impacts to neighboring properties, the zoning committee may recommend, and the county board may adopt, conditions on zoning petitions to any Processing, Manufacturing and Industrial zoning district that impose deeper setbacks, wider minimum lot widths, and/or wider side or rear yards than otherwise provided in this ordinance. Such conditions shall be based on the nature of the use and shall be adopted subject to the standards under s. 10.101(8)(d).
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.281(1) RI (Rural Industry) Zoning District
189
10.281. RI (Rural Industry) Zoning District
Purpose.
(a) The Rural Industry Zoning District is intended to accommodate industrial, processing and extractive uses, where:
1. primary activity often occurs outdoors;
2. uses require large land areas and separation from residential uses;
3. uses do not require full urban services or create intensive electrical, water or other utility demand, and;
4. uses are appropriate to a rural area.
(b) Permitted uses are similar to those in the Limited Commercial district, and do not require special conditions or approvals to mitigate impacts to surrounding properties.
(c) Conditional uses have significant potential for runoff, pollution, noise, dust, odors, vibration, heavy vehicle traffic and other potential nuisances, and typically require conditions tailored to the particular use and setting to protect public safety or to mitigate impacts to the environment or to surrounding properties.
Permitted Uses
(a) Agricultural accessory uses, except farm residences
(a) Agricultural uses
(b) Incidental parking for employees, consistent with s. 10.102(8).
(c) Indoor storage and repair.
(d) Light industrial
(e) Office uses, employees limited to 6 FTE.
(f) Outdoor storage.
(g) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
(h) Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(i) Utility services.
Conditional Uses
(a) Asphalt and concrete production
(b) Caretaker’s residence
(c) Communication towers
(d) Commercial processing or composting of organic by-products or wastes.
(e) Demolition material disposal sites
(f) Dumping grounds
(g) Electric generating facilities, provided 100% of the production output of the facility is derived from renewable energy resources.
(h) Incinerator sites
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.281(4) RI (Rural Industry) Zoning District
190
(i) Mineral extraction operations
(j) Outdoor sales, display, or repair.
(k) Salvage yard or junkyards.
(l) Slaughterhouses, meat processing plants
(m)Solid waste disposal or recycling center
(n) Stock yards, livestock auction facilities
(o) Storage of explosive materials.
(p) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above
(q) Wastewater treatment facilities.
Building size and area limitations.
Buildings shall not exceed 35 feet in height or two and one-half stories, whichever is less.
Lot dimensions.
(a) Minimum lot size. All lots created in the RI zoning district must be at least 16 acres in area, excluding public rights-of-way.
(b) Minimum lot width. All lots created in the RI zoning district must have a minimum lot width of 100 feet.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yards. Construction equipment, vehicles, or material shall not be stored between the building setback line and the front lot line of any lot.
(b) Side yards. The minimum width for any side yard shall not be less than 10 feet for any building.
(c) Rear yards. Rear yards shall not be less than 25 feet from the property line.
Lot coverage.
The total building footprint of commercial buildings, residential buildings and residential accessory buildings shall not exceed 35 percent of the lot area.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.282(1) MI (Manufacturing and Industrial) Zoning District
191
10.282. MI (Manufacturing and Industrial) Zoning District
Purpose.
(a) The Manufacturing and Industrial Zoning District is intended to accommodate industrial, processing and extractive uses, where:
1. primary activity occurs either indoors or outdoors;
2. uses are intensive, and at relatively high densities and may produce a high volume of employee and freight traffic
3. uses require separation from residential uses;
4. uses may require full urban services or create intensive electrical, water or other utility demand, and;
5. uses are appropriate to an urbanized or industrial area.
(b) Permitted uses occur primarily indoors.
(c) Conditional uses often occur outdoors, and have unusual potential for runoff, pollution, noise, dust, odors, vibration, heavy vehicle traffic and other potential nuisances, and typically require conditions tailored to the particular use and setting to protect public safety or to mitigate impacts to the environment or to surrounding properties.
Permitted Uses
(a) Adult book stores, subject to s. 10.103(2)
(b) Adult entertainment, subject to the provisions of the Adult Entertainment Overlay District (AED).
(c) Agricultural accessory uses. Livestock not permitted.
(d) Agricultural uses. Livestock not permitted.
(e) Animal boarding, domestic pets
(f) Animal boarding, large animal.
(g) Contractor, landscaping or building trade operations
(h) Drive-in establishments
(i) Electric generating facilities
(j) Fertilizer manufacturing plants
(k) Fertilizer mixing or blending plants.
(l) Freight and passenger bus terminals
(m)Governmental, institutional, religious, or nonprofit community uses.
(n) Heavy industrial uses.
(o) Indoor entertainment and assembly
(p) Indoor storage and repair
(q) Indoor sales.
(r) Light industrial uses.
(s) Marinas
(t) Off-site parking lot or garage
(u) Office uses.
(v) Outdoor active recreation
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.282(3) MI (Manufacturing and Industrial) Zoning District
192
(w) Outdoor entertainment.
(x) Outdoor sales, display or repair.
(y) Outdoor storage
(z) Personal or professional service
(aa) Personal storage facilities
(bb) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
(cc)Undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.
(dd) Utility services.
(ee) Vehicle repair or maintenance services
(ff) Veterinary clinics
(gg) Warehousing and distribution facilities
(hh) Wastewater treatment facilities.
Conditional Uses
(a) Asphalt and concrete production
(b) Biodiesel and ethanol manufacturing
(c) Biopower facilities for distribution, retail or wholesale sales
(d) Communication towers
(e) Commercial processing or composting of organic by-products or wastes.
(f) Demolition material disposal sites
(g) Dumping grounds
(h) Incinerator sites
(i) Manure processing facilities
(j) Mineral extraction operations
(k) Processing or composting of organic byproducts or wastes.
(l) Solid waste disposal operation or recycling centers
(m)Salvage recycling operations
(n) Stockyards, livestock auction facilities
(o) Storage of explosive materials.
(p) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
Building size and area limitations.
(a) Building height. Buildings shall not exceed a height of 50 feet, excluding tanks, storage bins, silos and towers.
Lot dimensions.
(a) Minimum lot area. There is no minimum lot area for lots in the MI district. However, lots must have sufficient room to accommodate sanitary, stormwater and parking for intended
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.282(6) MI (Manufacturing and Industrial) Zoning District
193
uses.
(b) Maximum lot area. There is no maximum lot area for lots in the MI district.
(c) Minimum lot width. There is no minimum lot width for lots in the MI district.
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yards. Construction equipment, vehicles, or material shall not be stored between the building setback line and the front lot line of any lot.
(b) Side yards. The minimum width for any side yard shall not be less than 10 feet for any building.
(c) Rear yards. Rear yards shall not be less than 10 feet from the property line.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.290(1) Special Use Zoning Districts
194
10.290. Special Use Zoning Districts
10.291. PUD (Planned Unit Development) Zoning District
Purpose.
The purpose of the PUD Planned Unit Development district is to promote improved development design by allowing greater flexibility and imagination in urban and rural development while ensuring substantial compliance with the intent of the zoning ordinance and adopted plans. The district allows variations in uses, structures, densities, setbacks and yard requirements, building heights, landscaping and other provisions for developments which are cohesively planned and implemented. In exchange for such flexibility, the project (hereinafter referred to as Planned Unit Development or PUD) must provide a higher level of design and functionality than normally required for other developments.
Permitted uses.
The only uses permitted within each mapped PUD district shall be those lawful use(s) in place at the time of PUD district mapping plus those uses explicitly listed, depicted and described as permitted uses within that particular PUD district.
Other standards.
Building height limit, Area, frontage and population density regulations; Lot coverage; Number of principal buildings per lot; Setback from road and front property line and front yard requirements; Side and rear yard requirements; Off-street parking; Screening and landscaping provisions; Sign regulations. Zoning limitations on or requirements for building height, lot area, lot frontage/width, housing unit or population density, number of buildings per lot, lot coverage, setbacks, yard areas, off-street parking and loading, screening or landscaping, and signage shall be specified for each particular PUD district. Such requirements shall be generally described as part of an approved General Development Plan (GDP) for each PUD and explicitly specified as part of an approved Specific Implementation Plan (SIP). Where they provide sufficient detail, such specifications shall supersede similar specifications found elsewhere in the zoning ordinance.
Criteria for approval of PUDs.
Planned unit developments shall meet all of the following criteria to be approved:
(a) The development shall be consistent with a town comprehensive plan approved by both the town and county.
(b) The uses and their intensity, appearance, design and arrangement shall be compatible with the physical nature of the site and area, and shall not have a significant adverse impact on the natural environment.
(c) The uses and their intensity, appearance, design and arrangement shall in no foreseeable manner diminish or impede the uses, values and normal and orderly development of surrounding properties.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.291(5) PUD (Planned Unit Development) Zoning District
195
(d) The uses and their intensity, appearance, design and arrangement shall not create access issues, traffic or parking demand inconsistent with existing or anticipated transportation facilities.
(e) The development shall include adequate provision for the continued preservation, maintenance and improvement of natural areas and open space.
(f) The applicant shall provide evidence of financial feasibility and assurances that each phase can be completed in a manner which would not result in an adverse effect upon the community as a result of termination at that point.
(g) The development shall comply with all other applicable ordinances.
Planned unit development approval process.
There is a two step review and approval process for establishing a PUD district. The first step consists of submittal of a General Development Plan (GDP) that outlines the nature of the Planned Unit Development and provides information necessary for consideration and decision-making by the town and county. The second step involves submittal of a Specific Implementation Plan (SIP) which documents the detailed actions the applicant will take to implement the General Development Plan. No PUD zoning district can be established without an approved GDP and corresponding SIP(s). If approved by the zoning administrator, the applicant may combine steps for simple PUDs involving a small tract of land or proceed with both steps concurrently.
(a) General Development Plan (GDP).
1. Prior to submitting a formal application, the prospective applicant shall present the concept of the proposed PUD to, and consult with, representatives from the affected town, staff from the planning and development department, and the zoning committee regarding the project, required application materials, and the PUD review process. These representatives may comment on the concept, but their comments are not binding on the representatives nor indicative of their position on a formal application. The review by the town and the zoning committee may take place at a joint meeting.
2. The applicant shall submit to the zoning administrator a formal application for GDP review and approval, along with required application materials. The zoning administrator shall process such applications under the standard zoning map amendment procedure, plus additional procedures established herein. The applicant shall include twenty-five (25) copies of all required materials, along with the applicable fee provided for in chapter 12.
3. The zoning administrator shall determine whether the GDP submittal is complete in reference to the following required application materials:
a. Name of the applicant, agent, property owner(s) and entity which intends to develop the land.
b. A complete written legal description of the subject property.
c. A map(s) of the subject property showing all lands for which the PUD is proposed, and all other lands within 1,000 feet of the subject property. Said map shall clearly indicate the current property owners and zoning of the subject property and all
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.291(5) PUD (Planned Unit Development) Zoning District
196
lands with 500 feet, the boundaries of all political jurisdiction(s) in the area and all lot dimensions of the subject property. The map shall be at a scale not less than one inch equals 800 feet.
d. A general written description of the proposed PUD, including:
i. general project themes, images and design concepts;
ii. general mix of dwelling unit types and land uses;
iii. approximate development densities;
iv. general treatment of natural features and provisions for open space preservation;
v. general relationship to nearby properties and existing and planned streets, highways and other transportation improvements;
vi. general relationship to the approved town land use plan; and
vii. a general plan for phasing, including a planned timeline for submittal of one or more SIPs.
e. A description of why the applicant wishes to develop the project using PUD zoning. This description shall include justification for the proposed PUD, and shall indicate how the criteria in sub. 10.153(4) will be met.
f. A list of standard zoning provisions which will be met by the proposed PUD, standards which will not be met by the proposed PUD, standards which will be more than met by the proposed PUD, and the location(s) in which they apply. This list shall be organized in the following manner:
i. land use types and mix (list range of permitted uses);
ii. density and intensity of land uses (list range of dwelling units per acre, lot sizes, lot frontages/widths, setbacks and yard requirements, lot coverage, building heights, lot dimensions, number of units, and floor area ratios for non-residential uses);
iii. landscaping and screening;
iv. off-street parking and loading;
v. signage; and
vi. other applicable standards.
g. GDP map(s) at a minimum scale of 1 inch equals 100 feet (11” x 17” reduction shall also be provided) of the proposed project showing at least the following information:
i. land use layout and the location of major public streets and/or private drives;
ii. location of recreational and open space areas and facilities; and
iii. statistical data on lot sizes in the development, the approximate areas of large development lots and pads, and density/intensity of various parts of the development.
iv. A conceptual landscaping plan, noting approximate locations and types of existing and planned landscaping, screening and fencing.
v. A general signage plan, including approximate locations, types, heights,
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.291(5) PUD (Planned Unit Development) Zoning District
197
lighting and sign face areas.
vi. Evidence of financial capability pertaining to construction, maintenance and operation of all public and private improvements associated with the proposed development.
vii. Other maps or information requested by the town or county.
viii. In the case of a rural PUD, the GDP shall identify any areas proposed to be subject to conservancy easements, the nature of the conservancy easements to be imposed, and other features designed to protect the rural character of the area in which the PUD is proposed.
ix. After the GDP submittal is complete, the zoning administrator shall forward two copies of the submittal to the town clerk of the affected town and schedule the petition for zoning committee public hearing.
x. The affected town shall review and act on the proposed GDP. The town may approve the GDP with conditions that identify specific limits or elements the town requires to be included in the SIP.
xi. The zoning committee, after a public hearing and after receiving comments from the affected town, shall forward its recommendation on the proposed GDP to the county board. The GDP may be approved with conditions that identify specific limits or elements the county requires be included in the SIP. If the town board approves the GDP subject to conditions and such conditions are amended or deleted by the county, the GDP as approved by the county shall be submitted to the town board for approval of the county’s conditions or denial of the GDP.
xii. The county board shall act on the GDP and, if the GDP is approved, shall establish through its approval a delayed effective date (DED) totaling at least 12 months within which one or more SIPs must be filed in order to effectuate the rezoning and establish the PUD on the zoning district map. Such timeframe may later be extended through an amendment to the approved GDP, which shall follow the same process as GDP approval. Failure to file an SIP(s) within the delayed effective date, or to extend said date, shall cause the rezoning to become null and void.
xiii. Approval of the GDP shall establish the basic right of use for the subject property in conformity with the approved plan, but approval of such plan shall not make permissible in any area of the PUD those uses proposed until an SIP is approved for that area. No development may occur within a PUD district which is inconsistent with an approved GDP.
(b) Specific Implementation Plan (SIP).
1. The applicant may submit to the zoning administrator an application for one or more SIPs along with required application materials within the delayed effective date period as established through county board approval of the rezoning to PUD (GDP approval). If such SIP(s) has not been submitted by the Delayed Effective Date, the approved GDP shall be null and void for those portions of the subject property not yet covered by an
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.291(5) PUD (Planned Unit Development) Zoning District
198
approved SIP, and the zoning administrator shall approve no further SIPs for the property under the previously approved GDP. In the event all or part of a GDP is rendered null and void, the zoning on the property shall revert to the zoning category existing prior to the PUD rezoning.
2. The zoning administrator shall determine whether the SIP submittal is complete in reference to the following required application materials
3. Name of the applicant, agent, property owner(s) and entity which intend to develop the land.
4. A complete written legal description of the SIP area.
5. A map showing the relationship of the SIP area to the approved GDP area.
6. A written description of the proposed SIP area within the PUD, including:
a. specific project themes, images and design features;
b. a specific list of permitted dwelling unit types and land uses;
c. specific development densities by dwelling units per acre, lot sizes, lot frontages/widths, setbacks and yard requirements, lot coverage, building heights, lot dimensions, number of units, and floor area ratios for non-residential uses;
d. specific treatment of natural features and provisions for open space preservation;
e. specific relationship to the remainder of the PUD included in the approved GDP, nearby properties and existing and planned streets, highways and other transportation improvements; and
f. a development schedule indicating project stages.
g. A written description demonstrating the consistency of the proposed SIP with the approved GDP and the criteria in s. 10.291(4)., and identifying any and all deviations between the approved GDP and the proposed SIP.
h. An SIP map at a minimum scale of 1 inch equals 100 feet (11” x 17” reduction shall also be provided) of the proposed project showing at least the following information:
i. locations, sizes, dimensions and permitted uses of all lots and building sites (detailed lot layout/conceptual subdivision plan required for SIPs with multiple lots);
ii. locations, sizes and dimensions of all structures (minimum setbacks and yard areas);
iii. delineations of all water bodies, wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes and other sensitive environmental areas;
iv. locations, dimensions and surface type of all driveways, walkways, trails, parking and loading areas and roads;
v. detailed off-street parking lot and stall design;
vi. location of all public and private utilities;
vii. location, type and intensity of outdoor lighting;
viii. location of recreational and open space areas and facilities, specifically describing those that are to be reserved or dedicated for public use; and
ix. statistical data on lot sizes in the development, the exact areas of all
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.291(5) PUD (Planned Unit Development) Zoning District
199
development lots and pads, density/intensity of various parts of the development, floor area ratios, and lot coverage percentages.
i. A detailed landscaping plan for the area included in the SIP, specifying the location, species, and installed and mature size of all existing and proposed trees, shrubs and fencing.
j. A signage plan for the project, including the type, location, height, dimensions, lighting and sign face area of all proposed signs.
k. An erosion control, drainage and stormwater management plan.
l. Building elevations for all buildings, including building heights and materials.
7. After the SIP submittal is complete, it shall be forwarded to the town clerk of the affected town. The town may then forward any comments and recommendations on the proposed SIP to the zoning administrator within 60 days. Alternatively, at the sole discretion of the affected town, the town may forward its comments and recommendations to the zoning administrator prior to the zoning administrator’s determination of SIP submittal completeness, in which case the 60 day review period is not required.
8. The planning and development director and zoning administrator shall review the submitted SIP with reference to the GDP approval, the evaluation criteria in s. 10.291(4), and town comments and recommendations. Within 50 days of receipt of a complete submittal (of within 10 days of such receipt in the event that the town offers comments and recommendations before the zoning administrator’s determination of completeness is made), the director and zoning administrator shall determine whether the SIP is consistent with the approved GDP. Inconsistencies shall require an amendment to the GDP according to the procedure in sub. 10.291(5)(a). If generally consistent with the approved GDP and the evaluation criteria, the director and zoning administrator shall, within such timeframe, approve the SIP as submitted or with modifications necessary to achieve full consistency. If approved with modifications, the applicant shall submit modified SIP materials consistent with the approval before the issuance of zoning permits.
9. The approved SIP shall provide the basis for the issuance of all subsequent permits including, but not limited to, zoning permits, to allow development with the SIP area. Any portion of an approved SIP for which a zoning permit is not issued within three years of SIP approval shall expire, and a new SIP must be submitted and approved for that area before any development may occur.
10. As an alternative to SIP technical review by the zoning administrator, planning and development director and affected town, approval of the GDP may include detailed restrictive covenants specific to the PUD that establish a design review committee and design review process to review SIP submittals so as to ensure compliance with the GDP. All other requirements for the SIP per para. (b) above shall remain in effect if this option is approved by the town and county as part of the GDP.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.292(1) UTR (Utility, Transportation and Right-of-Way ) Zoning District
200
10.292. UTR (Utility, Transportation and Right-of-Way ) Zoning District
Purpose
The UTR Utility, Transportation and Right-of-Way district is intended to provide for parcels intended for purely utilitarian, nonresidential uses with no principal structure. The UTR district is intended for parcels that due to their size, width, location, proximity to a roadway, division by municipal boundaries or other circumstance are unsuitable for most forms of residential, commercial or other structural development, yet lack significant natural resource features.
Permitted uses.
(a) Accessory uses and structures associated with a permitted principal use on parcels in common ownership that are either adjacent or on the opposite side of a public right-of-way.
(b) Undeveloped natural resource use.
(c) Community gardens.
(d) Small-scale farming
(e) Public or private roadways
(f) Bicycle or hiking trails
(g) Private driveways or onsite parking
(h) Railroad, utility or access easements or rights-of-way
(i) Stormwater facilities
(j) Utility services.
(k) A transportation, utility, communication, or other use that is:
1. required under state or federal law to be located in a specific place, or;
2. is authorized to be located in a specific place under a state or federal law that specifically preempts the requirement of a conditional use permit.
(l) Invasive species control activities.
Conditional uses
(a) Transportation, communications, pipeline, electric transmission, utility, or drainage uses, not listed as a permitted use above.
(b) Storage structures, not to exceed 250 square feet.
(c) Runways or take-off and landing areas associated with airports, landing strips or heliports.
Building size and area limitations.
(a) Building height. Buildings, as approved by conditional use permit, shall not exceed a height of 12 feet, excluding utility structures or communication towers.
Lot dimensions.
(a) Minimum lot area. There is no minimum lot area for lots in the UTR district.
(b) Maximum lot area. There is no maximum lot area for lots in the UTR district.
(c) Minimum lot width. There is no minimum lot width for lots in the UTR district.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.292(6) UTR (Utility, Transportation and Right-of-Way ) Zoning District
201
Setbacks and required yards.
(a) Front yards.
1. All structures must meet front yard setbacks as described in s. 10.102(9).
2. For parcels without road frontage, structures must be at least four feet from the lot line where primary access to the parcel is made.
3. Construction equipment, vehicles, or material shall not be stored between the building setback line and the front lot line of any lot.
(b) Side yard. Any permitted structures must be at least four feet from the side lot line.
(c) Rear yard. Any permitted structures must be at least four feet from the rear lot line.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.300(1) Overlay Districts
202
10.300. Overlay Districts
10.301. AED (Adult Entertainment) Overlay District
Statement of Purpose.
It is the purpose of this district to establish reasonable and uniform regulations of the use of property for adult entertainment establishments in order to prevent the adverse secondary effects associated with these businesses and thereby promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of Dane County. It is not the intent or effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented entertainment protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
Findings.
While the County Board recognizes that freedom of speech is among our most precious and highly protected rights, and wishes to act consistently with full protection of those rights, based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the Board, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); BBL, Inc. v. City of Angola, 809 F.3d 317 (7th Cir. 2015); Thirteen Mile Rd. Inc. v. Warren, 626 F. Supp. 803, (E.D. Mich. 1985); Alexander v. Minneapolis, 713 F. Supp. 1296 (DC Minn. 1989); 7250 Corp. v. Board of County Comrs., 799 P.2d 917 (Col. 1990); Chicago v. Scandia Books, Inc., 102 Ill App. 3d 292 (1st Dist. 1981); Islip v. Caviglia, 540 N.E.2d 215 (N.Y. 1989); Dumas v. Dallas, 648 F. Supp. 1061 (N.D. Tex. 1986); International Eateries of America, Inc. v. Broward County, 726 F. Supp. 1568 (S.D. Fla. 1989); Walnut Properties, Inc. v. City Council of Long Beach,100 Cal. App. 3d 1018 (2d Dist. 1980); S&GNews, Inc. v. Southgate, 638 F. Supp. 1060(E.D. Mich. 1986); U.S. Partners Financial Corp. v. Kansas City, 707 F. Supp. 1090 (W.D. Mo.1989); City of Vallejo v. Adult Books, 167 Cal. App. 3d xxx (1st Dist. 1985); County of Cook v. Renaissance Arcade & Bookstore, 122 Ill 2d 123(1988); Derusso v. City of Albany, NY, 205 F. Supp. 2d 16 (N.D. N.Y. 2002); Mom N Pops, Inc.v. City of Charlotte, 979 F. Supp. 372 (W.D. N.C.1997); Venture I, Inc. v. Orange County, Tex.,947 F. Supp. 271 (E.D. Tex. 1996); Community Visual Communications, Inc. v. City of San Antonio, 148 F. Supp. 2d 764 (W.D. Tex. 2000);Bronco’s Entertainment, Ltd. v. Charter Tp. Of Van Buren, 421 F.3d 440 (6th Cir. 2005);Brandywine, Inc. v. City of Richmond, Kentucky,359 F.3d 830 (6th Cir. 2004); Holmberg v. City of Ramsey, 12 F.3d 1413 (8th Cir. 1994); Woosterv. Entertainment One, Inc., 158 Ohio App. 3d161 (2004); Grand Brittain, Inc. v. City of Amarillo, Tex., 27 F.3d 1068 (5th Cir. 1994);Tollis, Inc. v. City of County of San Diego, 505F.3d 935 (9th Cir. 2007); as well as finding from papers, articles, studies and information from other communities including, but not limited to, Fort Worth & Dallas, Texas; Palm Beach County, Florida; Garden Grove, California; Austin, Texas; Phoenix, Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; Houston, Texas; Tucson, Arizona; Whittier, California; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Amarillo, Texas; Beaumont,
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.301(3) AED (Adult Entertainment) Overlay District
203
Texas, New York City (Times Square); Milford, Massachusetts, Seattle, Washington, and Los Angeles, California the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); “Sexually Oriented Businesses An Insider’s View,” by David Sherman, presented to the Ohio Senate Judiciary Committee on Civil Justice, December 3, 2002; “Secondary Effects of Sexually Oriented Businesses on Market Values” by Connie B. Cooper and Eric D, Kelly and “Crime Related Secondary Effects” by Richard McCleary, Texas City Attorneys Association, 2008; “Rural Hotspots: The Case of Adult Businesses,” by Richard McCleary, 19 Criminal Justice Policy Review 153 (2008); and “Correlates of Current Transactional Sex among a Sample of Female Exotic Dancers in Baltimore, MD,” 88 Journal of Urban Health: Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine 342 (2011); “Adult Businesses & Crime: Seeking A Better Understanding,” Eric S. McCord and Richard Tewksbury, University of Louisville; “Do ‘Off-Site’ Adult Businesses Have Secondary Effects? Legal Doctrine, Social Theory, and Empirical Evidence,” Richard McCleary and Alan C. Weinstein, 31 Law & Policy 218 (2009); “Do Peep Shows ‘Cause’ Crime? A Response to Linz, Paul, and Yao,” Richard McCleary and James W. Meeker, 43 The Journal of Sex Research 194 (2006), the County of Dane, relying upon the experience of other local governments in this state and throughout the country, finds as follows:
(a) That adult entertainment establishments may have an adverse secondary effect on the surrounding community because the sexual nature of the business may, regardless of the intentions of the proprietors, attract persons seeking prostitution or unlawful drugs, or who are inclined to be disorderly or disruptive;
(b) Adult entertainment establishments are an intense commercial use which create a large volume of foot and automobile traffic in the vicinity of the establishment, which may require police and other municipal services which may not be readily available in towns, and which may conflict with the preservation of farmland by encouraging scattered commercial development;
(c) Adult entertainment establishments have their peak activity at hours and days which are incompatible with residential uses, and have a larger customer volume than other entertainment establishments;
(d) Because of the potential for negative impacts on property values, the peace and good order of the community and the welfare of individuals affected by adult entertainment establishments, it is necessary to minimize the secondary effects of adult entertainment;
(e) It is the intent of this section to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Dane County and to further preserve the quality of life and to preserve the urban and rural characteristics of its neighborhoods. The intent of the Adult Entertainment Overlay District is to regulate the location of such establishments.
Limitations.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the regulation of any activities conducted in adult entertainment establishments which are entitled to protection under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, including:
(a) plays, operas, musicals or other dramatic works that are not obscene;
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.301(4) AED (Adult Entertainment) Overlay District
204
(b) classes, seminars, or lectures which are held for a serious scientific or educational purpose and that are not obscene.
(c) rental or sale of video cassettes, DVD videodiscs, or other electronic media for private viewing off the premises.
Determination of obscenity.
Whether or not an activity is obscene shall be judged by consideration of the following factors:
(a) whether the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that the activity taken as a whole appeals to prurient interest in sex;
(b) whether the activity depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, as measured against community standards; and
(c) whether the activity taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
Applicability.
The overlay district shall apply only to lands zoned M-I, Manufacturing and Industrial.
Permitted Uses.
An adult entertainment establishment shall be a permitted use within the overlay district.
Standards for siting of adult entertainment establishments.
Adult entertainment establishments shall meet all of the following requirements:
(a) Location of any particular adult entertainment establishment must be not less than 1,000 feet from any church, synagogue, temple, mosque or any other place of worship, any residentially zoned district, park, school, playground, day care center, public library and any other adult book store or adult entertainment establishment.
1. Measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the premises where adult entertainment is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in sub (a). Presence of a City, County or other municipal boundary shall not affect the calculation and application of the distance requirements of sub (a).
(b) There shall be no display windows on the premises;
(c) The business may have only one (1) non-flashing business sign, and which shall be not larger than 4 feet by 4 feet;
(d) A one square foot sign shall be placed on each public entrance which shall state “Admittance to adults only” and may include other pertinent business information;
(e) The owner and operator of an adult entertainment establishment shall agree to comply with all Federal, State and Local laws and ordinances, including those regulating obscenity and alcoholic beverages, and shall further insure that minors are not allowed on the premises. Solicitation for purposes of prostitution shall be strictly prohibited; and
(f) There shall be no areas in the adult entertainment establishment in which entertainment is
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.301(8) AED (Adult Entertainment) Overlay District
205
provided which are not fully visible from the main area of the establishment. No entertainment may occur in areas of the establishment which are set off by doors, curtains, screens, barriers, café or saloon doors or other obstructions.
Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance shall be severable. The County Board finds that it would have enacted all the provisions of this ordinance on the basis of any one of the findings in section (1).
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.302(1) HD (Historic) Overlay District
206
10.302. HD (Historic) Overlay District
Statement of purpose.
The purpose of the historic overlay district is to effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of such sites and structures which represent or reflect elements of the county's cultural history, and to safeguard the county's historic and cultural heritage as embodied in such sites and structures, expanding upon such protection as is afforded by chapter 157, 1987 Wis. Stats.
Designation.
No site may be designated which is not cataloged and no structure may be designated without the owner's written consent. The County of Dane is hereby deemed to have consented to the designation of all county-owned sites and structures which may hereafter be designated by the park commission with the approval of the county board.
Indication.
Sites and structures which are designated shall be indicated by attaching the suffix "HD" to the zoning district in which the site or structure is located.
Protection of historic sites.
No building or structure, whether or not a permit therefore is required under this ordinance, shall be erected on, and no use which involves soils disturbance shall be made of, any historic site except that with consent of the committee, an owner may remove, replace or add vegetation designed to preserve the site. There shall be a clear area extending 25 feet in all directions from any historic site except that on substandard lots where the clear area distance of 25 feet cannot reasonably be maintained, the clear area distance shall be reduced to a distance equal to twice the depth of any excavation intended to be constructed on the lot or 10 feet, whichever is greater, unless a more restrictive minimum distance is imposed by state statute in which case the statutory minimum shall apply.
(a) The committee is empowered to grant a waiver from the clear zone requirements above for any lot provided that the committee finds that the owner cannot otherwise make reasonable use of the lot for the zoning classification it bears and that the site is preserved intact. The committee shall seek the advice of the park commission when considering any waiver application.
(b) In no event shall a waiver under this section allow a structure to be located closer to an historic site than a distance equal to twice the depth of any excavation intended to be used for that part of the structure closest to the historic site, and in any event not closer than is permitted by statute.
(c) Replacement private onsite sewage treatment systems, and existing roads, including repairs thereto, may be located in clear areas.
(d) Where the designation of a particular parcel of land as an historic site under this ordinance results in a property owner being deprived of all, or substantially all, of the beneficial use
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.302(5) HD (Historic) Overlay District
207
of the property, compensation shall be paid as provided for by law.
Protection of historic structures.
Historic structures may be modified, altered or changed only when necessary to protect the continued existence of the structure or, for other purposes, when done according to the standards outlined by the department of the interior for the restoration, rehabilitation and adaptive reuse of historic structures. The owner of an historic structure who or which has opened the structure to the public may erect and maintain supporting structures, including lighting, protective fences and fire protection systems, as may be necessary for the maintenance or ease of use of the site.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.303(1) NR-I (Natural Resource Identification) Overlay District
208
10.303. NR-I (Natural Resource Identification) Overlay District
Purpose
The Natural Resource Buffer Overlay District (NR-I) is intended to:
(a) Minimize impacts to sensitive environmental features.
(b) Provide more detailed information about potential natural resources or other environmental features to aid in appropriate design and siting of development.
(c) Provide for appropriate review in areas of special concern as identified in adopted town and county comprehensive plans.
(d) Provide buffers and minimize ecological fragmentation of core resources in the NR-C (Conservation) Zoning district.
Permitted and conditional uses
All permitted and conditional uses in the underlying district, provided development conforms to the performance standards described in (4) below.
Additional application information.
Within the NR-I Natural Resources Identification Overlay District, any application for any zoning or conditional use permit must be accompanied by the following:
(a) A site plan meeting all the requirements of s. 10.101(6).
(b) If determined necessary by the zoning administrator, a Preliminary Review Letter from the Dane County Department of Land and Water Resources confirming that erosion control and stormwater management standards under Chapter 14 and/or Chapter 11, Dane County Code can be readily met.
(c) Other natural elements as specifically identified in applicable, adopted town/county comprehensive plans.
Performance standards.
Prior to issuing a zoning permit for any development activity within the Natural Resource Buffer Overlay District, the zoning administrator, or his or her designee, must confirm that any development conforms to the approved site plan for the project.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.304(1) TDR-S (Transfer of Development Rights Sending) Overlay District
209
10.304. TDR-S (Transfer of Development Rights Sending) Overlay District
Statement of purpose.
The purposes of the TDR-S overlay district are to:
(a) Support Transfer of Development Rights, as follows:
1. establish a county-wide framework which allows a participating municipality to transfer development rights within or outside its jurisdiction;
2. reduce spot development of rural land;
3. encourage efficient transportation planning by reducing truly scattered development;
4. encourage environmental preservation by enhancing open space;
5. preserve and enhance property rights;
6. provide support and input into the agricultural community by encouraging the preservation of large intact agricultural areas in some locations and individual farms in other areas;
7. direct development in rural areas away from areas planned for long-term agricultural use;
8. provide a potential for compensation for individuals who do not want to develop their property or who live in communities which wish to restrict development;
9. help Dane County and participating communities achieve the goals and objectives contained in adopted plans;
10. facilitate purchase of development rights programs to protect high-priority natural or agricultural resources; and
11. allow for towns, villages and cities to serve as a clearinghouse for development rights in accordance with adopted land use and comprehensive plans.
(b) Protect property rights. Nothing in this section is intended to restrict, curtail or abridge the rights of property owners to use their property as currently permitted under ordinance, to petition the county board to rezone property or to apply for conditional use permits under ss. 59.69, 91.46 or 91.48, Wis. Stats., or this ordinance. A development proposal which is consistent with adopted plans is not objectionable on the grounds that it is not being undertaken with transferred development rights.
Areas affected.
This district is generally intended to apply to lands identified in adopted town and county comprehensive plans as suitable for:
(a) long-term or permanent agricultural, conservation or natural resource use;
(b) limited or no non-farm development; and
(c) sending areas for a transfer or purchase of development rights program.
Applicable zoning districts.
The TDR-S Overlay district shall only apply in the FP-35 and NR-C zoning districts
Permitted uses.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.304(5) TDR-S (Transfer of Development Rights Sending) Overlay District
210
(a) All permitted uses in the underlying zoning district.
(b) Transfer of development rights consistent with, and at a ratio determined by, an adopted town and county comprehensive plan.
1. Any transferred development rights must be accompanied by a recorded TDR agricultural conservation easement placed on the sending property.
2. The recorded easement must include a legal description of the sending property in accordance with adopted town and county comprehensive plan guidelines, must detail the number of rights transferred or sold, and must describe any receiving property or properties.
3. TDR agricultural conservation easements must list, at a minimum, the county and the town as parties with enforcement rights and must require, at a minimum, the county, the town and the landowner to agree to any amendment of the agricultural conservation easement in writing and after at least one public hearing held by the zoning committee. All such amendments shall be recorded.
4. No third parties with enforcement rights may be added without approval of the Town and the County.
Conditional uses.
All conditional uses in the underlying zoning district.
Area regulations.
All lots in the TDR-S overlay district must meet the minimum lot size of the underlying zoning district
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.305(1) TDR-R (Transfer of Development Rights Receiving) Overlay District
211
10.305. TDR-R (Transfer of Development Rights Receiving) Overlay District
Statement of purpose.
The purposes of the TDR-R overlay district are to:
(a) establish a county-wide framework which allows a participating municipality to transfer development rights within or outside its jurisdiction;
(b) encourage the clustering of rural development;
(c) encourage the efficient provision of services by clustering residential units;
(d) encourage efficient transportation planning by encouraging compact development;
(e) support planning of development in areas which have less impact on key sources;
(f) preserve and enhance property rights;
(g) encourage rural housing that is adequate and affordable for persons from a range of incomes;
(h) facilitate development in rural areas of towns already experiencing or seeking development;
(i) encourage the efficient use of land that has no history of, or is no longer suitable for, agriculture; and
(j) help Dane County and participating communities achieve the goals and objectives contained in adopted plans
Areas affected.
This district is generally intended to apply to lands identified in adopted town and county comprehensive plans as suitable for:
(a) residential development at a density exceeding one dwelling unit per 35 acres; and
(b) receiving areas for a transfer of development rights program
Applicable zoning districts.
The TDR-R Overlay district shall only apply in the Rural Mixed-Use, Rural Residential, Residential and Hamlet zoning districts.
Applicability near incorporated municipalities.
(a) The county board may not rezone to the TDR-R overlay district any parcel wholly or partially within the extraterritorial plat review jurisdiction of an incorporated municipality, as defined in s. 236.02(5), Wis. Stats., unless consistent with an adopted town and county comprehensive plan.
(b) If there are inconsistencies between the comprehensive plans of the town and the incorporated municipality with extraterritorial jurisdiction, prior to county board action the town and municipal governments must resolve the inconsistencies, following the dispute resolution process set forth in their respective comprehensive plans as required by s. 66.1001(2)(g), Wis. Stats.
Permitted uses.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.305(6) TDR-R (Transfer of Development Rights Receiving) Overlay District
212
All permitted uses in the underlying zoning district, provided all of the following criteria are met:
(a) Each new dwelling unit is accompanied by transferred development rights from a parcel or parcels in the TDR-S overlay district consistent with, and at a ratio determined by, an adopted town and county comprehensive plan.
(b) All transferred development rights in (a) above are from TDR-S overlay districts within the same town as the proposed dwelling unit, unless inter-town transfers are expressly authorized in adopted town and county comprehensive plans for both the sending and receiving towns.
(c) The landowner records a notice document for each new dwelling unit that details the number of development rights transferred, describes the sending property or properties, and references the recorded document number of the TDR agricultural conservation easement required under s. 10.304(4)(b).
(d) Copies of any recorded notices and copies of recorded TDR agricultural conservation easements on the sending parcel or parcels in the TDR-S district, must be provided to the zoning administrator before zoning permits will be issued.
Conditional uses.
All conditional uses in the underlying zoning district, provided all of the following criteria are met:
(a) Any application for a conditional use permit in the TDR-R overlay district that would increase the number of permanent dwelling units, except for those uses listed in paragraph (b) below, is accompanied by transferred development rights from a parcel or parcels in the TDR-S overlay district consistent with, and at a ratio determined by, an adopted town and county comprehensive plan
(b) Exceptions. The following conditional uses are not considered an increase in the number of permanent dwelling units and do not require a transferred development right:
1. community living arrangements;
2. attached accessory dwelling units;
3. long-term care facilities; and
4. nursing homes.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.400(1) Changes and Amendments
213
10.400. Changes and Amendments
The Dane County Board of Supervisors may from time to time alter, supplement or change by ordinance the boundaries or classification of districts designated in this ordinance, or any of the provisions of regulations imposed by this ordinance, as provided in s. 59.69(5)(e), Wis. Stats.
10.500. Roles, Responsibilities and Duties
Zoning Administrator
(a) Authority
The position of the zoning administrator shall have all authority, powers and duties as described in Chapters 33, 59, 87, 88, 236, 281 and 295, Wisconsin Statutes, and in Chapters 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 74 and 75, Dane County Code.
(b) Appointment.
The zoning administrator shall hold his or her office under civil service, and vacancies in such office shall be filled by procedures established by the Dane County Civil Service Ordinance. The county executive shall be the appointing authority for the position of zoning administrator.
(c) Powers and Duties.
The zoning administrator, or his or her designee, shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Receive applications, conduct inspections, and approve zoning permits under s. 10.101(1).
2. Provide accommodations for disabled persons under s. 10.102(1).
3. Require and review location surveys under s. 10.101(2).
4. Require, specify standards for, review and approve site plans under s. 10.101(6).
5. Conduct inspections to determine compliance with any provisions of this ordinance, other ordinances cited in (a) above, any permit standards or conditions and to investigate violations. The zoning administrator, or his or her designee, shall have the right to enter upon premises affected by this ordinance at reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection.
6. Issue certificates of compliance under s. 10.101(5).
7. Receive and review applications for conditional use permits under s. 10.101(7).
8. Receive and review petitions to rezone under s. 10.101(8)
9. Investigate any violation of this ordinance or any of the ordinances cited in (a) above, and to use enforcement measures authorized under s. 10.101(4) as necessary to ensure compliance.
10.Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including but not limited to all maps, amendments, conditional use permits, zoning permits, site plans, variances, appeals, inspections, interpretations, applications and other official actions.
11. Advise applicants for development approvals on the provisions of this chapter and assist applicants, to the extent practical, in preparing required permit applications.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.500(2) Roles, Responsibilities and Duties
214
12. Receive, file and forward all applications for all procedures governed by this chapter to the designated official review and approval bodies, along with all appropriate technical information and/or reports to assist such bodies in making their decisions.
13.Make interpretations regarding the provisions of this chapter in a manner that is consistent with the purpose of this chapter, the applicable chapter section(s), and the comprehensive plan. An interpretation may be requested by the owner(s) of a property, the Zoning and Land Regulations Committee, the County Board, or an interpretation may be initiated by the Zoning Administrator. All interpretations are subject to appeal to the Board of Adjustment per the procedures in s. 10.101(9).
14. Provide primary staff support to the Zoning and Land Regulations Committee and the Board of Adjustment, including the scheduling of public hearings and other meetings and site visits and the recording of the actions, recommendations, and minutes of such bodies.
15. Perform all duties related to shoreland and wetland zoning assigned to the zoning administrator, under Chapter 11, Dane County Code, NR 115, Wis. Admin. Code and s. 59.692, Wis. Stats.
16. Perform all duties related to floodplain zoning assigned to the zoning administrator under Chapter 17, Dane County Code, NR 117, Wis. Admin. Code and ss. 59, 59.692, 59.694 and 87.30, Wis. Stats.
17. Perform all duties related to land division and condominium plat review and approval as specified in Chapter 75, Dane County Code.
18. Perform all duties related to mineral extraction reclamation plans assigned to the zoning administrator under Chapter 74, Dane County Code.
19. Perform all duties related to rural addressing and road naming under Chapter 76, Dane County Code.
20. Perform all duties related to height limitations near the Dane County Regional Airport under Chapter 78, Dane County Code.
Zoning and Land Regulations Committee
(a) Authority.
The zoning and land regulations committee shall have all authority, powers and duties as described in Chapters 33, 59, 87, 88, 236, 281 and 295, Wisconsin Statutes, and in Chapters 7, 10, 11, 13, 14, 17, 74 and 75, Dane County Code.
(b) Appointment.
The county board chair shall appoint zoning and land regulations committee members pursuant to s. 7.12, Dane County Code.
(c) Powers and Duties
The zoning committee shall have the following powers and duties:
1. All powers and duties described in s.7.12, Dane County Code.
2. Conduct public hearings in accordance with s.59.69(2)(e), Chapter 985, Wis. Stats. and Chapter 7, Dane County Code.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.500(3) Roles, Responsibilities and Duties
215
3. Review and decide on requests for conditional use permits, including associated site plans where required, following the procedures in s. 10.101(7).
4. Advise the County Board on appropriate amendments to the text of this chapter or to the Official Zoning Map, following procedures established under §59.69, Wis. Stats., and in ss. 10.101(8) and 10.400.
5. Establish rules and procedures for committee meetings and public hearings under Chapter 7, Dane County Code.
6. Perform all duties, related to land division review, including approval of subdivision plats assigned to the zoning committee under Chapter 75, Dane County Code.
7. Review and approve waivers for landscaping standards for manufactured home communities under s. 10.103(14)(f)
8. Review and issue annual licenses for salvage yards and junkyards under s. 10.103(17)(c).
9. Review and approve Planned Unit Development applications under s. 10.291.
10. Review and approve replacement of vegetation or clear zone waivers in the Historic Overlay district under s. 10.302(4).
Town Government
(a) Authority.
Town boards of supervisors generally have powers as described in Chapter 60, ss. 59.69(5) and 59.69(5m), Wis. Stats.
(b) Powers and Duties
Town boards shall have the following powers and duties related to this ordinance:
1. Adoption of the county zoning ordinance under s. 59.69(5), Wis. Stats.
2. Withdrawal from county zoning under s. 59.69(5m), Wis. Stats.
3. Review, approval and denial of conditional use permits under s. 10.101(7)(c).
4. Review, objection and comment on rezoning petitions and ordinance amendments under s. 59.69(5), Wis. Stats.
5. Adoption of town comprehensive plans under ss. 66.1001, 60.23(33) and 62.23, Wis. Stats. and Chapter 82, Dane County code.
6. Receipt of agricultural entertainment, tourism or assembly plans under s. 10.103(3).
7. Receipt of outdoor assembly event plans under s. 10.103(16).
8. Licensing of salvage yards or junkyards under s. 10.103(17)(c).
9. Planned Unit Development review under s. 10.291.
County Board of Supervisors
(a) Authority.
The Dane County Board of Supervisors generally has all powers and duties as described in Chapter 59, Wis. Stats. and Chapters 6 and 7, Dane County Code.
(b) Powers and Duties
The county board of supervisors has the following specific powers and duties related to this ordinance.
1. The chair of the county board of supervisors appoints the Zoning and Land Regulations
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.500(5) Roles, Responsibilities and Duties
216
Committee, subject to Chapter 7, Dane County Code.
2. Review, approval or denial of rezone petitions and ordinance amendments under s.59.69(5), Wis. Stats. and s. 10.400.
3. Adoption, review and amendment of the Dane County Comprehensive Plan under s. 66.1001, Wis. Stats. and Chapter 82, Dane County Code.
4. Adoption, review and amendment of the Dane County Farmland Preservation Plan under Chapter 91, Wis. Stats. ad Chapter 82, Dane County Code.
5. Adoption of town comprehensive plans under s. 10.004(9) and Chapter 82, Dane County Code.
6. Approval of Planned Unit Development General Development and Specific Implementation Plans under s. 10.291(5).
County Executive
(a) Authority
The Dane County Executive generally has all powers and duties as described in s. 59.17, Wis. Stats.
(b) Powers and Duties
The county executive has the following specific powers and duties related to this ordinance:
1. Approval or veto of rezone petitions and ordinance amendments under ss. 10.101(7), 10.400 and s. 59.17(6), Wis. Stats.
2. Appointment of zoning administrator and other administrative staff.
Board of Adjustment
(a) Authority
The Board of Adjustment generally has all powers and duties as described in ss. 59.694, Wis. Stats.
(b) Powers and Duties
The Board of Adjustment has the following specific powers and duties related to this ordinance, and other land use ordinances of Dane County.
1. Hearing and deciding appeals of conditional use permit decisions under s. 10.101(7)(c)4.
2. Hearing and deciding appeals of administrative decisions under s. 10.101(9) and Chapters 11, 14 and 17, Dane County Code.
3. Hearing and deciding variances under s. 10.101(10) and Chapters 11, 14and 17, Dane County Code.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.600(6) Reserved for future use.
217
10.600. Reserved for future use.
10.700. Reserved for future use.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
218
10.800. Subchapter II Sign Regulations
Title
This subchapter shall be known as “The Dane County Sign Ordinance.”
Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination, and other physical characteristics of signs within Dane County in a manner that preserves the right of free speech and expression, and promotes public safety, preservation of scenic beauty, and the implementation of the desired overall character of the community and its constituent zoning districts.
Applicability
The requirements and provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all signs that are erected, relocated, structurally altered, maintained or reconstructed after the effective date of this Ordinance. It shall be unlawful and in violation for any person to erect, relocate, structurally alter, maintain, or reconstruct any sign; except in compliance with the requirements of this section.
Severability
Should any section, clause or provision of this subchapter be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this subchapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
Substitution
Any sign authorized by this Ordinance may contain a noncommercial message, subject to the same regulations applicable to such signs.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
219
10.801. Definitions
As used in this section, the following words shall have the definitions indicated:
Sign
Any object, device, display, structure or part thereof, situated outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
Abandoned sign.
A sign is abandoned if a business advertised on that sign is no longer doing business at that location.
Air dancer
An inflatable object, with or without text, that moves and is designed to attract attention.
Apartment complex sign
A sign that provides identification for an apartment complex on which the sign is located.
Appendage sign
An additional sign mounted above or hung below the primary sign face.
Auxiliary sign
A sign mounted separately and apart from the primary sign
Awning sign
A sign painted or installed on an awning.
Back-to-back sign
Signs that are mounted back to back with the sign faces in opposing directions or on a ‘v-shaped’ frame with an internal angle of less than 40. ‘V-shaped’ frame signs with an internal angle larger than 40 shall be considered side-by-side signs.
Billboard
An off-premise advertising sign with a copy area greater than 96 square feet.
Directional sign
An on-premise auxiliary sign which provides direction for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, e.g., enter, exit, parking, or location of any place or area on the same premise.
Double decked sign
Signs which are mounted one above the other.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
220
Electronic message sign
Any sign, which may or may not include text, where the sign face is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes including television, plasma, and digital screens, holographic displays, multi-vision slatted signs, and other similar media.
Feather flag or feather banner
A sign shaped like a feather or is rectangular in shape designed to move, and that is not permanently attached to the ground.
Graphic sign
A sign which is an integral part of a building façade. The sign is painted directly on or otherwise permanently embedded in the façade.
Ground
The average elevation of the ground upon which the sign supports are placed, except when the sign supports rest upon a berm or other area elevated above the surrounding ground. In such cases, the average elevation of the base of such berm or other area shall be considered as the ground.
Ground sign
A freestanding sign mounted on supports or uprights and whose bottom edge is less than 8 feet above the ground. A monument sign is a type of ground sign and is a two-sided sign attached to a permanent foundation or decorative base and not attached or dependent on support from any building, pole, posts or similar uprights.
Intersection
The point at which the right-of-way lines meet or, for highway interchanges, the beginning and ending points of the on and off ramps. A “t” intersection shall be considered the same as a four-way intersection in the determination of the required distance of signs from said intersection.
Logo
An emblem, symbol or trademark identification placed on signs.
Marquee sign
A sign mounted on an overhanging canopy of a theater, auditorium, fairground, museum or other such use.
Nit
A measurement of visible light intensity used to specify brightness.
Obscene
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
221
Matter which appeals to a prurient interest in sex, as determined by contemporary community standards or portrays sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, lacking any artistic or scientific value.
Off-premise advertising sign
A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere other than upon the premises where the sign is displayed.
On-premise advertising sign
A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment sold, offered or conducted on the same premises that the sign is located.
Private property protection sign
A sign posted on private property in order to deny entry to the general public, pursuant to s. 943.13, Wis. Stats.
Projecting sign
An on-premise sign advertising sign, other than a wall sign which is attached to and projects out from a wall or a building.
Pylon sign
A freestanding sign erected upon one or more pylons or posts the bottom edge of which is eight or more feet above ground level.
Road classification
The system of classifying roads, according to the following:
(a)Class A – All federal and state highways and designated county highways
(b)Class B – All county highways except those designated as class A
(c)Class C – All town roads
Side-by-side signs
Two or more signs mounted adjacently on the same structure. Signs mounted on a 'v-shaped' frame that has an internal angle larger than 40 shall be considered side-by-side signs.
Sign area
The total area which may be used for display of advertising, message, announcement, etc.
Sign face
Sign prepared with the background as part of the face.
Temporary signs
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
222
Signs which are installed for a limited time period for any purpose.. A permanently mounted sign shall not be considered as temporary even though the message displayed is subject to periodic changes.
Trim
A separate border or framing around the copy area of a sign.
V-shaped frame
A sign support structure which will accommodate two signs in a back-to-back position with one end of each sign mounted on a common support with the other sign. The other ends of the signs are mounted on separate, individual supports.
Vehicle sign
Vehicles with signs mounted or painted on them parked off-premise for the purpose of advertising rather than transportation.
Vision clearance triangle
An unoccupied triangular space at an intersection. The triangle is formed by connecting the point where each right-of-way line intersects and two points located at a distance equal to the right-of-way setback distance along each right-of-way line.
Wall sign
A sign mounted on and parallel to a building wall or other vertical building surface. Signs on the sides of a service station pump island roof structure shall be considered wall signs.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
223
10.802. Standards and Requirements for Signs in All Zoning Districts
Prohibited signs
The following signs are prohibited in any zoning district:
(a)Abandoned signs.
(b)Electronic message signs, except as provided in this section.
(c)Double-decker signs
(d)Graphic signs.
(e)Inflatable signs.
(f)Air dancers.
(g)Feather flags.
(h)Mobile signs.
(i)Portable signs.
(j)Noise making, steam emitting, or odor emitting signs.
(k)Obscene signs.
(l)Roof signs.
(m)Signs that block ingress or egress. Any sign that is placed or maintained so as to interferewith free ingress to or egress from any door, window, fire escape or parking lot.
(n)Signs that employ any parts or elements that revolve, rotate, whirl, spin, flash or otherwisemake use of mechanical, human or electronic derived motion, to attract attention.
(o)Signs that imitate or resemble any official traffic sign, signal or device.
(p)Signs on street trees.
(q)Signs on utility poles, electrical boxes, traffic control devices, or other public utilities.
(r)Vehicle signs.
Computation and Rules of Measurement
(a)Measurement of sign area. For purposes of determining compliance with the sign arearequirements of this ordinance, sign area shall be calculated as follows:
1.Measurement of a ground or pylon sign shall be of the sign face excluding thenecessary supports or uprights on which the sign in placed.
2.Sign faces. Where a sign has 2 faces, the area of all faces shall be included indetermining the area of the sign, except where 2 such faces are placed back to back.The area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the 2 faces are of equalarea, or as the area of the larger face if the 2 faces are of unequal area. No sign shallhave more than 2 faces.
3.For wall signs, measurement will be of the sign copy area only.
4.Copy area
The copy area of signs which have a face, border or trim shall consist of the entire surface area of the sign on which copy could be placed. Copy area of a sign whose message is applied to a background which provides no face, border or trim shall be the area of the smallest rectangle which can encompass emblems and other elements of the sign message.
(b)Measurement of sign height
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
224
1.For ground signs and pylon signs, the height shall be measured from the ground level atthe base of the sign to the top edge of the sign.
2.For billboard signs, the height shall be measured from the elevation of the centerline ofthe adjacent road to the top of the sign.
3.For wall signs, the height shall be measured from the base of the building below the signto the top of the sign face.
Location standards for all signs
(a)View blockage. No sign shall be placed in a way that blocks any part of a driver’s orpedestrian’s vision of the road, road intersection, crosswalk, vision clearance triangle,authorized traffic sign or device, or any other public transportation mechanism.
(b)Driveway blockage. No sign may block or interfere with the visibility for ingress or egress ofa driveway. All signs, except auxiliary signs, if within 20 feet of driveway ingress or egress,shall provide a minimum of 6 feet of clearance between ground level and the bottom edgeof the sign.
(c)Vision triangle. No sign shall be located within a vision clearance triangle.
(d)Road right-of-way setback requirements.
1.No sign shall be located within a road right-of-way.
2.All signs shall be setback not less than 5 feet from the right-of-way line, the propertyline, or permanent highway easement, whichever is greater.
(e)Side and rear yard setback requirements. All signs shall be setback not less than 5 feetfrom any side or rear yard, the right-of-way line, property line, or permanent highwayeasement, whichever is greater.
(f)Billboards may not be located within 300 feet of an existing on-premise sign or within1,000 feet of other billboard signs.
(g)Off-premise sign may not be installed within the limits of a curve.
(h)Projecting signs may not be located directly over a public or private street, drive or parkingarea.
(i)Off-Premise signs may not be located within 300 feet of on-premise advertising signs..
(j)On-Premise Advertising Wall Signs shall be mounted flush against the dwelling or buildingin which the business is located.
(k)Buildings which contain multiple businesses shall share the maximum wall sign allowanceby dividing the maximum area by the number of proposed businesses. All business may beafforded a maximum wall sign of 20 square feet, if greater than the maximum wall signlimit for the building.
(l)No sign shall be installed on a roof.
(m)No sign may be located within a permanently protected green space area or mappedwetland area.
Design Standards
(a)No sign shall use any word, phrase, symbol, shape, form or character in such manner as tointerfere with moving traffic, including signs which incorporate typical street-type or traffic
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
225
control-type sign designs and colors. No sign may be installed at any location where by reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape or color it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with, any official traffic control sign, signal or device.
(b)Signs, as permitted, shall be professionally designed, constructed and installed.
(c)Graphics. The lettering on a sign shall be clearly legible and in scale with the sign surfaceupon which it is placed.
(d)Materials. Signs shall be constructed of materials which are of appropriate quality anddurability.
(e)Smooth sign face. No nails, tacks or wires shall be permitted to protrude from the front ofthe sign.
(f)Illumination. All externally illuminated signs shall comply with the following standards.
1.Light, number and direction. Signs that are illuminated from an external source shallhave a maximum of 4 external lights directed at only the copy area from a downwardangle attached to the top of the sign or sign structure. No externally illuminated signshall be up-lit or utilize light directed from the ground towards the copy area.
2.Glare. Light sources shall be effectively shielded to prevent beams or rays of light frombeing directed at any portion of a road or right-of-way that are of such intensity orbrilliance as to cause glare or impair the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle, or thatotherwise interfere with any driver’s operation of a motor vehicle.
3.All light sources to illuminate signs, internal or external, shall be shielded from alladjacent buildings and rights-of-way. Light sources shall not be of such brightness so asto cause glare hazardous to the motoring public or adjacent buildings.
4.No sign shall use flashing, moving, reflecting, or changing light sources. Illuminatedsigns or lighting devices shall employ only a light of constant intensity.
(g)Electronic message sign design. Changing copy and electronic message signs must meet thefollowing requirements.
1.On-premises ground and pylon signs shall be the only type of sign that may incorporateelectronic message components to the sign’s copy area.
2.Electronic message boards are prohibited on the exterior walls of buildings.
3.The electronic message shall not be changed more than once every 6 seconds.
4.Malfunction. In the event of a malfunction in any portion of the electronic messagesign, the sign shall be turned off upon malfunction until the malfunction is corrected.
5.Nits. Electronic message sign copy areas shall not exceed a maximum illumination of5000 nits during daylight hours and 500 nits between dusk to dawn as measured fromthe sign’s face at maximum brightness.
6.Dimming. All electronic message signs shall be equipped with and shall usephotosensitive mechanisms to automatically adjust sign brightness and contrast basedon ambient light conditions.
Maintenance
(a)All signs within the jurisdiction of this ordinance shall remain in a state of proper
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
226
maintenance. Proper maintenance shall be the absence of loose materials including peeling paint, paper or other material, prevention of excessive rust, the prevention of excessive vibration or shaking and the maintenance of the original structural integrity of the sign, frame and other supports, its mounting and all components thereof.
(b)Signs found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be repaired or removed.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
227
10.803. Signs Allowed Without a Permit
Exempt Signs.
The following are exempt from all provisions of this ordinance .
(a)Address, numbers and dwelling unit nameplates.
(b)
(c)Gravestones, symbols or monuments in cemeteries or monument sales lots.
(d)Murals which are a design or representation painted on the exterior surface of a structurethat do not advertise a business, product, service or activity.
(e)Signs accessory to juvenile activities, such as a child’s lemonade stand or temporary play-related sidewalk markings.
(f)Scoreboards and signs on fences and other structures accessory to athletic fields.
(g)Signage which is an integral part of the original construction of vending or similarmachines.
(h)Signs required by other codes, public safety, health and welfare, of specifications requiredby other code or required by this ordinance.
(i)Flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, or other governmental or municipalagencies or unit.
(j)Displays within the confines of a building.
(k)Traffic control devices.
The following signs are permitted without requirement for a permit, subject to any listed standards.
(a)Signs in commercial districts where the parcel’s use includes a drive-through is permittedto have up to 2 ground signs per drive through lane that relate to the drive-through facility,such as menu order board signs or information signs. The drive-through signs may have amaximum height of 8 feet and a maximum area of 32 square feet per drive-through use.
(b)Auxiliary signs posted pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 346.55 shall have a maximum size of 32square feet, shall be erected to a height not to exceed 6 feet, with no more than 2 signsper parking lot. Such signs shall be located on the parking lot of the business advertised onthe sign.
(c)Private property protection signs.
(d)Private property protection signs shall have a maximum size of 1.5 square feet.
(e)Service station island signs.
1.Automobile service stations shall be permitted incidental signs and/or symbols at fuelpumps and service station islands only.
2.The maximum total area of signage at each service island (includes fuel pumps) shallnot exceed 3 square feet.
Temporary signs.
(a)Number. One sign is allowed per parcel. For on premise advertising signs in agriculturaldistricts, there shall not be more than one sign per row of crop.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
228
(b)Maximum size shall be 32 square feet, and maximum height shall be 12 feet
(c)Setback requirements.
1.Must meet requirements of s. 10.803(d) for on-premises ground signs.
2.Must be outside of Vision Clearance Triangle.
(d)Illumination. No temporary signs shall be illuminated or have the potential to beilluminated.
(e)Flashing/moving lights. Signs may not contain flashing lights or moving parts.
(f)Display period. Signs are limited to a period of 30 days two times per year. The 30-dayperiods shall not run concurrently.
(g)Inflatable signs/objects, air dancers, or feather flags shall be prohibited as temporary signs.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
229
10.804. Signs allowed with a permit
The following signs may be permitted in certain zoning districts as shown in the following Table 1 subject to the approval of a zoning permit and the sign design limitations applicable to each type of sign.
Table 1: Signs Permitted with a Permit by Zoning District
Zoning district category
Zoning District
On-Premises
Off-Premises
Wall signs
Projecting
Ground signs < 8’ off ground
Pylon signs (> 8’ off ground)
Electronic message signs*
Billboards
Natural Resource & Recreational
NR-C
RE
P
P
P
Farmland Preservation
FP-1
FP-35
P
FP-B
P
P
P
P
Rural Mixed Use & Transitional
AT-35
P
AT-B
P
P
P
P
AT-5
C
P
RM-8
C
P
RM-16
C
P
Rural Residential
RR-1
C
C
RR-2
C
C
RR-4
C
C
RR-8
C
C
Residential
SFR-08
C
C
SFR-1
C
C
TFR-08
C
C
MFR-08
C
P
Hamlet
HAM-R
C
C
HAM-M
P
P
P
Commercial
LC
P
P
GC
P
P
P
P
P
HC
P
P
P
P
P
P
Processing, Manufacturing & Industrial
RI
P
P
P
P
P
MI
P
P
P
P
P
P
Special Use
PUD
Determined as part of site plan review by Z.A.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
230
*On-premises ground and pylon signs, are the only types of signs that may incorporateelectronic message components to the sign’s copy area.
P = Permitted with a zoning permit
C = Permitted if associated with a use under an approved conditional use permit. Conditionaluse permits may specify additional restrictions on signs.
Auxiliary signs
Auxiliary signs are allowed in all Zoning Districts.
Awning signs
Awning signs are treated the same as Wall signs.
On-premise ground signs
On-premise ground signs are subject to the area and placement regulations of the following Table 2 and the design standards of this section.
(a)Table 2: Dimension and Location Standards for On-Premise Ground Signs
Use
Zoning District
Number Permitted
0-45 mph
46+ mph
Minimum Setbacks (ft.)
Per road frontage
Max area sq. ft.
Max height ft.
Max area sq. ft.
Max height ft.
From lot line
From residential district
Natural Resource & Recreational
RE
1
32
12
32
16
5
25
Farmland Preservation
FP-35
1*
32
12
32
12
5
25
FP-B
1*
32
12
64
16
5
25
Rural Mixed Use & Transitional
AT-35
1*
32
12
32
12
5
25
AT-5
1*
32
12
32
16
5
25
AT-B
1*
32
12
64
12
5
25
RM-8
1*
32
12
32
12
5
25
RM-16
1*
32
12
32
12
5
25
Rural Residential
RR-1
1*
32
12
32
12
5
25
RR-2
1*
32
12
32
12
5
25
RR-4
1*
32
12
32
12
5
25
RR-8
1*
32
12
32
12
5
25
Residential
SFR-08
1*
32
12
32
12
5
25
SFR-1
1*
32
12
32
12
5
25
TFR-08
1*
32
12
32
12
5
25
MFR-08
1
32
12
32
12
5
25
Hamlet
HAM-R
1
32
12
32
16
4
25
HAM-M
1
32
12
32
12
4
25
Commercial
LC
1
32
12
64
16
5
25
GC
1
32
12
64
16
5
25
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
231
HC
1
32
12
64
16
5
50
Processing, Manufacturing & Industrial
RI
1
32
12
64
16
5
100
MI
1
32
12
64
16
5
100
*Crop signs shall have a maximum size of 3 square feet and be erected to a height not to exceed 10feet. There shall not be more than one sign per row of crop.
(b)Monument base required. It is encouraged that ground signs in the county shall be low-level monument ground signs.
On-premise pylon signs
On-premise pylon signs are subject to the area and placement regulations of the following Table 3.
(a)Table 3: Dimension and Location Standards for On-Premise Pylon Signs
Use
Zoning District
Number Permitted
Maximum Area (sq. ft.)
Maximum Height (ft.)
Minimum Setbacks
Per parcel
0-45mph
46+ mph
0-45mph
46+ mph
From lot line
From residential district
Recreational
RE
1
100
200
25
50
5
25
Farmland Preservation
FP-B
1
100
200
25
50
5
25
Rural Mixed Use & Transitional
AT-B
1
100
200
25
50
5
25
Commercial
GC
1
100
200
25
50
5
25
HC
1
100
300
35
50
5
50
Processing, Manufacturing & Industrial
RI
1
100
300
35
50
5
100
MI
1
100
300
35
50
5
100
On-premise wall signs
Wallsigns are subject to the design standards of the following Table 4.
(a)Table 4: Dimension and Location Standards for Wall Signs
Use
Zoning District
Maximum Area (sq. ft.)
Maximum Height (ft.)
Number of Signs Permitted per Building
Number of road frontages on zoning lot
0-45mph
46+ mph
0-45mph
46+ mph*
1
2**
3**
Recreational
RE
100
300
20
50
2
3
4
Farmland Preservation
FP-B
100
300
20
50
2
3
4
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
232
Rural Mixed Use & Transitional
AT-35
100
300
20
50
2
3
4
AT-5
100
300
20
50
2
3
4
AT-B
100
300
20
50
2
3
4
RM-8
100
100
20
20
2
3
4
RM-16
100
300
20
50
2
3
4
Rural Residential
RR-1
100
100
20
20
2
3
4
RR-2
100
100
20
20
2
3
4
RR-4
100
100
20
20
2
3
4
RR-8
100
100
20
20
2
3
4
Residential
SFR-08
100
100
20
20
2
3
4
SFR-1
100
100
20
20
2
3
4
TFR-08
100
100
20
20
2
3
4
MFR-08
100
100
20
20
2
3
4
Hamlet
HAM-R
100
300
20
50
2
3
4
HAM-M
100
300
20
50
2
3
4
Commercial
LC, GC, HC
100
300
20
50
2
3
4
Processing, Manufacturing & Industrial
RI, MI
100
300
20
50
2
3
4
Special Use
PUD
Determined as part of site plan review by Z.A.
*
For buildings 6 stories or more in height, a wall sign may also be located within 20 feet of the top of the building.
**
The maximum size and height of signs on zoning lots with 2 or more road frontages shall be determined by reference to the nearest adjacent road.
In no event shall there be more than two walls signs on any one side of the building. Wall signs shall be located only on the building containing the business advertised on the sign.
(b)Design standards.
1.Wall Signs. Wall signs shall not project more than 1 foot from the building wall to whichit is attached and shall be set back from the end of the building, or party wall line for adistance of at least 3 feet and shall not project above the building wall. Wall signs maybe internally or externally illuminated only in the GC, HC and MI zoning districts.
2.Projecting signs shall have a maximum size of 21 square feet and be installed to aheight not to exceed 15 feet. Such signs shall be located on the building containing thebusiness advertised on the sign.. Projecting signs shall not extend more than 3 feetfrom the face of a building and the lowest portion of such signs shall not be less than 8feet above the finished grade of a sidewalk or other pedestrian way.
Billboards
Billboards shall meet all of the following requirements:
(a)Total sign copy area shall not exceed 300 square feet in area.
(b)Shall be erected to a height not to exceed 35 feet above the centerline of the adjacenthighway at the location of the sign.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(8) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
233
(c)Shall meet all setback requirements for the district in which they are located.
(d)Minimum separation of 1,000 feet from all other billboards.
(e)Billboards may not be located 300 feet of existing on-premise advertising signs.
(f)Intersection regulation: a billboard whose bottom edge is less than 8 feet above thecenterline elevation of adjacent roads shall maintain distance from road intersection asfollows:
1.100 feet where the road speed is 0 to 45 mph and
2.200 feet where the road speed is 46+ mph.
(g)A billboard whose bottom edge is 8 feet or higher above the centerline elevation ofadjacent roads may be located up to the vision triangle line.
Directional Signs
(a)Directional signs shall comply with the location standards of this ordinance.
(b)Directional signs shall have a maximum size of 5 square feet and be erected to a height notto exceed 4 feet, with a total copy area not to exceed 50 square feet.
(c)
10.805. Nonconforming Signs and Use
Nonconforming signs
Signs existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance which do not conform to the provisions of the ordinance shall be nonconforming signs.
(a)Nonconforming signs shall not be rebuilt, altered or moved to a new location withoutbeing brought into compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
(b)Routine maintenance of a sign is permitted unless the cost exceeds 50% of the currentvalue of the sign, if the maintenance cost is more than 50% of the value of the sign saidsign shall be considered rebuilt.
Signs advertising a nonconforming use
Signs advertising a nonconforming use may be continued but such signs shall not expand in number, copy area, height or illumination. New signs may be erected only upon the complete removal of all nonconforming signs.
New copy
Replacement of new skin (printed or painted surface of copy face), must contain the same message. A different message will be considered a new sign, and as such, it must meet current code requirements.
Change of use
Nonconforming signs shall be brought into compliance or removed when the principal use of the premises is changed to a different use.
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
10.800(1) Subchapter II Sign Regulations
234
10.806. Administration
Variances
(a)Variances from the requirements of this subchapter may be granted by the Board ofAdjustment (BOA) upon application to and payment of a fee to the zoning administrator.Variances are limited as specified in this section.
1.Variances may be granted from the maximums of height or area (but not both) for allsigns regulated by this ordinance, except as limited by this section.
2.Variances to maximum of height or area may not exceed maximums specified in thischapter by more than 20%.
3.Variances may not be granted to maximum height, to maximum area or to minimumseparation requirements for off-premise advertising signs.
(b)Variance Standards. Unnecessary hardship must be found as distinguished from a mereinconvenience. The finding of a hardship shall take into consideration the particularphysical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved.
1.The conditions upon which the application for a variance is based would not beapplicable generally to other property similarly situated.
2.The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a desire for economic orother material gain by the applicant or owner.
3.The alleged hardship or difficulty is caused by this ordinance and has not been createdby any person presently having an interest in the property.
4.The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare, or injuriousto other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property islocated.
5.The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacentproperty, endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair property valueswithin the neighborhood.
(c)Conditions on variances. The committee may impose such conditions or restrictions uponthe sign and premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to comply with theabove standards to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such variance upon otherproperty in the neighborhood and to better carry out the general intent of this ordinance.
Applications and Permits
(a)Required materials to be submitted for sign permit applications:
1.Completed application form.
2.Site Plan. The location of all buildings on the lot shall be provided. Distance of theproposed sign to property lines shall be provided. Dimensions of the property linesshall be provided. Site plan shall be drawn to scale using an Architect’s scale (i.e.1/8”=1’0”) or Engineer’s scale (i.e. 1”=10’). +
3.Detailed drawings. Drawings of all proposed and existing signs shall show the design,layout, and dimensions. All drawings shall be to scale using an Architect’s scale (i.e.1/8”=1’0”) or engineers scale (i.e. 1”=10’).
Comprehensive Revision of Dane County Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 10, Dane County Code)
AS ADOPTED BY THE DANE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS JANUARY 23, 2020
0(1)
235
4.Elevation plans. Height of all proposed and existing signs shall be shown. If a sign isproposed to be on a wall, then the entire wall that such sign will be attached must bedepicted showing the location of all proposed and existing signs on said walls. Elevationplan shall be drawn to scale using an Architect’s scale (i.e. 1/8”=1’0”) or Engineer’sscale (i.e. 1”=10’).
5.Illumination. For illuminated signs, the method of illumination shall be provided, as wellas the number and type of luminaires. The statement that the illumination of each signwill comply with the provisions of Section 10.802(4)(f) shall be provided
6.All other information deemed pertinent by the Zoning Administrator or designeethereof, shall be provided.
(b)The Zoning Administrator shall issue a suitable identification tag with each sign permit. Theidentification tag shall be placed on the sign or on a support column in a location that iseasily visible from the road or proximity of the sign.
(c)Fees are established in Chapter 12 of the Dane County Code of Ordinances.
Penalties
(a)Failure to obtain a zoning permit for a sign shall follow the violations and penalties rulesand procedures as defined in Section 10.101(4)

- 1 -
Subdividing and Developing in the Town of Middleton
A Guide to Ordinances & Regulations
December 24, 2019
This guide is provided for informational purposes only as a service to residents and developers and
offers a broad description of the Town’s subdivision and development regulations. It is not
intended to be a substitute for review of the actual regulations nor is it intended to provide legal
advice. The application of the regulations to a specific project often depends on the nature,
location, and scope of the specific project and this guide should not be construed as guarantee or
contract of any nature.
Standards for Land Divisions in the Town:
In general, subdividing property can be accomplished in the Town given the proposal meets certain
basic requirements (see also attached chart):
Density Requirements
The Town’s Chapter 15 Land Division and Subdivision Ordinance sets lot and density standards.
“Traditional” subdivisions in the Town have an overall maximum density of one dwelling unit per
75,000 square feet. “Cluster” subdivisions in the Town have an overall maximum density of one
dwelling unit per 60,000 square feet. This is approximately 0.6 to 0.7 dwelling units per gross acre,
inclusive of roadways, parks, and open space. Subdivisions in the Town’s “Transition Area” have a
maximum density of one dwelling unit per 50,000 square feet, or approximately 0.87 units/acre.
Traditional Subdivisions
In Traditional Subdivisions the minimum lot size is 65,000 square feet. A variance process exists in
the Town’s Chapter 15 ordinance for reducing the minimum lot size. There is no open space
requirement for Traditional Subdivisions, other than parkland dedication requirements (see below).
Cluster Subdivisions
The Town allows Cluster Subdivisions on parcels greater than 15 acres in size. Clustering allows the
subdivider to create smaller individual lots than are normally allowed under traditional subdivision
standards, with a greater amount of space devoted in outlots. The minimum lot size in a Cluster
Subdivision is 25,000 square feet.
The open space requirements vary based on the size of lots being created. For each lot between
25,000 and less than 40,000 square feet, the open space required is 60,000 square feet minus the lot
size. Lots between 40,000 and 65,000 square feet require 20,000 square feet of open space.
If a plat contains a mix of Traditional and Cluster lots, 10,000 square feet of open space is required
for each Traditional lot over 65,000 square feet in size. In these mixed subdivisions, the more
restrictive density standards apply to the entire plat.
Transition Area Cluster Subdivision
A transition area is defined in Town ordinances adjacent to the future City of Madison growth area.
It includes an area 1/2 mile west of Pioneer Road (and Pioneer Road extended) from the southern
extent of the Town up to Old Sauk Road. It allows for slightly higher densities between the future
- 2 -
City and existing Town development. The maximum density for Cluster Subdivisions in this
Transition Area is one dwelling unit per 50,000 square feet (0.87 units/acre). The minimum lot size
is 25,000 square feet (like non-Transition Area Cluster Subdivisions) plus open space requirements,
which are less than are required for a Cluster Subdivision outside of the Transition Area.
The open space required depends on lot size. For lots under 32,700 square feet, the open space
required is 10,000 square feet plus 32,700 square feet minus the lot size. For lots between 32,700
and 65,000 square feet the open space required is 5,000 square feet.
Transition Area Traditional Subdivision.
Traditional subdivisions in the Transition Area (described above) have a maximum overall density of
one dwelling unit per 50,000 square feet. Roadways and required open space may be included in the
density calculations. However, being a Traditional Subdivision, a variance is still required to remove
the minimum lot size requirement of 65,000 square feet per lot. This variance process is outlined in
Town Ordinances.
Certified Survey Maps (CSMs)
Up to 4 lots can be created by use of a CSM. CSM lots have many of the same requirements as
platted lots created as part of a Traditional or Cluster Subdivision, but there are some differences
including:
1. CSM lots must have a minimum lot size of 65,000 square feet (1.5 acres), exclusive of rightof-
way, regardless of location. Specific variance criteria are outlined in the ordinance if this
standard cannot be met.
Parkland Dedication
When land within the Town is subdivided, a dedication of 5,000 square feet of parkland is required
per lot (or per dwelling unit created, whichever is greater). In areas where the Town does not desire
land dedication, a fee of $2,255 per lot in-lieu of parkland dedication is required. The Town’s
Comprehensive Plan, Recreational Trail Plan, Park and Outdoor Recreation Plan, or other plans
indicate where the Town desires trails and parks. It is up to the discretion of the Town Board to
require land dedication, fee in lieu of parkland dedication, or a combination of both.
Other Special Planning Areas
In addition to the standard ordinances, there are 4 specific areas in the Town which have special
controls on land use and subdivision. These areas are:
1. Future City of Madison Area
Lands east of a line roughly defined by the east edge of Pope Farm Park, Pioneer Road, and
Meadow Road (see intergovernmental agreement for definition of Boundary Line) are
subject to City of Madison development standards and possible annexation. Therefore, any
request for subdivision, change in land use, or development needs to be requested from the
City of Madison and Town of Middleton.
2. Madison Intergovernmental Agreement Area
The 2003 City of Madison and Town of Middleton Cooperative Plan specifies standards and
land uses for development within ¼ mile of the future City border described above.
- 3 -
3. City of Middleton Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) Review Area
Certain areas of the Town are within an Extraterritorial Review area and land divisions are
subject to review by the City of Middleton as described by a 1994 Intergovernmental
Agreement. See Agreement or attached map for area and specifications.
4. Tumbledown Neighborhood
In 2005 the Town undertook a neighborhood planning process for the area between
Pioneer, Mineral Point, and Valley View Roads. A future land use and roadway network
plan was developed with recommendations for the future development of the area. See
attached map for Tumbledown Neighborhood location.
Other Issues to Be Aware Of:
Major Roadway Buffer Zones
Development along roadways defined as “collectors” or “arterials” in Town Ordinances is required
to include a landscape buffer of 80’ adjacent to the roadway. Requirements for grading and
vegetation within this buffer can also be found in the Town’s Chapter 15 Ordinance.
Airport Road Impact Fee
The Town has adopted an ordinance to recoup costs associated with the reconstruction of Airport
Road. Each new lot created through subdivision in the designated area (contact Town Engineer for
maps) will be charged $1,155.00.
Application Review Fees
The Town requires a deposit for the review of applications for land divisions and zoning-related
applications. This fee is used to reimburse the Town for its costs in reviewing the proposal,
including costs for the Town Engineer, Planner, and Attorney. This fee must be received by the
Town before any review will take place.
If the applicant is unsure of the project’s feasibility and wishes to have it evaluated as a concept by
the Plan Commission before a formal submittal, the Applicant shall submit a deposit for this initial
review, with the potential of being required to submit an additional deposit upon submitting a
formal proposal. The review fees incurred depend solely on the time required by the Town
Engineer, Planner and Attorney to review the concept or to resolve plat, CSM, zoning, and/or legal
issues.
Rezoning for Land Divisions
When the new County Zoning Ordinance was adopted in early 2019, new zoning districts were
mapped for the Town. The Town policy is that residential parcels under 5 acres that are created by
plat or CSM should be rezoned from AT-5 (Ag Transition zoning, which is intended for unplatted
lands and larger parcels) to SFR-08 (Single-Family Residential zoning intended for residential
developed lots). The Town intends to handle these rezonings through an annual “blanket rezone”
request to Dane County, at no cost to land owners. Rezoning is not required if the current land use
is permitted in the AT-5 district, but not in SFR-08, in which case rezoning to SFR-08 would make
the use “nonconforming” with zoning.
- 4 -
Review & Approval Process
The Chapter 15 Land Division and Subdivision ordinance includes complete details on submittal
requirements and the approval process. Land divisions generally follow the same process:
1. A Preliminary Consultation with Town staff to discuss the general idea and overall
conformance with ordinances.
2. Formal submittal of a CSM or Preliminary Plat is made to the Town Clerk at least 21
days before the Plan Commission meeting where it is to be considered. Copies of the
submittal go to the Commissioners and Town Engineer before the meeting. The Town
Engineer prepares a written review of the land division.
3. At the Plan Commission Meeting, the submittal is reviewed and the Commission makes a
recommendation to approve or deny the land division to the Town Board.
4. At the Town Park Commission meeting, the submittal is reviewed and the Commission
makes a recommendation to the Board regarding parks and trails.
5. At the Town Board meeting, a Public Hearing is held by the Town Board to consider
the land division and invite public input. The Town Board makes a decision to approve,
approve conditionally, or reject the CSM or Plat within 90 days of a complete application.
6. If the Preliminary Plat is approved and a Final Plat is submitted within 36 months of that
approval, the Final Plat is entitled to approval with respect to layout. The Final Plat still has
specific submittal requirements and is reviewed by the Plan Commission, Park Commission
and Town Board.
7. The Town Board makes a decision to approve, approve conditionally, or reject the Final Plat
within 60 days of formal submittal by the applicant. However, the Town Board requires two
meetings on the Final Plat – one to complete the initial review of the plat, and a final
meeting to approve a Developer Agreement and finalize the plat approval, including any
conditions of approval that remain.
NOTES:
1. Applicants are strongly encouraged to meet with the Town Administrator and Town Engineer before preparing
a land division. The meeting is very useful to confirm what is required of the applicant, the timeline for review
and approval, and the anticipated costs to be borne by the applicant.
2. Certified Survey Maps are not required to gain preliminary and final approval. Therefore, the approval process
generally follows steps 1-5 above.
Please refer to the latest Town Ordinances, Town Fee Schedule, and Dane County Zoning Code for
more information on the following:
 Approval Process
 Submittal Requirements
 Landscape Requirements
 Application and Review Fees
M:\Middleton, Town of\_middleton data\Town Forms\Subdividing and Developing in Middleton_122419.docx
May 6, 2019
Open Space
Requirements
(per lot)
Roads
Included?
Parks
Included?
Maximum
Density
Roads
Included?
Open Space
Included?
65,000 sf n/a n/a n/a 1 unit per
75,000 sf Yes Yes
60,000 sf -
[lot size]
20,000 sf
10,000 sq ft
+32,700 sq ft
-[lot size]
5,000 sq ft
65,000 sf n/a n/a n/a 1 unit per
50,000 sf ***
Yes Yes
Notes:
M:\Middleton, Town of\180001_2018 - General\Task 3 Recodification of Town Ordinances\Forms & Procedure Documents\Residential_Dev_Requirements.xlsx
No
Lots sized 40,000 to 65,000 sq ft
Transition Area Cluster *
Lots sized 25,000 to 32,700 sq ft 25,000 sf No
Lots sized 32,700 to 65,000 sq ft
Transition Area Traditional *
No
A subdivision can combine "traditional" and "cluster" lots within a plat.
*Transition Area per Town Ordinances. Note, there is a separate "Transition Area" as detailed in the Intergovernmental Agreement with the City of Madison
existing along Pioneer Road. Generally, this intergovernmental Transition Area is not as restrictive as the Town's Transition Area in terms of density, but is more
restrictive in terms of setbacks and access to Pioneer Road.
**Density requirements are gross calculations; roads and open space are included.
***Although maximum density is 50,000 sq ft, traditional lots in Transition Area are still subject to a mimium lot size of 65,000 sq ft unless a variance is granted.
Town of Middleton: Residential Development Requirements
Yes Yes
Yes Yes
Density Requirements**
1 unit per
50,000 sf
Open Space Requirements
Traditional
Lots sized 25,000 to under 40,000 sq ft
Minimum
Type of Subdivision Lot Size
1 unit per
60,000 sf
Cluster
25,000 sf
Yes (up to
50% of
required
O.S.)
14
12
PD
Timber
High Point
Mid Town
Park
Rosa
Pioneer
Mineral Point
East
M
Watts
Tree
Valley View
Raymond
Gammon
Blackh awk
Swoboda
Frisch
Nesbitt
Elderberry
Westfield
Airport
McKenna
South
Rocky Dell
Rae
Woods
Deming
High
Almor
Elmwood
Inner
Shady Oak
Schneider
Schroeder
Old Sauk
Hubbard
Low
Donna
Jeffy
Twin Valley
Maple Grove
Franklin
Allen
Red Tail
Muir Field
Sawmill
Meadow
Fargo
Vosen
Caribou
McKee
Voss
Maywood
University
Settlers
Toepfer
Odana
Boyer
Century
Hammersley
Old Middleton
Paulson
Beltline
Laura
Redan
Manchester
Putnam
North
Ice Age
Branch
Mound View
Westin
Mica
Wilrich
Lacy
Temin
Harvest Hill
Kottke
Richie
Ozark
Pheasant Branch
Jacobs
Main
Capitol View
Island
Talc
Urich
Brule
Stonefield
Ashworth
Pilgrim
Fourier
Waldorf
Parmenter
Bronner
Hill Creek
Piping Rock
Struck
Enterprise
Schewe
Bear Claw
Junction
18 & 151
South Point
Lisa
Country View
White Crossing
Riva
Clark
Tucson
Mu rphy
Mendota
Forsythia
Ways ide
Cosgrove
Evergreen
Ox Trail
Sabaka
Verona
Nautilus
Fitchrona
Cross Country
Seybold
Yellowstone
Ellington
Enchanted Valley
Big Stone
Farmington
Middleton
High lands
Monticello
Parview
Nine Mound
Kenyon
Felton
Lynn
Thrush
Dolphin
Morey
Plaza
Ritz Barton
Stratton
Nursery
Sonnet
Cooper
Sara
Patty
Marty
Cardinal Point
Goth
Forward
Tribeca
Sequoia
Flagstone
Bergamot
Highfield
Ashton
Welton
Pinehurst
Mayhill
Williamsburg
Hula
Grand Canyon
Koch
Trevor
Betsy
Blackwolf
Tiller
Excelsior
Jeffers
Tramore
Market
Terrace
Black River
Bay Laurel
Elder
Russett
Whittlesey
Welcome
Chapel Hill
Offshore
D'onofrio
Birch Hill
Frigate
Everglade
Friendship
Lone Pine
Mayo
Pleasant View
Wolf
Ancient Oak
Friar
Middleton Beach
Carnwood
Samuel
Landfall
Waterbend
Dylyn
Fernglade
Chester
Amherst
Prairie
Boundary
Heim
Jetty
Smithies
Talons
Swallowtail
Lily
Maurer
Country
Nina
Twinflower
Raptor
Heather Glen
Flower
Dunhill
Discovery
Cimarron
Little Bear
Skyline
Springton
Fortune
Hillcrest
Pine Cone
Leflore
Danville
Shadow Ridge
Harvest Moon
Noll Valley
Saalsaa
Sunshine
Delmara
Tempe
Silkwood
Shooting Star
Ineichen
Commerce
Woodford
Deering
Brandon
Platte
Shady Point
Capitol
Nightingale
Fallen Oak
Vista
Yard
Keswick
Legacy
Serene
Big Sky
Silverbell
Sugar Maple
Baker
Trappers
Sand Pearl
Erdman
Blue Maple
Valley Woods Willow
Sagebrush
Lost Pine
Highwood
Berkley
Turnwood
Elver
Oakbrook
Hills
Water
Shawn
Isaac
Greenway
Paragon
Squire
Pamela
Drumbeat
Woodgate
Briar Haven
Holt
Everest
Colony
Chalet
Woodstone
Oak Hill
Widgeon
Breezy
Dregers
Lois Lowry
Park Edge
Schwartz
Glacier
Jasmine
Brassco
Hickory Ridge
White Oaks
Longview
Kessel
Arc tic Fox
Holiday
Winston
Wh ite Fox
Baltic
Cypress
Karls
Birchstone
Rye
Eddy
Arden
Opus
Hickory Hill
Falcon
Aster
Strathfield
Horizon
Pineview
Kempfer
Serenity
Greenside
Stratford
Teal
Cedar
Montclair
Flagship
Orchid
Fortunate
Larch
Beach
Knights
Lewis
Meriter
Watts
Prairie
PD
Hillcrest
Gammon
High
High Point
12
Terrace
Samuel
Town of Middleton Special Planning Areas
Future Boundary Line Adjusted per City of Madison Cooperative Agreement
Boundary Line per City of Madison Cooperative Agreement
Madison Intergovernmental Agreement Transition Area
Tumbledown Neighborhood
Transition Area (Per Town Ordinances)
Future City of Madison Area of the Town
City of Middleton Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Area
Town areas not within an Intergovernmental Planning Area
City of Middleton
City of Madison
May 8, 2019
.
0 0.5 1Miles
Source: Dane County LIO 2018
T:\CorpClients\Middleton, Town of\Middleton_Town_General\arc\MXD\town_middleton_planning_areas\2019_05_07_special_planning_areas.mxd