The Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. Designation and citation of Code. [Code 1993, § 25.07]
These ordinances shall be known as the "Code of Ordinances, Village of
Mount Pleasant, Wisconsin," and shall take effect from and after passage
and publication, as provided in Wis. Stats. § 66.035. All references to this
Code shall be cited by section number (example: § 13-6).
§ 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction. [Code 1993, § 25.01]
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
GENERALLY — Terms shall be construed in their common and usual
significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated.
ACTS OF AGENTS — When a provision requires an act to be done
which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such
requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by
an authorized agent.
BOARD and VILLAGE BOARD — Whenever the terms "board" and
"Village Board" are used without qualification, they shall read as if the
term "of Mount Pleasant, Wisconsin" followed such terms.
CODE — Whenever the term "Code" is used without further
qualification, it shall mean the "Code of Ordinances, Village of Mount
Pleasant, Wisconsin," as designated in § 1-1.
COMPUTATION OF TIME —
The time within which an act is to be done or a proceeding had or
taken shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last day. When any such time is expressed in hours, the whole
of Sunday and of any legal holiday, from 12:00 midnight to 12:00
midnight, shall be excluded.
(1)
If the last day within which an act is to be done or a proceeding had
or taken falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, the act may be done or
the proceeding had or taken on the next secular day.
(2)
When the last day within which a proceeding is to be had or an
act done, which consists of any payment to or the service upon or
the filing with any officer, agent, agency, department or division of
the state or any county, city, Village, town, school district or other
subdivision of the state, of any money, return, statement, notice
(3)
1:1
COUNTY — The term "county" shall mean the County of Racine,
Wisconsin.
GENDER, SINGULAR AND PLURAL — Every term in this Code and
in any ordinance imparting the masculine gender may extend and be
applied to females as well as males, and every term imparting the
singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons
or things as well as to one person or thing; provided these rules of
construction shall not be applied to any provision which contains any
express language excluding such construction or when the subject
matter or context of such provision may be repugnant thereto.
MONTH — The term "month" shall mean a calendar month.
OATH — The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases where
by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. If any oath or
affirmation is required to be taken, such oath or affirmation shall be
taken and administered before an officer authorized by the laws of the
state to administer oaths, at the place where the oath is required to be
taken or administered, unless otherwise expressly directed, and, when
necessary, duly certified by such officer. If an oath is administered, it
shall end with the term "so help me God." In actions and proceedings in
the courts, a person may taken an oath or affirmation in communication
with the administering officer by telephone or audiovisual means.
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES — Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title, such as "Clerk-Treasurer" or "Health Officer," such
reference shall be construed as if followed by the term "of the Village
of Mount Pleasant, Wisconsin."
or other document, falls on a Saturday and the duly established
official office hours of such officer, agent, agency, department or
division to which such payment is to be made or with which such
return, statement, report, notice or other document is required to
be filed do not include any office hours thereof on such Saturday,
the proceeding may be had or taken or such act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
Regardless of whether the time limited in any statute for the taking
of any proceeding or the doing of any act is measured from an
event or from the date or day on which such event occurs, the
day on which such event took place shall be excluded in the
computation of such time.
(4)
The term "legal holiday," as used in this definition, means any
statewide legal holiday provided in Wis. Stats. § 895.20. When an
act is permitted to be done by the use of the postal service and
the last day within the time prescribed by law for performing such
act falls on a legal holiday designated by the President such that
the postal service does not receive registered mail or make regular
deliveries on that day, the day shall be considered a legal holiday
for the purposes of this definition.
(5)
§ 1-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 1-2
1:2
OWNER — The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, shall
include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a
part of such building or land.
PERSON — The term "person" extends and applies to natural persons,
firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic
and all entities capable of being sued unless plainly inapplicable.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — The term "personal property" shall include
every species of property, except real property.
PRECEDING and FOLLOWING — The terms "preceding" and
"following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — The term "property" shall include real, personal and
mixed property.
REAL PROPERTY — The term "real property" shall include lands,
tenements, hereditaments and all rights and interests thereto and
therein.
SHALL — The term "shall" shall be construed as being mandatory.
SHERIFF — The term "sheriff" shall be construed as if followed by the
term "of Racine County, Wisconsin."
STATE — The term "state" shall mean the State of Wisconsin.
STREET — The term "street" shall include any highway, court, street,
avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane or viaduct in the Village, dedicated
or devoted to public use.
TENANT and OCCUPANT — The terms "tenant" and "occupant," When
applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written
or oral lease thereof or who occupies the whole or part of such building
or land, either alone or with others.
TENSE — Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
VILLAGE — The term "village" shall mean the Village of Mount
Pleasant, Wisconsin.
WISCONSIN STATUTES and WIS. STATS — All references to the terms
"Wisconsin Statutes" and "Wis. Stats." mean the current edition of the
Wisconsin Statutes and includes the most recent biennial session as any
statutes amended.
WRITTEN and IN WRITING — The terms "written" and "in writing"
shall include any representation of terms, letters or figures, whether by
printing, fax, e-mail or otherwise.
YEAR — The term "year" shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise
expressed.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-3. Section catchlines and other headings.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections
and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any
part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.
§ 1-4. History notes.
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are
not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate
the source of matter contained in the sections.
§ 1-5. References to chapters or sections.
All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of
this Code unless otherwise specified.
§ 1-6. Editor's notes and references.
References and editor's notes following certain sections of this Code are
inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling, nor
meant to have any legal effect.
§ 1-7. Effect of repeal. [Code 1993, § 25.06]
(a) The repeal or amendment of any section or provision of this Code, or of
any other ordinance or resolution of the Village Board, shall not:
(1) By implication, be deemed to revive any ordinance not in force or
existing at the time such repeal or amendment takes effect.
(2) Affect any vested right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired,
accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed or amended
unless the privilege of repealing such obligation or privilege has
been reserved by the Village.
(3) Affect any offense committed, or penalty or forfeiture incurred
previous to the time when any ordinance is repealed or amended,
except when any forfeiture or penalty has been mitigated by the
provisions of any ordinance, such provisions shall apply to and
control any judgment to be pronounced after such ordinance takes
effect for any offense committed before that time.
(4) Affect any prosecution for any offense, or the levy of any penalty or
forfeiture pending at the time when any ordinance is repealed or
amended, but the right of action shall continue and the offender
shall be subject to the penalty as provided in such ordinance, and
such prosecution shall proceed, in all respects, as if such ordinance
had not been repealed, except all such proceedings had after the
§ 1-3 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 1-7
1:4
§ 1-8. Certain ordinances not affected by Code. [Code 1993, § 25.05]
time this Code takes effect shall be conducted according to the
provisions of this Code.
(a) All ordinances heretofore adopted by the Village Board are hereby
repealed, except all ordinances or parts of ordinances relating to the
following subjects and not conflicting with any of the provisions of this
Code:
(1) Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred before the effective date of this Code.
(2) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
for the Village or authorizing the issuance of bonds or notes of the
Village, any evidence of the Village's indebtedness, or any contract,
right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation
assumed by the Village.
(3) Any administrative ordinances of the Village not in conflict or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, including, but not
limited to, letting contracts without bids and releasing persons
from liability.
(4) Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in
the Village.
(5) Any ordinance annexing or excluding territory, or extending the
boundaries of the Village.
(6) Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions or
setting salaries of Village officers and employees, or any personnel
regulations.
(7) Any temporary or special ordinance, including, but not limited to,
the joint sewage agreement and related contracts.
(8) Any ordinance calling an election.
(9) Any ordinance authorizing street maintenance agreements.
(10) Any ordinance regarding the lighting of streets and alleys.
(11) Any ordinance naming public grounds and parks.
(12) Any ordinance regarding the establishment of wards, ward
boundaries, aldermanic districts, aldermanic district boundaries
and election precincts.
(13) Any charter ordinance unless repealed by a charter ordinance.
(14) Any ordinance releasing persons from liability.
(15) The Village's schedules of fees and charges.
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-9. Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, as far as they are the same as those
of the Code of the Village of Mount Pleasant, Wisconsin, and of ordinances
existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a
continuation thereof and not new enactments.
§ 1-10. Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any
offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or
any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of
this Code.
§ 1-11. Clerk-Treasurer to file documents incorporated by
reference. [Code 1993, § 25.03]
Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written
or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated
in this Code as if fully set forth in this Code, and the Clerk-Treasurer
shall file, deposit and keep in his office a copy of the code, standard,
rule, regulation or other written or printed matter as adopted. Materials so
filed, deposited and kept shall be public records, open for examination with
proper care by any person during the Clerk-Treasurer's office hours, subject
to such orders or regulations which the Clerk-Treasurer may prescribe for
preservation of such materials.
§ 1-12. Severability of parts of Code. [Code 1993, § 25.02]
(16) Any currently effective resolutions.
(b) All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect
to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. All ordinances are
on file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
(a) Conflict of provisions. If the provisions of the different chapters of this
Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each
chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the
subject matter of such chapter.
(b) Separability of provisions. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause
or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase, or portion thereof. The
Village Board hereby declares that it would have passed this Code and
each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase, or portion thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses or phrases, or portions thereof, may be declared
invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 1-8 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 1-13
1:6
§ 1-13. Amendments to Code. [Code 1993, § 25.08]
As each ordinance or resolution affecting this Code becomes effective, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall forward such ordinance or resolution to the revisor,
who shall incorporate it into the Code. The revisor shall make no
substantive changes to such ordinances and resolutions, but may renumber,
rearrange and edit them without first submitting them to the Village Board,
and such rearranging, renumbering and editing shall not affect the validity
of such ordinances and resolutions or the provisions of this Code affected
thereby.
§ 1-14. Supplementation of Code.
(a) By contract or by Village personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Village
Board. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive
permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the Village Board
or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by
the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code, and shall
also include all Charter ordinances adopted or amended during the
period. The pages of a supplement shall be numbered so that they will
fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages
which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages
shall be prepared so that, when they have been inserted, the Code will
be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance
included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement)
may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do
so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and
other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make
changes in catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to
be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new
material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the term "this ordinance," or terms of the same meaning, to
"this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may
be, or to "sections_____ through_____," inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive
sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
§ 1-15. General penalty. [Code 1993, § 25.04]
§ 1-16. Authority to issue citations; form. [Amended 1-9-2012 by
Ord. No. 01-2012]
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but
in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already
embodied in the Code.
(a) Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of such violation, be
subject to a penalty as follows:
(1) First offense. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $50, nor
more than $500, together with the costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall
be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are
paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance
or part of an ordinance of this Code, who has previously been
convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year,
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100, nor more
than $500, for each such offense, together with the costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs,
shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs
are paid, but not exceeding six months.
(b) Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the
Village from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a
violation of any provision of this Code.
(c) Whenever any person fails to pay any forfeiture and costs of
prosecution upon the order of any court for violation of any ordinance of
the Village, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the
defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue
an execution against the property of the defendant for such forfeiture
and costs.
(a) Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.013, in addition to law enforcement
officers, the following Village officials and their designees are
authorized to issue citations for ordinance violations directly related to
their official responsibilities:
(1) Zoning Administrator.
(2) Plumbing inspector.
§ 1-14 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 1-16
1:8
§ 1-17. Penalties for nonpayment of any invoice; notice. [Ord. No.
6-2008, 6-9-2008; amended 1-9-2012 by Ord. No. 01-2012]
(3) Fire inspector.
(4) Health services coordinator.
(5) Building Inspector.
(6) Highway foreman.
(7) Director of Engineering.
(b) The form of the citation issued under this section shall include all of the
information required by Wis. Stats. § 800.02.
(a) Delinquent charges. All engineering, paving and other charges for
services provided by the Village shall be invoiced by the Village of
Mount Pleasant promptly, and shall include notice of late payment
penalty. Any customer who fails to pay such invoices within a thirty-day
period shall pay a penalty as authorized at 1 1/2% cumulative interest
rate per month (prorated from 30 days after the date of the original
invoice).
(b) Notice of delinquency. The Village of Mount Pleasant Finance
Department will give notice not later than October 15th of each year to
the owner/developer of such lot(s) or subdivision in the Village to which
the Village has furnished services prior to October 1st of that year for
which payment is owed and in arrears at the time of giving the notice.
(1) The notice shall state the amount in arrears, including any penalty
assessed pursuant to the ordinance; and that unless the amount is
paid by November 1st, an administrative charge of $75 will be
added. Unless the amount in arrears and any added penalty are
paid by November 15th, the amount in arrears and any added
penalty will be levied on the tax roll as a special charge against the
lot or a parcel of real estate to which service was furnished and for
which payment is delinquent.
(c) Certificate of delinquency. On November 16th, or as soon thereafter as
is practicable, the finance department shall provide the Village Clerk-
Treasurer a list of all lots or parcels of real estate (giving the legal
description of each) and/or developers or individuals for which notice of
arrears has been made; and any added charges given with respect to
any added unpaid arrearage, stating the amount of arrearage and
added administrative charge of $75.
(d) The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall insert the total delinquent amount
including an added administrative charge of $75 as a special charge
against the lot or parcel of real estate. The Village shall thereafter take
reasonable actions to collect the delinquent amounts, including
interest. Upon collection of any delinquent amounts, including interest,
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:9
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
the Village shall promptly pay such amounts due to our current
consulting engineer.
§ 1-17 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 1-17
1:10
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 2-1. Effective date of ordinances. [Code 1993, § 2.07]
Unless otherwise provided, all ordinances shall be in effect and in force
from and after passage and posting of such ordinances, and published
copies thereof shall have appended thereto the date of first publication.
§ 2-2. Fiscal year. [Code 1993, § 3.02]
The calendar year shall be the fiscal year.
§ 2-3. Elected officials. [Code 1993, § 1.01; amended 1-11-2010 by
Charter Ord. No. 01-2010]
§ 2-4. Appointive officers/department heads. [Amended 1-11-2010
by Charter Ord. No. 01-2010; 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 19-2016]
(a) The elected officials of the Village shall be the:
(1) Village President;
(2) Trustees, at large (six); and
(3) Municipal Judge, multijurisdictional.
(a) Appointed officers. Appointive Officers of the Village of Mt. Pleasant
shall be defined as follows:
Village Administrator
Community Development Director
Chief of Police Department
Chief of Fire Department
Village Clerk
Village Treasurer
"Appointed Officers" other than Police and Fire shall be appointed by a
majority vote of the Village Board for an indefinite term, serving at the
pleasure of the Village Board pursuant to Sec. 17.13(1), Wis. Stats. The
Village Board may appoint one person for Village Clerk and Treasurer
or may appoint separate individuals for each separate position (Clerk
and/or Treasurer).
(b) Department heads. Department heads of the Village of Mt. Pleasant
shall be defined as follows:
Village Administrator
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:11
§ 2-5. Oaths and bonds. [Code 1993, § 1.03]
Elected and appointed officials shall take and file the official oath within five
days after notice of their election or appointment and shall execute and file
the official bond as required by statute and this Code.
§ 2-6. Removal from office. [Code 1993, § 1.04]
Community Development Director
Chief of Police
Chief of Fire Department
Chief Building Inspector
Highway Foreman
Village Engineer/Utilities Manager
Finance Director
Human Resources Director
Village Clerk/Treasurer
IT Director
Municipal Court Clerk
(c) The Village Clerk shall:
(1) Perform duties as outlined in Wisconsin State Statutes § 61.25 as
amended.
(d) The Village Treasurer shall:
(1) Perform duties as outlined in Wisconsin State Statutes § 61.26 as
amended.
(e) Should any section, clause or provision of this charter ordinance be
declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the same shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other
than the part so declared to be invalid.
(f) All ordinances in conflict with any provisions of this charter ordinance
are hereby repealed.
(g) This charter ordinance shall take effect 60 days after its passage and
publication, unless within such 60 days a referendum petition is filed as
provided in § 66.0101, Wis. Stats., in which event this charter ordinance
shall not take effect until submitted to a referendum and approved by a
majority of electors voting thereon as provided by § 66.0101, Wis. Stats.
§ 2-4 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-6
1:12
§ 2-7. Vacancies in office. [Code 1993, § 1.05]
§ 2-8. Salaries. [Code 1993, § 1.06]
The salaries of all elected and appointed officials, including members of
boards and commissions, shall be as determined by the Village Board, when
authorized under Wis. Stats. § 61.32, provided salaries and compensation
rates of elected officials shall not be increased or reduced during such
officials' terms of office.
§ 2-9. Receipt of gifts and gratuities. [Code 1993, § 1.07]
§ 2-10. Facsimile signatures. [Code 1993, § 3.10]
(a) Elected officials. Elected officials may be removed from office by the
Village Board as provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.13(2), or by the Judge of
the circuit court for cause pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 17.13(3), or as
provided by Wis. Stats. § 17.16.
(b) Appointed officials. Appointed officials may be removed from office as
provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.13(1), (3) and 17.16.
(a) Causes. Vacancies in elective and appointive positions are caused as
provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 17.03 and 17.035.
(b) Filling. Vacancies in elective and appointive offices shall be filled as
provided in Wis. Stats. § 17.24.
(a) Restricted. No Village employee or official shall receive or offer to
receive, either directly or indirectly, any gift, gratuity or other thing of
value which he is not authorized to receive from any person who:
(1) Has or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or
financial relationships with the Village or Village Board;
(2) Conducts operations or activities which are regulated by the
Village or Village Board; or
(3) Has interests which may be substantially affected by the Village or
Village Board.
(b) Penalty. The receipt of any gift, gratuity or other thing of value as
denoted in Subsection (a) of this section is contrary to the public policy
of the Village and is punishable as provided in Wis. Stats. § 946.12 and
§ 1-15.
(a) In lieu of the personal signatures of the president and Clerk-Treasurer
on any and all order checks of the Village drawn upon any depository of
the funds of the Village, the facsimile signature of the president and/or
the Clerk-Treasurer may be affixed to any such order check.
(b) This section is enacted in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0607(3), and this section shall remain in full force and effect with
§ 2-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-10
1:13
§ 2-11. Use of Village equipment. [Code 1993, § 11.20]
No individual shall use Village equipment without proper authorization
from the Village foreperson, department head or official. Operation of any
such equipment by a nonqualified person, including persons without a
proper license, experience or other relevant and necessary qualifications, is
prohibited.
§ 2-12. Retention of public records. [Amended 3-8-2010 by Ord. No.
03-2010]
respect of each depository of the funds of the Village until such
depository is notified that this section has been amended or rescinded.
(a) Purpose. Pursuant to Sec. 19.21, Wis. Stats., this ordinance authorizes
the transfer or destruction of obsolete records.
(b) Definitions.
(1) Legal custodian. The individual responsible for maintaining records
pursuant to Sec. 19.33, Wis. Stats.
(2) Record. The meaning as defined in Sec. 19.32(2), Wis. Stats.
(c) General Retention Period. Unless a different retention period is
specifically adopted in the Records Retention Schedule or required by
Wisconsin Statutes, all records shall be retained at least seven years
before destruction.
(d) Records Retention Schedule. The schedule of retention periods
differing from the period prescribed in Subsection (c) above shall be
listed in the Records Retention Schedule of the Village of Mount
Pleasant which shall be on file in the office of the Village Clerk, who
shall keep the same current at all times by such revision as is required
by additions, deletions, and amendments adopted by the Village Board
by ordinance from time to time.
(e) Notification of State Historical Society. At least 60 days prior to the
destruction of any records pursuant to this section, the legal custodian
shall notify the State Historical Society of Wisconsin in writing, unless
the State Historical Society has waived notice for the type of records to
be destroyed as indicated in the Records Retention Schedule.
(f) Destruction Pending Litigation. Notwithstanding the above, no record
subject to pending litigation shall be destroyed until the litigation is
resolved.
(g) Legal custodian(s).
(1) Each elected official is the legal custodian of his or her records and
the records of his or her office, but the official may designate the
Village Clerk or Deputy Clerk to act as the legal custodian.
§ 2-10 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-12
1:14
§ 2-13. through § 2-40. (Reserved)
(2) Unless provided in Subsection (g)(3), the Village Clerk or Deputy
Clerk shall act as legal custodian for the Village and for any
committees, commissions, boards, or other authorities created by
Ordinance or resolution of the Village Board. The following offices
or authorities shall have as a legal custodian of records the
individual so named.
Authority Designated Legal Custodian
General Village Records Village Clerk or Deputy Clerk
Police Department Records Chief of Police
(3) For every authority not specified in Subsections (g)(1) and (2), the
authority's chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the
authority, but the officer may designate an employee of his or her
staff to act as the legal custodian.
(4) Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian
in his or her absence, or in the absence of his or her designee, and
each legal custodian shall send notice of the designated deputy to
the Village Administrator.
(5) The Village Clerk shall establish criteria for establishing the
records system and shall cause the department/office records
system to be reviewed on an annual basis.
§ 2-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-13
1:15

ARTICLE II
Village Board
§ 2-41. Composition; election; term of office. [Code 1993, § 2.01;
amended 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 13-2014; 7-13-2015 by Charter Ord.
No. 04-2015]
The Village Board shall consist of six Trustees and the Village President,
who shall be, by virtue of the office, a Trustee. Three trustees shall be
elected at each annual spring election for a term of two years, commencing
on the third Tuesday of April in the year of their election. Effective with
the Village's Spring 2016 Primary Election and the 2016 Regular Spring
Election, Village Trustees shall be nominated and elected for non-partisan
primaries and elections at large by numbered seats. Prior to the nomination
period for the 2016 election, the Village Board shall assign seats numbered
two, four, and six to the offices up for election in 2016 and seats numbered
one, three, and five to the offices up for election in 2017. The Village
Board shall determine the manner in which the three even-numbered seats
and the three odd-numbered seats are assigned to particular Trustees.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person shall
be eligible to be nominated, elected or to serve in more than one of the
numbered seats for the office of Trustee of the Village of Mount Pleasant
at the same time. The Village President shall be elected in odd-numbered
years to a term of two years.
§ 2-42. Powers. [Code 1993, § 1.10]
The Village Board shall have all powers of the Village not specifically given
to some other body or officer. Except as otherwise provided by law, the
Village Board has power over property, finances, highways, streets, utilities
and the public service and may act for the government and good order of
the Village, for its commercial benefit and for the health, safety, welfare
and convenience of the public, and may carry its powers into effect by
license, regulations, suppression, borrowing, taxation, special assessment,
appropriation, imposition of forfeitures and other necessary or convenient
means. The Village Board may appoint such officials from time to time as
may be deemed necessary for the benefit of the community. In addition, the
Village Board shall have the powers enumerated in Wis. Stats. § 61.34. The
powers hereby conferred shall be in addition to all other grants and shall be
limited only by express language.
§ 2-43. Meetings. [Code 1993, § 2.02; Ord. No. 7-2003, 7-28-2003;
Ord. No. 8-2008, 7-14-2008; amended 11-11-2013 by Ord. No.
05-2013; 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 13-2014; 3-13-2017 by Ord. No.
03-2017]
(a) Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Village Board shall be held
on the second and fourth Mondays of each calendar month, at 6:30
p.m., or such other time as may be established by the Village Board
providing appropriate notice is given in advance of the meeting. Any
§ 2-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-43
1:17
regular meeting falling on a legal holiday shall be held on such date
as designated by the Village Board at the same hour and place. Unless
otherwise specified, all meetings of the Board, including special and
adjourned meetings, shall be held in the Village Hall. The following
protocol is adopted for the conduct of Village Board meetings:
(1) These rules shall remain in effect until repealed or amended by the
Village Board and may be amended from time to time by the Village
Board in accordance with § 2-48.
(2) Whenever a majority vote is required hereinafter, the same shall
mean a majority vote of the Village Board present at a meeting of
the Village Board.
(3) The Village Administrator, in consultation with the Village
President, shall administratively prepare the written agenda for
meetings of the Village Board.
(4) Any member of the Village Board may request an item to be placed
on the agenda by contacting the Village President. Any two
members of the Village Board may compel an item to be placed on
the agenda.
(5) Oral communications by the public to the Village Board at the
meeting of the Board are encouraged, and shall be permitted only
in the following manner:
a. Public Comment Agenda Item.
1. Under the agenda item "Public Comment," speakers
recognized by the President or presiding officer may
address any item. Speakers addressing the Village Board
shall try to limit their remarks to three minutes. It shall be
the prerogative of the President or presiding officer to
allow additional time if circumstances warrant. Speakers
shall state their name and address before addressing the
Village Board.
2. The overall length of the Public Comment agenda item
shall not exceed 30 minutes per meeting.
3. Comments shall be directed to topics subject to Board
action and relating to the Village.
4. All comments allowed are for the purpose of granting
citizens the opportunity to be heard, to express their views
and to inform the Village Board. In no case shall the same
be in the nature of engaging others in public debate.
5. Decorum shall be maintained by using mutually respectful
language, behavior and non-abusive criticism. Foul
language is not permitted.
§ 2-43 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-43
1:18
6. Comments shall not deal in personalities or personal
attacks on others, but focus on issues of broad concern to
the Village.
7. All remarks shall be addressed to the body through the
President or presiding officer; at the discretion of the
President or presiding officer, individual Village Board
members may question a speaker during the Public
Comment section. The Village Board shall take no action
and make no decision on any item presented during the
"Public Comment" section. Instead, the Village Board may
direct appropriate staff to gather additional information on
the item, or may schedule the matter for Board discussion
at a later date.
b. Discussions Relating to Specific Agenda Items. After the
Village Board's discussion of any agenda item, the President or
presiding officer, at his or her discretion, may recognize any
speaker having pertinent information relating to the agenda
item and allow the speaker to address the Village Board.
Speakers shall state their name and address before addressing
the Village Board. Speakers shall try to limit their remarks to
three minutes. It shall also be the prerogative of the President
or presiding officer to allow additional time if circumstances
warrant, and to permit individual Village Board members to
question the speaker regarding the particular agenda item
being discussed.
(6) All meetings of the Village Board shall be transacted as far as
practical in the following order subject to the rules of the Village
Board:
a. Roll Call;
b. Pledge of Allegiance;
c. Community Project Updates;
d. Public Comment and Input;
e. Consent Agenda;
f. New Business;
g. Administrator/Staff Reports;
h. Trustees' and President's Reports;
i. Executive/Closed Session (if necessary);
j. Adjournment. The Village Board may adjourn from time to time
to a specific date and hour, upon a majority vote of the
members present, but not less than three affirmative votes.
§ 2-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-43
1:19
§ 2-44. Presiding officer. [Code 1993, § 2.03]
§ 2-45. Quorum. [Code 1993, § 2.04]
A majority of the members of the Village Board shall constitute a quorum.
§ 2-46. Conduct of deliberations. [Code 1993, § 2.05; amended
1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 02-2011; 9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 13-2014]
k. The Village Board may, by motion, second and majority vote
waive any of the above.
(7) No new item shall be considered by the Village Board after 10:00
p.m., unless a majority of the Village Board votes to consider said
item.
(b) Open meetings; public notice. All meetings of the Village Board,
committees, boards, and commissions shall be open to the public and
preceded by public notice as provided in Wis. Stats. § 19.84.
(c) Closed meetings. Whenever the Village Board or any other commission
or entity subject to the open meeting laws of the state shall lawfully
declare the necessity of holding a closed meeting pursuant to Wis.
Stats. § 19.85, each member and all others present at such meeting
shall keep confidential and not reveal the substance of the meeting until
such time that the matter has been reported out by the Village Board or
other commission or entity acting in open session. For the purposes of
this subsection, the term "confidential" means the release of any
information to unauthorized third persons concerning the subject
matter of the meeting.
(a) Designated. At the stated hour, the president shall call the meeting to
order. If the president is absent at the designated time of any meeting,
the senior trustee present, based on the date of original election, shall
serve as acting president for that meeting.
(b) Duties. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, decide
all questions of order and conduct the proceedings of the meeting.
(c) Appeals of decisions. Any member may appeal from a decision of the
presiding officer. An appeal shall be sustained by a two-thirds vote of
the members, excluding the presiding officer.
(a) Deliberations of the Village Board shall be conducted in the following
manner:
(1) Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the conduct of all Village
Board meetings as far as such rules are not inconsistent with other
rules of the Village or statute.
(2) An agenda for each meeting shall be prepared not less than 72
hours before such regular meeting of the Village Board, and notice
§ 2-43 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-46
1:20
of the meeting and the agenda shall be given to the public in
accordance with law. The agenda shall provide for a time during the
Village Board meeting when the public may be heard concerning
any matter which is relevant to the conduct of Village business.
(3) Trustees shall not address the Village Board until they have been
recognized by the President or presiding officer. Trustees shall then
address the President or presiding officer and confine their
remarks to the question under discussion.
(4) When two or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the
President or presiding officer shall name the member who is to
speak first.
(5) No motion shall be discussed or acted upon until it has been
seconded, unless the rules permit one Trustee to initiate action. No
motion shall be withdrawn without the consent of the person
making the motion and the person seconding it.
(6) When a question is under discussion, no action shall be in order,
except the following motions, which shall have precedence in the
order listed:
a. To adjourn;
b. To lay on the table;
c. To move the previous question;
d. To postpone to a certain day;
e. To refer to a committee;
f. To amend; or
g. To postpone indefinitely.
(7) Any Trustee may demand a roll call vote on any matter, and such
vote shall be entered in the proceedings. A majority vote of all
members of the Village Board in favor of any proposed ordinance,
resolution or appointment shall be necessary for passage or
approval, unless a larger number is required by law. A majority vote
of the members present shall prevail in other cases.
(8) No Trustee shall withdraw from any Village Board meeting before
adjournment without permission of the presiding officer.
(9) A motion to adjourn shall always be in order; and a motion to
adjourn, to lay on the table, and a call for the previous question
shall be decided without debate.
§ 2-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-47
1:21
§ 2-47. Reconsideration of questions. [Code 1993, § 2.06]
Any member voting with the majority may move for a reconsideration of
the vote on any question at that meeting or the immediately succeeding
meeting. A motion to reconsider being put and lost shall not be renewed.
§ 2-48. Amendment of rules. [Code 1993, § 2.08]
The rules set forth in this article shall not be rescinded or amended unless
the proposed amendment or motion to rescind has laid over from a regular
meeting, and then it shall require a vote of two-thirds of all the members of
the Village Board.
§ 2-49. Suspension of rules. [Code 1993, § 2.09]
The rules set forth in this article, or any part thereof, may be temporarily
suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded
vote of two-thirds of the members present.
§ 2-50. through § 2-80. (Reserved)
§ 2-47 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-50
1:22
ARTICLE III
Officers And Employees
DIVISION 1
Code of Ethics
§ 2-81. Purpose. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 11-2014]
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people; that government decisions and policy be made in the best interest of
the people, the community and the government and in the proper channels
of governmental structure; that public offices and employment not be used
for personal gain, and that the public have confidence in the integrity of
its government. To assist in attaining these goals, there is established a
Code of Ethics for all Mt. Pleasant ("Village") officials, including members
of boards, committees, commissions, the Village President and employees,
whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid.
§ 2-82. Policy. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 11-2014]
§ 2-83. Definitions. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 11-2014]
The following definitions shall be applicable in this code:
ANYTHING OF VALUE — Any money or property, favor, gift, service,
payment, advance, forbearance, loan or promise of future employment,
including, but not limited to, remuneration, tickets, passes, lodging, travel,
recreational expenses and admission offered and provided by persons doing
business or interested in doing business with the Village. "Anything of
value" does not include compensation and expenses paid by the Village of
Mt. Pleasant, fees and expenses which are permitted and reported under
Wis. Stats. § 19.56, political contributions which are reported under
Chapter 11 of the state statutes, or hospitality expended for a purpose
unrelated to public business by a person other than an organization.
ASSOCIATED (when used with reference to an organization) — Includes
any organization in which an individual or a member of the individual's
(a) The purpose of this code is to establish guidelines for ethical standards
of conduct for all Village officials and employees by setting forth those
acts or actions which are incompatible with the best interests of the
Village and by requiring such officials and employees to disclose
personal interests, financial or otherwise, that could possibly be a
conflict of interest in matters requiring them to take action or make a
decision.
(b) Nothing contained in this code is intended to deny to any individual the
rights granted by the United States Constitution, the constitution of this
state, the laws of this state or labor agreements between the Village
and its bargaining units.
§ 2-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-83
1:23
immediate family is a director, officer or trustee, or owns or controls,
directly or indirectly, and severally or in the aggregate, at least 10% of the
outstanding equity or of which an individual or member of the individual's
immediate family is an authorized representative or agent.
BUSINESS — Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual or
any other legal entity which engages in profit-making activities.
CANDIDATE FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE — Any person who files nomination
papers and a declaration under Wis. Stats. § 8.10 for the purpose of
appearing on the ballot for election to an office in the Village of Mt. Pleasant
or any person nominated for a Village office in an election through the writein
process and who files a declaration pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 8.10.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Written material or oral information
related to Village government, which is not otherwise subject to the public
records law and which is expressly designated or marked as confidential.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST — A public official's act or failure to act in the
discharge of his/her official duties which could reasonably be expected to
produce or assist in producing a substantial economic or personal benefit
for such official, his/her immediate family or an organization with which he/
she is associated.
ECONOMIC INTEREST — Any interest that will yield directly or indirectly
a monetary or other material benefit to the public official or to any person
employing or retaining the services of the public official, or any member
of the immediate family of said public official, except as permitted by Wis.
Stats. § 946.13.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any interest which would yield, directly or
indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit to the public official or his/
her spouse or to any person employing or retaining the services of the
public official or his/her spouse.
GIFT — The payment or receipt of anything of value without valuable
consideration.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY —
INCOME — The meaning given under the Federal Internal Revenue Code.
INCOMPATIBILITY — A conflict between one's official responsibilities and
personal or economic interest which would prevent the public official from
the complete and proper discharge of his/her official duties.
(a) An individual's spouse; and
An individual's relative by marriage, lineal descent or adoption who
receives, directly or indirectly, more than 1/2 of his or her support
from the individual or from whom the individual receives, directly or
indirectly, more than 1/2 of his or her support.
(b)
§ 2-83 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-83
1:24
ORGANIZATION — Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, trust or other legal entity other than an
individual, body politic or charitable entity.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship,
firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, joint venture, trust, or
other legal entity recognized as such by the laws of the state.
PRIVILEGED INFORMATION — Information obtained under government
authority which has not become a part of the body of public information.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL — Any person holding an elected Village office and
candidates for elected Village office, any person holding an appointed
Village office, all Village department heads, administrative managers,
Village employees, and persons appointed by the President or Village Board
to advisory boards, commissions, committees or panels.
VALUABLE AND SUFFICIENT CONSIDERATION — Payment or
compensation of an amount equivalent to the actual value of any item
received. If the actual value cannot be determined, payment or
compensation of a reasonable value is acceptable.
§ 2-84. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 7-14-2014 by Ord. No.
11-2014]
(a) Violation of work rules. Appointed officials and employees shall adhere
to the rules of work and performance standards established for their
positions. Officials and employees shall not exceed their authority or
breach the law or ask others to do so. They shall cooperate with public
officials and employees from other governmental bodies, agencies, or
jurisdictions unless prohibited by law from doing so. They shall not
disclose confidential information or privileged information gained in the
course of, or by reason of their official positions or official activities.
(b) Use of office for private gain. Public officials may not use their public
position or office to obtain financial gain or anything of substantial
value for the private benefit of themselves or their immediate family, or
for an organization with which they are associated. This includes the
acceptance of free or discounted admissions to athletic or other
entertainment events. This provision does not prohibit public officials
from accepting complimentary tickets or invitations to dinners and
similar functions when invited in their official capacity. Local public
officials are not prohibited from using the title or prestige of their
offices to obtain campaign contributions that are permitted and
reported as required by Wis. Stats. Ch. 11.
(c) Offering or receiving anything of value. No person may offer or give to a
public official, directly or indirectly, and no public official may solicit or
accept from any person, directly or indirectly, anything of value if it
reasonably could be expected to influence the public official's vote,
official actions or judgment, or reasonably could be considered as a
reward for any official action or inaction on the part of the official.
§ 2-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-84
1:25
Candidates for office or public officials may not utilize their vote to
influence or promise to take or refrain from taking official action on
matters under consideration or upon condition that any person make or
refrain from making a political contribution or provide or refrain from
providing any service or other thing of value, to or for the benefit of a
candidate, a political party, any person who is subject to a registration
requirement under Wis. Stats. § 11.05, or any person making a
communication that contains a reference to a clearly identified public
official or candidate for public office.
(d) Taking action affecting a matter in which an official has financial
interest. Public officials may not take any official action that
substantially affects a matter in which the official, a member of the
official's immediate family, or an organization with which the official is
associated has a substantial financial interest. Nor, may the official's
office be used in a way that directly or indirectly produces or assists in
the production of a substantial benefit for the official, or one or more
members of the official's immediate family, or an organization with
which the official is associated.
However, public officials are not prohibited from taking any action
concerning the lawful payment of salaries, employee benefits or
reimbursement of actual and necessary expenses. Nor are the officials
prohibited from taking official action with respect to any proposal to
modify Village ordinances.
(e) Use and Disclosure of Confidential Information. Public officials shall not
knowingly use confidential information for actual or anticipated
personal gain or for the actual or anticipated gain of any other person.
Nor shall public officials, without proper legal authorization, disclose
confidential information gathered in the course of public employment to
an unauthorized person.
(f) Issuance of permits. Public officials empowered to issue a discretionary
permit pursuant to either state or local laws or regulations shall not
issue any such permit to themselves or to any member of that public
official's immediate family without first revealing in writing the request
for such permit to that person's immediate supervisor or to the Village
Board committee that regulates the subject of such permit.
(g) Bribery. Public officials and employees are prohibited from accepting
any money, property or other personal advantage they are not
authorized to receive from anyone who promises this with the intention
of influencing the public official or employee's conduct regarding any
matter in which law is pending.
(h) Misconduct in office. Public officials and employees are prohibited
from:
(1) Intentionally failing or refusing to perform a known mandatory,
nondiscretionary ministerial duty of their office or employment
within the time or in the manner required by law.
§ 2-84 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-84
1:26
(2) Performing an act knowingly in excess of their lawful authority or
one in which they know they are forbidden by law to do in their
official capacity.
(3) Whether by act of commission or omission, exercising a
discretionary power in a manner inconsistent with the duties of
their office or employment or the rights of others and with intention
to obtain a dishonest advantage for themselves or another.
(4) Intentionally falsifying an account, record book, return, certificate,
report or statement in the officers' or employees' official capacity.
(5) Intentionally soliciting or accepting anything of value, known by
the officers or employees to be greater or less than is fixed by law,
for the performance of any service or duty.
(6) Using Village property in a manner that is prohibited by policy, or
that causes unnecessary costs, congestion, disruption or damage to
Village property, or other inappropriate uses which include, but are
not limited to:
a. Intentionally or unintentionally permitting the use of Village
property, equipment or vehicles by unauthorized persons;
b. Using Village logos or titles to misrepresent materials as
official or misrepresenting, either implicitly or explicitly,
personal views or comments as an official Village policy or
position;
c. Using property owned by the Village or services paid for with
Village funds for personal gain or to maintain or support a
private business;
d. Violating any portion of the Village's "computer hardware and
software policies."
(i) Nepotism. Public officials and employees are prohibited from:
(1) Using their public office to obtain employment for the officials'
spouses or dependent relatives. However, if the official is not
involved in the hiring, promotion or conditions of employment, a
qualified spouse or dependent may be hired or promoted.
(2) Advocating for or hiring or promoting, or exercising jurisdiction,
supervision or direction over someone the official is related to as a
parent, grandparent, child, grandchild, sibling, parent-in-law,
grandparent-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, uncle, aunt, niece,
nephew or spouse.
(j) Incompatibility of offices. Officials or employees shall not engage in or
accept private employment or render service, for private interest, when
such employment or service conflicts with the proper discharge of their
official duties or would tend to impair such officials' or employees'
§ 2-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-84
1:27
§ 2-85. Action upon conflict of interest. [Amended 7-14-2014 by
Ord. No. 11-2014]
independence or judgment or action in the performance of such duties,
unless otherwise permitted by law and unless disclosure is made as
herein provided.
(k) Statutory Standards of Conduct. There are certain provisions of the
Wisconsin Statutes which should, while not set forth herein, be
considered an integral part of any Code of Ethics. Accordingly, the
provisions of the following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, as from
time to time amended, are made a part of the Code of Ethics and shall
apply to public officials and employees whenever applicable, to wit:
(1) Sec. 19.41 - 19.59, State Ethics Law.
(2) Sec. 946.10, Bribery of Public Officers and Employees.
(3) Sec. 946.12, Misconduct in Public Office.
(4) Sec. 946.13, Private Interest in Public Contract Prohibited.
(l) Post employment.
(1) No former Village public official, for 12 months following the date
on which he or she ceases to be a Village public official, may, for
compensation on behalf of any person other than a governmental
entity, make any formal or informal appearance before or try to
settle or arrange a matter by calling, writing, or conferring with,
any officer or employee of the department with which he or she was
associated as a Village public official.
(2) No former Village public official, for 12 months following the date
on which he or she ceases to be a Village public official, may, for
compensation on behalf of any person other than a governmental
entity, make any formal or informal appearance before, or try to
settle or arrange a matter by calling, writing, or conferring with,
any officer or employee of a department in connection with any
judicial or quasi-judicial proceeding, application, contract, claim,
or charge which might give rise to a judicial or quasi-judicial
proceeding in which the former Village public official participated
personally and substantially in his or her former official capacity.
(a) If any Village officer or employee who, in the discharge of official duties,
is required to take an action that is prohibited by this article, and which
would result in a conflict of interest, such Village officer or employee:
(1) Shall not take such action;
(2) Shall prepare a written statement describing the matter requiring
action or decision, and the nature of the possible conflict of interest
with respect to such action or decision;
§ 2-84 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-85
1:28
§ 2-86. through § 2-100. (Reserved)
(3) Shall deliver copies of such statement to his/her immediate
superior, if any.
(4) In the case of a Trustee, may deliver a copy of such statement to the
Village Administrator and Village Board. The Village Clerk/
Treasurer shall cause such statement to be printed in the official
proceedings and, upon request, such Trustee shall be excused from
voting, deliberating and taking other actions on the matter on
which a possible conflict exists.
(b) If the Village officer or employee is not a Trustee, his superior, if any,
shall assign the matter to another employee who does not have a
possible conflict of interest. If the Village officer or employee has no
immediate superior, he/she may request permission from the
Administrator to seek advice from a Village Attorney concerning the
potential need to remove himself or herself from influence over actions
and decisions on the matter on which the possible conflict exists.
(c) Nothing in this section prohibits a Trustee from making decisions
concerning reimbursement of expenses, salaries or salary-related
benefits of Trustees."
§ 2-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-86
1:29

DIVISION 2
Personnel
§ 2-101. Village Administrator. [Added 1-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3-2019]
(a) A Village Administrator shall be appointed by the Village Board. The
Village Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the
Village, responsible to the Village Board for the proper administration
of the business affairs of the Village. The Village Administrator shall be
appointed on the basis of merit with due regard to training, experience,
administrative ability and general fitness for the office, by a majority
vote of the Village Board. The Village Administrator shall hold office for
an indefinite term subject to removal at any time by a super-majority
vote of the Village Board. The Village Administrator shall serve at the
pleasure of the Village Board.
(b) No person shall be eligible for said office who shall not have achieved a
bachelor's degree with attainment of a graduate degree(s) in public
administration or related field. Said individual must possess municipal
experience as a municipal manager/Administrator or assistant
manager/Administrator with solid experience and orientation to the
activities of a full-service municipality.
(c) Duties of the Village Administrator:
(1) Carry out directives of the Village Board which require
administrative implementation, reporting promptly to the Village
Board any difficulties encountered.
(2) Be responsible for the administration of all day-to-day operations of
the Village government.
(3) Establish necessary administrative procedures to increase the
effectiveness and efficiency of Village government according to
current practices in local government, not inconsistent with the
general purpose of the position, or directives of the Village Board.
(4) Attend all board, commission and committee meetings of the
Village upon the request of the Chairperson.
(5) Keep informed concerning current federal, state and county
legislation and administrative rules affecting the Village and
submit appropriate reports and recommendations thereon to the
Village Board.
(6) Keep informed concerning the availability of federal, state and
county funds for local programs. Assist department heads and the
Village Board in obtaining these funds under the direction of the
Village Board.
§ 2-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-101
1:31
(7) Represent the Village in matters involving legislative and
intergovernmental affairs as authorized and directed as to that
representation by the Village Board.
(8) Act as public information officer for the Village, at the direction of
the Village Board, with the responsibility of assuring that the news
media are kept informed about the operations of the Village and
that all open meeting rules and regulations are followed.
(9) Establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communications
between citizens and Village government to assure that complaints,
grievances, recommendations and other matters receive prompt
attention by the responsible official, and to assure that all such
matters are expeditiously resolved.
(10) Assist the Human Resources Director when necessary in the
administrative direction and coordination of all employee relations
of the Village according to the established organization
procedures, and union contracts.
(11) Assist the Village Board (where the Board is the appointing
authority) with the appointment, promotion and suspension or
termination of department heads.
(12)With the exception of the Police and Fire Departments, in
cooperation with the appropriate department head, assist with the
appointment, promotion, and suspension or termination of
employees below the department head level.
(13) Assist department heads in the evaluation of the performance of all
employees on a regular basis.
(14) Assist the Village Board in establishing salary and wage scales for
Village employees not covered by collective bargaining
agreements.
(15) Develop and enforce high standards of performance by Village
employees.
(16)Work in conjunction with department heads to assure that Village
employees have proper working conditions.
(17)Work closely with department heads to promptly resolve personnel
problems or grievances.
(18) Assist in labor contract negotiations.
(19) Assist department heads in assuring that employees receive
adequate opportunities for training to maintain and improve jobrelated
knowledge and skills.
(20) Assist (to help, aid) in the preparation of the annual budget with
the Finance Director as adopted by the Village Board.
§ 2-101 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-101
1:32
§ 2-102. Finance Director. [Added 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3-2019]
The Village Board shall direct the Village Administrator to appoint a Village
Finance Director.
§ 2-103. Village Attorney. [Added 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3-2019]
The Village Board shall direct the Village Administrator to appoint a Village
Attorney.
§ 2-104. Village Engineer. [Added 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3-2019]
The Village Board shall direct the Village Administrator to appoint a Village
Engineer.
§ 2-105. Human Resources Director. [Added 1-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3-2019]
The Village Board shall direct the Village Administrator to appoint a Village
Human Resources Director.
§ 2-106. Community Development Director. [Added 1-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 3-2019]
The Village Board shall direct the Village Administrator to appoint a
Community Development Director.
§ 2-107. through § 2-120. (Reserved)
(21) Administer (to manage, direct) the budget as adopted by the
Village Board.
(22) Oversee all contracts for the purchase of equipment, supplies and
property to ensure compliance with the Village's purchasing policy
and contract provisions.
(23) Assist in implementing any policy directives made by the
Committee of the Whole.
(24) For the purpose of enabling the Village Administrator to perform
the duties required of him/her by this section, he/she is hereby
authorized and empowered to engage or employ such assistants as
he/she may deem necessary, providing funds for the same are
provided by the Village Board in the departmental budget.
§ 2-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-107
1:33

DIVISION 3
Clerk-Treasurer
§ 2-121. Clerk's powers and duties. [Code 1993, § 1.11]
The Clerk shall have such powers and perform such duties as prescribed by
law and directed by the Village Board.
§ 2-122. Treasurer's powers and duties. [Code 1993, § 1.12]
The Treasurer shall have such powers and perform such duties as
prescribed by law and directed by the Village Board.
§ 2-123. Clerk-Treasurer's bond; liability for default. [Code 1993,
§ 3.08]
§ 2-124. Temporary investment of funds not immediately needed.
[Code 1993, § 3.09]
The Clerk-Treasurer may invest any Village funds not immediately needed,
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0603(1m).
§ 2-125. through § 2-150. (Reserved)
(a) Bond eliminated. The Village elects not to give the bond on the Clerk-
Treasurer provided for by Wis. Stats. § 70.67(1).
(b) Liability for default. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.67(2), the Village shall
pay all state and county taxes required by law to be paid by the Clerk-
Treasurer to the county Treasurer, if the Clerk-Treasurer fails to do so.
§ 2-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-125
1:35

DIVISION 4
Assessor
§ 2-151. Appointment. [Code 1993, § 1.14]
(a) Selection. The electors of the Village, by referendum vote, have
established that assessors for the Village shall be selected by
appointment. The Village Board, under the options provided by law,
elects not to establish a civil service system for the selection of
assessors and does elect to select such assessors by appointment of the
Village Board on the basis of merit, experience and general
qualifications.
(b) Application. Any person desiring to be considered for appointment as a
Village assessor shall submit a written application addressed to the
Village Board and filed with the Clerk-Treasurer, which application shall
set forth the following information, in detail:
(1) Applicant's name, address and date of birth.
(2) Applicant's current employment and position held.
(3) Employment and positions held by the applicant for the previous 10
years, with the reason for any termination of employment.
(4) Applicant's experience in the field of real and personal property
appraisals and establishment of real and personal property
valuations.
(5) Education and scholastic degrees obtained by the applicant, if any.
(6) Extent and knowledge of state tax laws by the applicant.
(7) Applicant's criminal record.
(8) Whether the applicant is applying for Village assessor or assistant
Village assessor.
(9) Salary at which appointment would be accepted by the applicant.
(c) Investigation. The Village Board may cause such investigation as it may
deem necessary to verify the information submitted as provided in
Subsection (a) of this section or to further inform itself on the merits,
experience and general qualifications of such applicants. From among
the applications submitted, the Village Board shall appoint a person as
the Village assessor and as many assistant Village assessors as it may
deem necessary on the basis of merit, experience and general
qualifications for such offices, and fix the salaries and the terms of
office, which may be of an indeterminate length. No person who holds
the office of Clerk-Treasurer shall be appointed as the Village assessor
or assistant Village assessor.
§ 2-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-151
1:37
§ 2-152. through § 2-180. (Reserved)
(d) Certification. On or before March 15 each year, the Village Board shall
certify to the Clerk-Treasurer the names of such assessor and assistants
and the salaries to be paid to such persons, and the Clerk-Treasurer
shall periodically issue a check on the Village treasury for the payment
of such salaries on a monthly basis.
§ 2-151 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-152
1:38
ARTICLE IV
Boards, Commissions And Committees
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 2-181. through § 2-200. (Reserved)
§ 2-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-181
1:39

DIVISION 2
Plan Commission
§ 2-201. In general. [Code 1993, § 1.20]
§ 2-202. through § 2-220. (Reserved)
(a) The Plan Commission shall consist of seven residents of the Village
which may include two trustees appointed by the Village President in
April for three-year staggered terms, subject to confirmation by the
Village Board.
(b) Any member of the Plan Commission may be reappointed without
limitation as to the number of terms.
(c) The per diem for members of the Plan Commission shall be fixed by the
Village Board from time to time.
§ 2-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-202
1:41

DIVISION 3
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 2-221. Composition. [Code 1993, § 1.23]
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five residents of the Village
appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation of the Village
Board, for terms of three years. The president shall designate one of the
members as the chair. The Zoning Board of Appeals may employ a secretary
and other employees. The president may appoint, for staggered terms of
three years, two alternate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, who
shall act with full power only when a member of the Zoning Board of
Appeals refuses to vote because of interest or when a member is absent.
§ 2-222. through § 2-240. (Reserved)
§ 2-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-222
1:43

DIVISION 4
Board of Review
§ 2-241. Created; terms of office; compensation; officers; reports;
meetings; income and expense information; appeals. [Code 1993,
§ 1.24; Ord. No. 5-2005, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 1-2007, 1-8-2007]
(a) Created. In accordance with Wis. Stats. § 70.46, there is created a
Board of Review for the Village consisting of five members and four
alternates. Such members shall be appointed by the Village Board and
vacancies will be appointed in the same manner.
(b) Terms of office. The first members of the Board of Review shall be
appointed for terms expiring on the last day of April. All subsequent
appointments shall be for terms of five years. The term of office shall
begin upon appointment, confirmation and qualification, and shall
continue until the qualification of a successor.
(c) Compensation. Members of the Board of Review shall receive
compensation for their services of $35 per meeting per member or
alternate and $45 per meeting for the chairperson. Village officials and
full-time employees are hereby exempt from this subsection and shall
not be compensated for their membership.
(d) Officers. Every year, within 45 days after the time designated in
Subsection (b) of this section for the beginning of terms, members of
the Board of Review shall organize, by the election from among their
members, a president and such other officers as they may deem
necessary. The Village Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Board of Review,
and shall keep an accurate record of all its proceedings.
(e) Reports. The Board of Review shall annually, as soon as practicable
after its hearings have been completed, file a report with the Village
Board setting forth the names of all persons who appeared before the
Board of Review objecting to the amount of valuation, the street
address of the property whose valuation was reviewed, the request
made by the persons asking for a review of valuation and the decision of
the Board of Review, together with their findings and conclusions in
regard thereto.
(f) Meetings. The Board of Review shall meet annually anytime during the
thirty-day period beginning on the second Monday of May in the Village
hall. If the assessment roll is not complete at that time, the Board of
Review shall adjourn for such time as shall be necessary to complete
the roll and shall post a written notice on the outer door of the place of
meeting stating to what time such meeting is adjourned. The Board of
Review shall be in session not fewer than two hours between 8:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon on the first meeting day on which the completed
assessment roll is available to the Board of Review.
§ 2-241 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-241
1:45
§ 2-242. through § 2-250. (Reserved)
(g) Income and expense information. Whenever the assessor, in the
performance of his duties, requests or obtains income and expense
information pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), or any successor
statute thereto, then such income and expense information that is
provided to the assessor shall be held by the assessor on a confidential
basis, except, however, that such information may be revealed to and
used by persons in the discharge of duties imposed by law; in the
discharge of duties imposed by office, including, but not limited to, use
by the assessor in the performance of official duties of his office and use
by the Board of Review in the performance of its official duties; or
pursuant to an order of a court. Income and expense information
provided to the assessor under Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), unless a court
determines that it is inaccurate, is, per Wis. Stats. § 70.47(7)(af), not
subject to the right of inspection and copying under Wis. Stats.
§ 19.35(1).
(h) Appeals. Appeals from the decisions of the Board of Review shall be in
accordance with the statutes in such case made and provided.
§ 2-241 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-242
1:46
DIVISION 5
Civic Affairs Committee1
§ 2-251. through § 2-270. (Reserved)
1. Editor's Note: Former Division 5, Civic Affairs Committee, was repealed 5-11-2020 by Ord.
No. 8-2020.
§ 2-251 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-251
1:47

ARTICLE V
Finance
§ 2-271. Budget. [Code 1993, § 3.03]
(a) Departmental estimates. Annually, at a time specified by the Village
Board, the Village administration shall file the following with the Village
Board:
(1) An itemized statement of disbursements made to carry out the
powers and duties of such officer, department or committee during
the preceding fiscal year;
(2) A detailed statement of the receipts and disbursements on account
of any special fund under the supervision of such officer,
department or committee during such year and of the conditions
and management of such fund; and
(3) Detailed estimates of the same matters for the current and ensuing
fiscal years.
(b) Preparation of proposed budget.
(1) Preparer. The Village administration shall annually prepare a
proposed budget presenting a financial plan for conducting the
affairs of the Village for the ensuing fiscal year.
(2) Required information. The budget shall include the following
information:
a. The expense of conducting each department and activity of the
Village for the ensuing fiscal year and corresponding items for
the current year and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for
any increase and decrease recommended as compared with
appropriations for the current year.
b. An itemization of all anticipated income of the Village from
sources other than general property taxes and bonds issued,
with a statement comparing the amounts received by the
Village from each of the same or similar sources for the last
preceding and current fiscal years.
c. An itemization of the amount of money to be raised from
general property taxes, which, with income from other
sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures.
d. Such other information as may be required by the Village
Board and law.
(3) Copies required. The Village shall provide a reasonable number of
copies of the prepared budget for distribution to citizens.
§ 2-271 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-271
1:49
§ 2-272. Budget changes. [Code 1993, § 3.04]
The amount of the tax to be levied or certified and the amounts of the
various appropriations, and the purposes thereof, shall not be changed after
approval of the budget, except by a two-thirds vote of all the members of
the Village Board. Notice of such change shall be given by posting.
§ 2-273. Funds to be spent in accordance with appropriations.
[Code 1993, § 3.05]
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the Village, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance
of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as
authorized by § 2-272. At the close of each fiscal year, any unencumbered
balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be
subject to reappropriation, but appropriations may be made by the Village
Board, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance
of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed
within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until
the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned.
§ 2-274. through § 2-300. (Reserved)2
(c) Hearing. The Village Board shall hold a public hearing on the budget, as
required by law.
(d) Action by Village Board. Following the public hearing, the proposed
budget may be changed or amended and shall take the same course in
the Village Board as ordinances.
2. Editor's Note: Former § 2-274 was repealed 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 04-2011.
§ 2-271 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-274
1:50
ARTICLE VI
Tax
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 2-301. Preparation of tax roll and tax receipts. [Code 1993, § 3.01]
§ 2-302. through § 2-320. (Reserved)
(a) Computation of tax roll. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.65(2), in computing
the tax roll, the Clerk-Treasurer shall insert only the aggregate amount
of state, county, local, school and other general property taxes, minus
credits applied under Wis. Stats. § 79.10(9), except credits determined
under Wis. Stats. § 79.10(7m), in a single column in the roll opposite the
parcel or tract of land against which the tax is levied, or, in the case of
personal property, in a single column opposite the name of the person
against whom the tax is levied. Each tax bill or receipt shall show the
purpose for which the taxes are to be used, giving the breakdown for
state, county, local, school and other general property taxes. The tax
roll shall indicate all corrections made under Wis. Stats. §§ 70.43 and
70.44.
(b) Tax receipts. The Clerk-Treasurer shall enter in each tax receipt given
by the county Clerk for the payment of taxes the name of the person
paying the taxes, if that person is not the owner of the property taxed;
the date of payment; and the aggregate amount of taxes paid. Tax
receipts shall be signed, and a duplicate kept, by the Village Clerk-
Treasurer, after noting the payment of taxes upon the tax roll. The
Clerk-Treasurer shall then deliver the receipt to the appropriate
person.
§ 2-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-302
1:51

DIVISION 2
Room Tax
§ 2-321. Room Tax.
(a) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or group of buildings in which the
public may obtain accommodations for a consideration, including,
without limitation, such establishments as inns, motels, tourist homes,
tourist houses or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses, summer
camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges and cabins and any other
building or group of buildings in which accommodations are available
to the public, except accommodations, including mobile homes as
defined in Wis. Stats. § 101.91 (10), manufactured homes as defined
in Wis. Stat § 101.91 (2), and recreational vehicles as defined in Wis.
Stats. § 340.01 (48r), rented for a continuous period of more than one
month and accommodations furnished by any hospitals, sanatoriums,
or nursing homes, or by corporations or associations organized and
operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes
provided that no part of the net earnings of such corporations and
associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
individual. In this subdivision, "one month" means a calendar month or
30 days, whichever is less, counting the first day of the rental and not
counting the last day of the rental.
OPERATOR — A person, firm or association of any kind which owns a
hotel or motel as defined in this section.
TOURISM PROMOTION AND TOURISM DEVELOPMENT — Any of
the following that are significantly used by transient tourists and
reasonably likely to generate paid overnight stays at more than one
establishment on which room tax may be imposed:
TRANSIENT — Any person residing for a continuous period of less
than one month in a hotel, motel or other furnished accommodations
available to the public.
Marketing projects, including advertising media buys, creation and
distribution of printed or electronic promotional tourist materials,
or efforts to recruit conventions, sporting events, or motorcoach
groups.
(1)
(2) Transient tourist informational services.
Tangible municipal development, including, but not limited to, a
convention center.
(3)
(b) Tax imposed. Pursuant to the authority of Wis. Stats. § 66.0615(1m)(a)
and incorporated herein by reference, the Village hereby imposes a tax
in the amount of 8% of gross receipts from the lease or rental of a hotel
or motel to transient persons within the Village. Any tax so imposed
§ 2-321 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-321
1:53
shall not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by Wis. Stats.
§ 77.52.(2)(a)1.
(c) Reporting required.
(1) Every operator covered by this section shall submit a quarterly
report to the Village Finance Director showing the gross receipts
from furnishing accommodations, together with a copy of the state
sales tax report for the business and the tax due to the Village. The
report, state sales tax report and tax shall be submitted quarterly
by not later than 30 days from the end of each calendar quarter for
the receipts of the past calendar quarter. The quarterly report shall
be signed by the operator and notarized.
(2) The operator may retain $500 plus 1% of the tax collected for
administration.
(d) Tourism Commission.
(1) Creation. There is hereby created a Village of Mount Pleasant
Tourism Commission to coordinate tourism promotion and
development in the Village.
(2) Composition. The Commission shall consist of no less than four but
no more than six members. At least one Commissioner shall
represent the Wisconsin hotel and motel industry. Commissioners
shall be appointed by the Village President and confirmed by a
majority of the members of the Village Board who are present when
the vote is taken.
(3) Term. Commissioners shall serve for a one-year term expiring on
January 1 at the pleasure of the Village President. Commissioners
may be reappointed.
(4) Officers. The Commission shall elect a chairperson, vicechairperson
and secretary at the first meeting held after January 1
of each year.
(5) Meetings. The Commission shall meet regularly and conduct its
proceedings in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order.
(6) Duties.
a. Use the room tax appropriated to the Commission for tourism
promotion and tourism development within the Village and
contract with an organization to perform the functions of a
tourism entity.
b. Report any delinquencies or inaccurate reporting pertaining to
room tax collection to the.
§ 2-321 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-321
1:54
c. Submit a report to the Village Board on or before November 1
of each year itemizing its expenditures and proposing its
budget for the following year.
(e) Appropriation.
(1) The Village shall appropriate 75% of room tax revenue to the
tourism commission.
(f) Enforcement.
(1) The Village adopts by reference the enforcement provisions in Wis.
Stats. § 66.0615 as amended from time to time, including:
a. If the Village has probable cause to believe that the correct
amount of room tax has not been assessed or that the tax
return is not correct, inspect and audit the financial records of
any person operator pertaining to the furnishing of
accommodations to determine whether the correct amount of
room tax is assessed and whether any room tax return is
correct.
b. A forfeiture of 5% of the tax due for failure to comply with a
request to inspect or audit.
c. The Village Finance Director shall determine the tax due in his
or her best judgment if the operator fails, neglects or refuses to
furnish a complete report within 60 days of the date it is due.
d. The amount of tax which the Finance Director determines is
due under Subsection (f)(1)c is additionally subject to 1% per
month payment of the unpaid balance. No refund or
modification of the amount may be made until the operator
files a correct report and allow the Village to inspect and audit
the accommodation's financial records.
e. The Village Board may subject any operator who fails to pay a
tax when due an assessment of up to 25% of the room tax due
or $5,000, whichever is less.
(2) If a false of fraudulent report is filed with the intent to evade the tax
imposed, the Village Board may additionally subject the operator to
an assessment of 50% of the tax due.
(3) Upon conviction for violation of any provision of this section, the
court shall impose the above amounts as forfeitures and order the
payment of the forfeiture, tax and cost of prosecution and, in
default of payment of the forfeiture tax and cost of prosecution,
may order the operator imprisoned for up to 90 days in the county
jail.
§ 2-321 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-321
1:55

DIVISION 3
Payment Distribution for State Property Tax Credits
§ 2-322. Findings. [Ord. No. 7-2019, 2-18-2019]
The Village of Mount Pleasant receives more than $3,000,000 in payments
from the State of Wisconsin for the state school levy, lottery and gaming,
and first dollar property tax credits.
§ 2-323. Authority to notify approval of direct distribution of
property tax credits. [Ord. No. 7-2019, 2-18-2019]
Pursuant to 2017 Wisconsin Act 59, municipalities receiving greater than
$3,000,000 in state property tax credits may notify the state departments
of administration and revenue that the municipality approves the direct
distribution of the property tax credits to the municipality until or unless the
division is repealed, or the property tax credits to be distributed no longer
exceed $3,000,000 annually.
§ 2-324. Notification enacted. [Ord. No. 7-2019, 2-18-2019]
By passage of this division, the Village of Mount Pleasant hereby notifies
the state departments of administration and revenue to make such direct
payments in 2019 and for all subsequent years.
§ 2-325. When effective. [Ord. No. 7-2019, 2-18-2019]
This division shall take effect and be in force and after its passage and
publication.
§ 2-326. through § 2-360. (Reserved)
§ 2-322 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-326
1:57

ARTICLE VII
Claims
§ 2-361. System of approval. [Code 1993, § 3.06(1)]
Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0609, the Village elects the alternative system
of approving certain claims against the Village.
§ 2-362. Payments. [Code 1993, § 3.06(2) — (4)]
§ 2-363. Annual audit. [Code 1993, § 3.06(5)]
The Village Board shall authorize an annual detailed audit of its financial
transactions and accounts by a public accountant licensed under Wis. Stats.
Ch. 442, and designated by the Village Board.
§ 2-364. Fidelity bond. [Code 1993, § 3.06(6)]
The Clerk-Treasurer shall be covered by a fidelity bond in an amount of not
less than $5,000.
(a) Payments may be made from the treasury after the Clerk-Treasurer
audits and approves each claim as a proper charge and endorses his
approval on the claim after having determined that the following
conditions have been complied with:
(1) Funds are available for such payment pursuant to the budget
approved by the Village Board.
(2) The service covered by such claim has been authorized by the
proper official, department head, board or commission.
(3) The service has been actually rendered in conformity with such
authorization.
(4) The claim is just and valid pursuant to law.
The Clerk-Treasurer may require the submission of such proof and
evidence to support the conditions as he, in his discretion, may deem
necessary.
(b) The authority extended in Subsection (a) of this section to the Clerk-
Treasurer shall apply to regular payroll checks of Village employees,
the salaries of elected Village officials and all other financial claims
against the Village which are in the nature of bills and vouchers.
However, no action may be brought or maintained against the Village
upon a claim, unless the claimant complies with Wis. Stats. § 893.80.
(c) No less than monthly, the Clerk-Treasurer shall file with the Village
Board a list of the claims approved, showing the date paid, name of
claimant, purpose and amount.
§ 2-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-365
1:59
§ 2-365. through § 2-400. (Reserved)
§ 2-365 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-365
1:60
ARTICLE VIII
Public Records
§ 2-401. Destruction of obsolete public records. [Code 1993, § 3.07]
(a) Financial records. The Clerk-Treasurer may destroy the following
nonutility records of which he is the legal custodian, and which are
considered obsolete, after completion of an audit by state auditors or an
auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. Ch. 442, but not less than seven
years after payment or receipt of any sum involved in the particular
transaction, unless a shorter period of time has been fixed or will in the
future be fixed by the state public records board pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 16.61(3)(e), and then after such shorter period:
(1) Bank statements, deposit books, slips and stubs.
(2) Bonds and coupons, after maturity.
(3) Cancelled checks, duplicates and check stubs.
(4) License and permit applications, stubs and duplicates.
(5) Official bonds.
(6) Payrolls and other time and employment records of personnel
included under the state retirement plan.
(7) Receipt forms.
(8) Special assessment records.
(9) Vouchers, requisitions, purchase orders and all supporting
documents pertaining thereto.
(10) Vouchers and supporting documents pertaining to charges not
included in plant accounts of municipal utilities and the sewer
department.
(11) Other municipal utility and sewer department records, with the
written approval of the state public service commission.
(b) Utility records. Village officers may destroy the following utility
records, subject to the regulations by the state public service
commission and the Village sewer department, of which they are the
legal custodians and which are considered obsolete, after completion of
an audit by state auditors or an auditor licensed under Wis. Stats. Ch.
442, but not less than two years after payment or receipt of the sum
involved in the applicable transaction:
(1) Water and sewer stubs and receipts of current billings.
(2) Customers' ledgers.
§ 2-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-401
1:61
§ 2-402. through § 2-500. (Reserved)
(3) Vouchers and supporting documents pertaining to charges not
included in plant accounts.
(c) Other records. Village officers may destroy the following records which
are considered obsolete, but not less than seven years after the record
was effective:
(1) Assessment rolls and related records, including Board of Appeals
minutes.
(2) Contracts and papers relating thereto.
(3) Correspondence and communications.
(4) Financial reports, other than annual financial reports.
(5) Insurance policies.
(6) Oaths of office.
(7) Reports of boards, commissions, committees and officials
duplicated in the Village Board minutes.
(8) Resolutions and petitions.
(9) Voter cards.
(10) Traffic forfeiture and ordinance violation case files.
(d) Notice required. At least 60 days' notice shall be given to the state
historical society prior to the destruction of any public record described
in Subsections (a) — (c) of this section.
(e) Interpretation. This section shall not be construed to authorize the
destruction of any public record after a lesser period than that
prescribed by statute or state administrative regulation.
§ 2-401 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-402
1:62
ARTICLE IX
Public Contracts
§ 2-501. Public contractor qualification. [Amended 9-24-2012 by
Ord. No. 08-2012]
(a) Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this section is to ensure that
contractors and subcontractors who perform work on public
improvement projects within the Village are responsible, competent to
perform such work skillfully, capable of completing such work in a
timely manner and sensitive to the necessity of performing such work in
a manner that protects the health, safety and welfare of the public and
minimizes any disturbance, inconvenience or annoyance to the public.
This Ordinance shall apply to all public improvement contracts entered
into by the Village of Mount Pleasant that are estimated to have a
construction contract value of $25,000 or more.
(b) Definitions.
(1) ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Administrator and/or such other
Village staff members or officials as may be designated as the
administrators of this section by resolutions adopted from time to
time by the Village Board; the Village Board, at its discretion, may
perform, in the first instance, any function delegated to the
Administrator by this section.
(2) PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROJECT — Any project within the
Village, or undertaken by or behalf of the Village, involving the
construction, reconstruction, improvement, installation,
remodeling or repair of, or any grading, excavation, drilling, filling,
landscaping or other work in connection with any public
improvement, including without limitation all public buildings,
public street improvements (pavement, curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, culverts, street trees, streetlights and street signs),
public bridges, public sanitary sewerage system improvements and
facilities, public water supply and distribution system
improvements and facilities, public storm sewer and drainage
system improvements and facilities, and public parks and
recreational facilities, or any improvements or facilities that are
intended to become public through dedication to the Village in
connection with an approved land division or otherwise.
(3) PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
trust, body politic or corporate, or any other legal entity.
(4) SUBCONTRACTOR — Any person whose relationship to the
principal contractor is substantially the same, with respect to a
part of the work on a public improvement project, as the latter's
relationship is to the proprietor; a subcontractor takes a distinct
part of the work on a project in such a way that the subcontractor
does not contemplate doing merely personal service.
§ 2-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-501
1:63
(c) Qualification requirement. No person shall be permitted to obtain bid
proposal forms or related plans or specifications from the Village for the
purpose of submitting a bid for work on any public improvement
project, or to submit a bid for work on any public improvement project
without first qualifying for such activities pursuant to the provisions of
this section. Except as permitted by Subsection (d), it shall be unlawful
to, and no person shall, act as a contractor or subcontractor on any
public improvement project within the Village unless such person is
duly qualified pursuant to this section.
(d) Exemption. Any contractor or subcontractor who has submitted a bid to
the Village for work on a public improvement project or who has
entered into a construction contract for work on a public improvement
project prior to the effective date of this section shall be exempted from
this section only to the extent of the work on such project. No lapse,
suspension or cancellation of the qualification of a contractor or
subcontractor under this section shall affect the ability of such
contractor or subcontractor to carry out a contract with respect to a
public improvement project, without penalty, provided that such
contract was entered into in good faith at a time such contractor or
subcontractor was duly qualified.
(e) Qualification application. Any person who wishes to obtain bid proposal
forms or related plans or specifications from the Village for the purpose
of submitting a bid for work on any public improvement project or to act
as a contractor or subcontractor on any public improvement project,
may become qualified to do so by filing with the Administrator an
application for qualification. Each such application shall specify the
categories of public improvement projects for which qualification is
sought and shall be accompanied by a sworn statement of
qualifications. The applicant shall pay to the Village Clerk/Treasurer, at
the time of application, an application fee of $75, or such other amount
as may be set periodically by resolution of the Village Board, to help
defray the costs of reviewing and evaluating the application. All
applications for qualification and all sworn statements of qualification
shall be submitted on standard forms approved by the Village Board
and available from the Administrator. The Administrator may require
from time to time that additional or supplementary information be
submitted by any applicant or any qualified contractor or subcontractor
with respect to particular categories of public improvement projects, or
with respect to a particular public improvement project, or as a followup
to issues raised by a failure to submit the required information, or by
the information initially submitted, or by problems or complaints
generated by work on current or recent public improvement projects,
or by adverse information received from any source.
(f) Qualification categories. The following are the general categories of
public improvement projects on which contractors and subcontractors
may be qualified to perform work pursuant to this section. If applicant
§ 2-501 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-501
1:64
cannot qualify for a general category, please indicate qualification in
related work in individual categories under the general category:
(1) General street construction. The applicant must be capable of the
construction and performance of a complete unit of street
improvement work, including without limitation grading, sub-base
work, base course, masonry, asphaltic or concrete pavement,
miscellaneous concrete structures (including lighting and signal
bases), pavement marking, roadway signage, street lighting, traffic
signals, and related work, or any combination thereof.
(2) General utility construction. The applicant must be capable of the
trenching, excavating, boring, casing installation, bedding and
placing pipe, backfilling, compacting, connecting service lines,
testing, and restoring pavement surface or restoration of nonpaved
areas.
(3) General landscaping. The applicant must be capable of the
excavation to prepare for planting, supplying plant material,
planting ornamental or native plants, shrubs, and trees, capable of
providing maintenance of planted materials including staking,
watering, weeding, mowing, etc.
(4) Invasive species control. The applicant possesses the
understanding of plant identification, particularly the identified
invasive species of the region and has the training, knowledge, and
certification when required to apply herbicide treatments or other
methods of control in environmentally sensitive areas.
(5) General bridge structures. The applicant must be capable of the
construction and/or erection of bridge structures including precast,
cast-in-place, steel, timber, railroad structures, and must be able to
provide a completed ready to use facility including, railings,
ornamental attachments, and painting of the structure.
(6) Railroad construction. The applicant must be capable of excavating
and grading for the track bed, installation of drainage structures,
ballasting, laying or replacement of railroad ties, rails, turnouts,
etc.
(7) General building construction. The applicant must be capable of
the complete construction of building structures including;
erection of frame superstructure, general masonry walls and precast
panels, roofing, HVAC systems installation or repair, electrical
and communications wiring, interior carpentry, glass and glazing,
plumbing, fire protection, site work (including grading, sidewalk
and parking lot), painting both exterior and interior portions of the
building.
(g) Qualification determination. The Administrator shall determine
whether and with respect to which categories of public improvement
projects an applicant is qualified. Such determination shall be made in
§ 2-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-501
1:65
writing as soon as practical after an application and all required
information is filed. In the event that an applicant fails or refuses to file
required supporting or supplementary information within a reasonable
period of time, the Administrator may deny qualification, entirely or
with respect to certain categories of public improvement projects, or
subject any qualification granted to reasonable conditions. The
Administrator may attach to any determination to qualify a contractor
or subcontractor under this section such conditions precedent or
subsequent as may be reasonable in light of the purposes of this section
and the information available to the Administrator.
(h) Notice of determination. The Administrator shall promptly notify the
applicant in writing of any determination made with respect to
qualification. Any determination to deny any qualification sought by an
applicant because of the lack of required information shall specify the
missing information. Any determination to deny any qualification
sought by an applicant, for any reason other than missing information
shall specify with particularity the reasons for such determination. Any
determination to qualify an applicant shall specify for which categories
of public improvement projects the applicant is qualified and any
conditions to which the qualification is subject. In the absence of a
subsequent determination to modify, suspend or cancel the qualification
of a contractor or subcontractor, all determination to qualify an
applicant shall be effective for the remainder of the then-current
calendar year, plus two additional calendar years.
(i) Reconsideration. An applicant may file an application to reconsider a
prior qualification determination at any time. The fee for filing an
application to reconsider prior determination shall be 1/2 the fee for an
initial application, and such application shall be processed in the same
manner as an initial or renewal application. The applicant shall file with
the application an updated sworn statement of qualifications. Any such
statement shall correct all outdated or incorrect information in the
prior statement and shall include any new information upon which the
application is based.
(j) Suspension, modification or cancellation of qualification. If a contractor
or subcontractor qualified under this section fails or refuses promptly
to supply any information requested by the Administrator, or fails to
satisfactorily perform work on any public improvement project, or if the
Administrator receives material new information regarding the
responsibility, competence or capability of the contractor or
subcontractor, or its sensitivity to the necessity of performing work on
public improvement projects in such a way as to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public and to minimize any disturbance,
inconvenience or annoyance to the public, which demonstrates that a
prior qualification determination is no longer justified, the
Administrator may suspend, modify, cancel or subject to new conditions
the qualification of such contractor or subcontractor, as may be
reasonable in light of the purposes of this section and the information
§ 2-501 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-501
1:66
§ 2-502. Final acceptance of construction of public facilities.
[Amended 9-24-2012 by Ord. No. 08-2012]
available to the Administrator. If the Administrator determines that
materially-false information was submitted on a statement of
qualifications filed with the Village, the Administrator shall cancel the
qualification of such contractor or subcontractor, and such contractor
or subcontractor shall be ineligible for qualification for one year from
the date of cancellation. Written notice of any action taken under this
subsection shall be provided to the contractor or subcontractor.
(k) Appeal. Any person aggrieved by any determination made by the
Administrator pursuant to this section may appeal such determination
to the Village Board by filing with the Village Administrator or the
Village Administrator designee a notice of appeal specifying with
particularity the determination appealed from and all specific grounds
for believing that the Administrator's determination is erroneous. Any
such notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the date of the
Administrator's written determination. The appellant shall pay to the
Clerk/Treasurer, at the time of filing the notice of appeal, an appeal fee
of $25, or such other amount as may be set periodically by resolution of
the Village Board, to help defray the costs of appeal. A properly filed
appeal shall be given a public hearing before the Village Board. The
appellant shall be given not less than 10 days' advance written notice of
the date, time and place of the hearing. The appellant may be
represented by counsel at the hearing, may present evidence and
argument relevant to the issues raised by the notice of appeal, and may
question witnesses called to support the Administrator's determination.
The Administrator may also present evidence and argument in favor of
the determination, and question witnesses called to support the
appellant's position. The appellant shall have the burden of proving that
it is qualified and that any conditions imposed on its qualification are
not reasonable. The Village Board may reverse, affirm or modify the
determination of the Administrator, and the Board's decision shall be
final. The Village Board shall promptly notify the appellant of its
findings in writing.
(l) Confidentiality. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0901(2), the contents of any
statement of qualifications or any related information, including any
additional, updated or supplemental information, filed by a person
pursuant to this section shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed
except upon the written order of such person, or for necessary use by
the Administrator or the Village Board in qualifying such person, or in
cases of legal or administrative action against or by such person, or
against or by the Administrator or the Village.
(a) The Director of Engineering, or other designated person, will make an
inspection of the work included in the construction of all public
facilities as soon as practical after the contractor provides notification
and confirmation is provided by the construction inspector that such
§ 2-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-502
1:67
work has, in their opinion, been completed and final clean-up
performed.
(b) Should the inspection disclose any work, in whole or in part, as being
unsatisfactory in its conformance with the approved plans, supply of
materials, or quality of construction, the Director of Engineering shall
give the contractor the necessary instructions for correction of the
same, and the contractor shall immediately comply with and execute
such instructions. Upon correction of the work, another inspection will
be made, which will constitute the final inspection provided the work
has been satisfactorily completed.
(c) When all work has been completed, in the opinion of the Director of
Engineering, the Village will make the final acceptance and will certify
the date of completion of such work and the warranty period as it may
apply.
§ 2-502 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 2-502
1:68
Chapter 6
ALCOHOL AND ALCOHOL BEVERAGES
§ 2-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-502
1:69

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 6-1. State statute adopted. [Code 1993, § 12.03(1)]
The provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 125, including all provisions relating to
underage persons, are adopted and made part of this chapter by reference.
A violation of any of such provisions shall constitute a violation of this
section.
§ 6-2. Licenses, permits and other authorizations. [Code 1993,
§ 12.03(2)]
§ 6-3. Inspections. [Code 1993, § 12.02(13)]
§ 6-4. Issuance of license for sales in dwellings. [Code 1993,
§ 12.03(6)(k)]
No license shall be issued to any person for the purpose of possessing,
selling or offering for sale any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverage in any dwelling, house, flat or residential apartment.
§ 6-5. License fees. [Code 1993, § 12.02(4)]
(a) Required. Except as provided by Wis. Stats. § 125.06, no person within
the Village shall serve, sell, manufacture, rectify, brew or engage in any
other activity for which this chapter or Wis. Stats. Ch. 125 requires a
license, permit or other authorization, without holding the appropriate
license, permit or other authorization as provided in this chapter.
(b) Licensees with multiple locations or premises. Except for licensed
public warehouses, a license shall be required for each location or
premises where alcohol beverages are stored, sold or offered for sale.
(a) Consent. An applicant for a license under this chapter thereby consents
to the entry of police or authorized representatives of the Village upon
the licensed premises at all reasonable hours for the purposes of
inspection and search, and consents to removal from the premises and
introduction into evidence in prosecutions for violations of this chapter
all things found therein in violation of this chapter or law.
(b) Reinspections. License fees cover the costs of an initial inspection and
one reinspection. Second and subsequent reinspections require a
reinspection fee as set by the Village Board.
(a) Required with application. License fees imposed under § 6-8 shall
accompany the license application. If a license is granted, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall issue the applicant a receipt for the license fee.
(b) Refunds. No fee paid shall be refunded unless the license is denied,
with the exception of an alcohol beverage license. Denial of any other
license shall result in a refund of the license fee, less a $25 service
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-5
1:71
§ 6-6. Classes of licenses and fees. [Code 1993, § 12.03(3); amended
6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 03-2015; 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 14-2017]
§ 6-7. Wine sampling on retail "Class A" liquor license premises.
[Ord. No. 1302, 12-9-2002; Ord. of 12-10-2002]
charge or the actual license fee, whichever is less. When the holder
of an alcohol beverage license shall surrender such license, the holder
shall be entitled to a prorated refund of the unearned license fee, minus
a service charge of $25.
(a) There shall be the following classes and denominations of licenses
which, when issued by the Clerk-Treasurer under the authority of the
Village Board, shall allow the licensee to sell, deal or traffic in
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages as provided in the
referenced statute. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the
full license fee on file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office shall be charged for
the whole or fraction of any year.
(1) Class "A" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. See Wis.
Stats. § 125.25.
(2) Class "B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license. See Wis.
Stats. § 125.26.
a. Part-time. A license may be issued at any time for six months in
any calendar year, for which 50% of the applicable license fee
shall be paid, but such temporary license shall not be
renewable during the calendar year in which license is issued.
See Wis. Stats. § 125.26(5).
b. Temporary Class "B". See Wis. Stats. § 125.26(6).
(3) Retail "class A" liquor license. See Wis. Stats. § 125.51(2).
(4) Retail "class B" liquor license. See Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3).
(5) Retail "class C" liquor license. See Wis. Stats. § 135.51(3)(m).
(a) The provision of wine taste samples, of not more than three fluid ounces
each, free of charge, by a "class A" licensee to customers and visitors
for consumption on the premises is permissible as follows:
(1) No "class A" licensee may provide more than two taste samples per
day to any one person. This subsection applies only between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. — 6:00 p.m. Notwithstanding Wis. Stats.
§ 125.07(1)(a)1, no "class A" licensee may provide taste samples
under this subsection to any underage person.
(2) No "class A" licensee may provide, as taste samples under this
Subsection (a), wine that the "class A" licensee did not purchase
from a wholesaler.
§ 6-5 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 6-7
1:72
§ 6-8. License and annual fee required. [Code 1993, § 12.01(1), (2),
(12); amended 6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 03-2015; 9-25-2017 by Ord. No.
14-2017]
§ 6-9. Operator's license. [Code 1993, § 12.03(15)]
(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this section, the
authority provide wine taste samples is conditioned that:
(1) The Village Board shall require an operator's/bartender's license to
conduct the wine tasting.
(2) The Village Board may limit the location of wine tasting to the
liquor department only.
(3) The Police Chief shall be notified prior to the wine tasting.
(4) An application must be completed by the "class A" license holder.
(a) Unless otherwise indicated, a license and annual fee shall be required
as follows:
(1) Fermented malt beverages:
a. Retail Class "A." On file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
b. Retail Class "B." On file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
c. Temporary. On file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
d. Operators. On file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
e. Managers. On file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
f. Provisional operators. On file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
g. Transfers. On file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
(2) Intoxicating liquor:
a. Retail "class A." On file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
b. Retail "class B." On file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
c. Retail "class C". On file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
(3) Nonintoxicating beverages:
a. Class E. On file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
b. Repealed Ord. 17-2018 July 23, 2018
(a) Required. No person, other than the licensee, the spouse of the
licensee, an agent of a corporation appointed as required by Wis. Stats.
§ 125.04(6) or the manager licensed under § 6-10, may serve or sell
alcohol beverages in any place operated under a Class B license unless
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-9
1:73
§ 6-10. Manager's license required. [Code 1993, § 12.03(16)]
No person may manage a premises operating under a Class B license issued
by the Village under this article unless the person is the licensee, the spouse
of the licensee, an agent of a corporation appointed as required by Wis.
Stats. § 125.04(6) or the holder of a manager's license as defined in Wis.
Stats. § 125.32(1). Application for a manager's license shall be made to
the Clerk-Treasurer on such form as the Clerk-Treasurer may provide, and
shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed in § 6-8. Any person holding a
manager's license issued under this article shall also be considered to be
the holder of an operator's license as required in § 6-9.
§ 6-11. License application. [Code 1993, § 12.03(4)]
he has an operator's license. Application for an operator's license shall
be made to the Clerk-Treasurer on such form as the Clerk-Treasurer
may provide, and shall be accompanied by the fee as prescribed in
§ 6-8. Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this chapter, an
operator's license may only be issued to an applicant who has attained
the age of 18 years per Wis. Stats. § 125.04(5)(d). Operator's licenses
may be issued by the Village Clerk pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 125.17(1).
[Amended 5-11-2020 by Ord. No. 7-2020]
(b) Provisional license.
(1) A provisional license may be issued by the Clerk-Treasurer only to a
person who has applied for an operator's license. A provisional
license may not be issued to any person who has been denied a
license by the Village Board.
(2) A provisional license expires 30 days after its issuance or when a
regular operator's license is issued to the holder of such license,
whichever occurs first.
(c) Temporary license. A temporary license may be issued only to operators
employed by, or donating their services to, nonprofit corporations. No
person may hold more than one temporary license per year. The
temporary license is valid for any period from one to 14 days, and the
period for which such license is valid shall be stated on the license.
(a) Form. Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverages shall be made in writing on forms prescribed
by the state department of revenue, and filed with the Clerk-Treasurer.
The premises shall be physically described, including every room and
storage space to be covered by the license, and including all rooms
joined by connecting entrances or not separated by a solid wall.
(b) Notarization. Applications shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant
as provided by Wis. Stats. § 887.01.
(c) List of licensees. By July 15 of each year, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
forward to the state department of revenue a list containing the name,
§ 6-9 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 6-11
1:74
§ 6-12. License granting and transferal procedure. [Code 1993,
§ 12.03(5)]
address and trade name of each person holding a license issued under
this chapter, except a picnic, manager's or operator's license.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish an equitable
procedure for the granting of "class B" combination licenses which are
limited in number pursuant to a quota system established and
controlled by statute. As such, the procedures set forth in this section
are to be implemented when granting an available license.
(b) Notice.
(1) When the number of "class B" combination licenses granted by the
Village falls under quota or is reduced in any fashion, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall notify the Village Board and License Committee of
such circumstances. The Village Board shall acknowledge the
report of the Clerk-Treasurer on the number of "class B"
combination licenses granted by motion in their official record. The
report will be included in the normal manner as part of the Village
Board's proceedings. The License Committee will then allow at
least 30 days to elapse before considering granting any "class B"
combination licenses to replace the licenses which have been
revoked, nonrenewed or are otherwise available.
(2) Procedures enumerated in Subsection (b)(1) of this section shall
not apply to routine renewals.
(c) Applications. Applications for available "class B" combination licenses
shall contain the following information:
(1) State alcohol beverage license application.
(2) Financial responsibility statement provided by the applicant's
financial institution, demonstrating that the applicant has access to
sufficient resources to implement the proposed business venture.
(3) Duplicate copies of a drawing or sketch, to scale, or other suitable
description, to indicate the size of the building and its capacity,
rooms and their purposes, type of construction, as well as site of
the building on the property and available parking, with ingress
and egress.
(4) Proof of one of the following:
a. Ownership of a building or a piece of real property upon which
a building can be constructed.
b. A lease on a building which is properly zoned to house the
proposed venture.
§ 6-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-12
1:75
§ 6-13. License restrictions. [Code 1993, § 12.03(6); Ord. No.
3-2004, § 12.03(6)(1), 4-12-2004; Ord. No. 4 04, § 12.03(6)(s),
4-26-2004; amended 4-23-2012 by Ord. No. 04-2012; 6-8-2015 by
Ord. No. 03-2015]
c. An option to purchase property which is properly zoned for the
venture.
d. An option to lease property which is properly zoned for the
venture.
(d) Failure to supply required information. Failure of a party to supply any
of the information required in Subsection (c) of this section may result
in refusal to grant, transfer or renew a license pursuant to this section.
(e) Determination of License Committee.
(1) The License Committee will make a determination of the social and
economic benefit of the proposed venture to the Village. The
License Committee will also determine if the establishment is in
harmony with, and complementary to, other proposed or adopted
plans for community development.
(2) At the discretion of the License Committee, but no sooner than 30
days after the making of the report of the Clerk-Treasurer to the
License Committee, the names of all applicants will be considered
and the successful applicants will be chosen and recommended to
the Village Board for approval. The remaining applications will
continue to be on file until the end of the license year applied for
and may be reconsidered when other license opportunities become
available.
(a) Statutory requirements. Class A and Class B licenses shall be issued
only to persons eligible for such licenses under Wis. Stats. § 125.04.
(b) Location.
(1) Distance Restrictions. No retail Class A or Class B license shall be
issued for any premises of which the main entrance is less than 300
feet from the main entrance of any established public school,
parochial school, hospital or church. Such distance shall be
measured by the shortest route along the highway from the closest
point of the main entrance of such school, church or hospital to the
main entrance to such premises.
(2) Exclusion. This Subsection (b) shall not apply to premises licensed
as such on June 30, 1947, nor shall it apply to any premises licensed
as such prior to the occupation of real property within 300 feet
thereof by any school, hospital or church building.
(c) Violators of liquor or beer laws or ordinances. No retail Class A or Class
B license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a
§ 6-12 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 6-13
1:76
violation of any federal or state liquor or fermented malt beverage law
or the provisions of this section, or whose license has been revoked
under Wis. Stats. § 125.12 during a period of one year prior to such
application. A conviction of a member of a partnership or the
partnership itself shall make the partnership or any member thereof
ineligible for such license for a period of one year.
(d) Health and sanitation. No retail Class A or Class B license shall be
issued for any premises which does not conform to the sanitary, safety
and health requirements of the state department of commerce
pertaining to buildings and plumbing, the rules and regulations of the
state department of health applicable to restaurants and all such
ordinances and regulations adopted by the Village.
(e) License quota.
(1) The number of persons and places that may be granted a retail
Class B liquor license under this chapter is limited as provided in
Wis. Stats. § 125.51(4).
(2) The number of persons that may be granted a Class A retail liquor
license under this chapter shall be and hereby is limited as follows:
a. There shall be only one Class A retail liquor license for each
1,000 inhabitants, or fraction thereof, in the Village as
determined by the last preceding census of the Bureau of the
Census of the United States government or the estimate made
by the state.
(f) Corporations. No corporation organized under the laws of this state or
any other state or foreign country may be issued any alcohol beverage
license or permit unless such corporation meets the requirements of
Wis. Stats. § 125.04(6).
(g) Age requirement. No license under this chapter, except an operator's
license, shall be granted to any person who has not attained the legal
drinking age. Operators' licenses may be issued only to applicants who
have attained the age of 18 years.
(h) Effect of revocation of license. Whenever any license has been revoked,
at least 12 months shall elapse before another license shall be granted
to the person whose license was revoked.
(i) Delinquent taxes, assessments and claims. No license shall be granted
or renewed for any premises for which taxes, assessments or other
claims of the Village are delinquent and unpaid or to any person
delinquent in payment of such claims to the Village, unless such person
has made arrangements suitable to the Village for payment of the
delinquent taxes, assessments or other claims.
(j) Class B licensed premises to be located on street level; exceptions. A
retail Class B license shall be issued only for that portion of a premises
§ 6-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-13
1:77
located on the street level. This restriction shall not apply to a bona
fide club, society or lodge in existence not less than six months prior
to application, nor prohibit any hotel holding a state permit from
supplying beverages in original containers to bona fide patrons in
rooms rented by such patrons.
(k) Use of area outside licensed area limited. Provided the initial or
renewal alcohol beverage license describes adjacent premises owned
or leased by the licensee or is amended to so describe such premises,
service and consumption of intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverages shall be permitted in such adjacent area on the provided
that:
(1) A site plan for such use is first submitted and receives favorable
recommendation from the Village Plan Commission and approval
by the Village Board, which site plan shall show that no dwelling,
except if located in the same structure as the licensed premises,
shall be within 150 feet of the outer boundary of such area.
(2) The area is designated by a fence, decorative chain and posts or
other suitable barricades at least three feet in height that cordons
the area off from the remainder of the outside area. Such barriers
may be placed to allow the public access from the outside as well as
through the licensed premises.
(3) The area is cleared of all persons by not later than 10:00 p.m.
(4) No loud music or dancing shall be allowed in the outside area.
(5) The outdoor area shall be supervised at all times by the licensee or
an authorized employee.
(6) All other Village ordinances, including those relating to littering,
noise or drinking of intoxicants where prohibited, shall be
observed.
(l) Continuity of business. No "class B" retail liquor license shall be held by
any person who is not actively engaged in the business for which such
license is issued. Failure to continuously be so engaged shall constitute
an abandonment of such license and shall be cause for revocation of the
license. In the case of corporations licensed under this chapter, this
subsection shall apply to all officers and directors of such corporation.
Failure to operate a licensed place of business for 60 days shall be
cause for revocation of the license, except that where the licensed place
of business is operated in connection with a seasonal business, the
licensed place of business may be closed during the closed season of
such seasonal business. If the premises designated to be licensed has
not yet been constructed (any such applicant for a license being
required to have a legal interest in such designated premises), the
Village Board may, in its discretion, extend the period of inactivity for
good cause shown.
§ 6-13 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 6-13
1:78
(m) Records.
(1) Any person may inspect applications for licenses to sell alcohol
beverages.
(2) The Clerk-Treasurer shall retain all applications made to the
Village for licenses to sell alcohol beverages.
(3) The Clerk-Treasurer may destroy all applications more than four
years of age which have been retained under Subsection (m)(2) of
this section.
(n) Curtains and doors. During the hours when a licensed premises is
required to be closed, any curtains or other obstructions to view, facing
on the street or highway, shall be removed to such an extent that a clear
view may be had of the interior of such premises. In any such premises,
no curtain, door or other obstruction shall close off the view into any
booth, room or other enclosure in which any alcohol beverage may or
can be served.
(o) Premises required to be kept open to the public. The premises for which
a license shall have been issued under this chapter shall be kept open to
the general public at all times when alcohol beverages are offered for
sale therein.
(p) Certain entertainment and other practices prohibited.
(1) Scope and findings.
a. The Village Board has explicit authority under Wis. Stats.
§ 125.10(1) to adopt regulations governing the sale of alcohol
beverages which are in addition to the regulations set forth in
Wis. Stats. Ch. 125;
b. The Village Board has authority under its general police
powers set forth in Wis. Stats. § 61.34 to act for the good order
of the Village and for the health, safety and welfare of the
public, and may carry out its powers by regulation and
suppression;
c. The Village Board recognizes it lacks authority to regulate
obscenity in light of Wis. Stats. § 66.0107(3), and does not
intend, by adopting the ordinance from which this chapter is
derived, to regulate obscenity and, since nudity in and of itself
is not obscene, it declares its intent to enact an ordinance
addressing the secondary effects of live, totally nude,
nonobscene, erotic dancing in bars and taverns;
d. Bars and taverns featuring live, totally nude, nonobscene,
erotic dancing have, in other communities, tended to further
the increase of criminal and other offensive activity; disrupt
the peace and order of the communities; depreciate the value
of real property; harm the economic welfare of the
§ 6-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-13
1:79
communities and negatively affect the quality of life of the
communities; and such secondary effects are detrimental to
the public health, safety and general welfare of citizens;
e. The Village Board recognizes the U.S. Supreme Court has held
that nude dancing is expressive conduct within the outer
perimeters of the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution and, therefore, entitled to some limited protection
under the First Amendment, and the Village Board further
recognizes that freedom of speech is among our most precious
and highly protected rights, and wishes to act consistently with
full protection of those rights;
f. However, the Village Board is aware, based on the experiences
of other communities, that bars and taverns in which live,
totally nude, nonobscene, erotic dancing occurs may and do
generate secondary effects which the Village Board believes
are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the Village;
g. Among such secondary effects are the:
1. Potential increase in prostitution and other sex-related
offenses, as well as other crimes and offenses;
2. Potential depreciation of property values in neighborhoods
where bars and taverns featuring nude dancing exist;
3. Health risks associated with the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases; and
4. Potential for infiltration by organized crime for the
purpose of unlawful conduct.
h. The Village Board desires to minimize, prevent and control
these adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the Village; protect the
citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of life;
preserve the property values and character of surrounding
neighborhoods; and deter the spread of urban blight; and
i. The Village Board has determined that enactment of an
ordinance prohibiting live, totally nude, nonobscene, erotic
dancing in bars and taverns licensed to serve alcohol
beverages promotes the goal of minimizing, preventing and
controlling the negative secondary effects associated with such
activity.
(2) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in
this Subsection (p), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
§ 6-13 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 6-13
1:80
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment licensed by the
Village Board to sell alcohol beverages pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch.
125.
LICENSEE — The holder of a retail Class "B" license under Wis.
Stats. § 125.26(1), a "class B" license under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3)
or "class C" license under Wis. Stats. § 125.51(3m), granted by the
Village Board.
(3) Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to the
licensed theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers and dinner
theaters where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic
performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular basis
and in which the predominant business or attraction is not the
offering to customers of entertainment which is intended to provide
sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and
where the establishment is not distinguished by an emphasis on, or
the advertising or promotion of, employees engaging in nude erotic
dancing.
(4) Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person to perform or engage in,
or for any licensee or manager or agent of the licensee to permit
any person, employee, entertainer or patron to perform or engage
in any live act, demonstration, dance or exhibition on the premises
of a licensed establishment which:
a. Shows such person's genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal
cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering;
b. Shows any portion of the female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or
c. Shows the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(5) Prohibited conduct. No licensee, either personally or through his
agent or employee, shall permit any person in the licensed
premises to perform acts of, or acts which, simulate:
a. Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited
by law.
b. The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks,
anus or genitals.
c. The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals.
d. The showing of films or slides or scenes wherein artificial
devices or inanimate objects or drawings are employed to
portray or depict any of the acts which are prohibited by the
regulations stated in Subsections (p)(5)a — c of this section.
§ 6-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-13
1:81
(6) Stage area. No licensee, either personally or through his agent or
employee, shall furnish entertainment or permit the performance
of any act, stunt or dance unless such act, stunt or dance shall be
performed on a stage area designated for such purpose. The use of
the surface of the bar proper as a stage area is prohibited. When
the stage area is located behind the bar, the nearest point of any
such stage area shall not be less than six feet from the outer limits
of the patrons' side of the bar. When the stage area is located
outside of the bar (i.e., on the patrons' side of the bar), such area
shall be raised from the floor level and separated by a railing or
other device so as to provide a distance of at least six feet between
the patrons and the performers so as to deter patrons from
participating in any act, stunt or dance.
(7) Disorderly conduct by patrons. No licensee, either personally or
through his agent or employee, shall permit any patron to
participate in any act, stunt or dance with performers or employees
who are under the auspices of the management.
(8) Solicitation of drinks. No licensee, either personally or through his
agent or employee, shall permit the solicitation by any entertainer
or employee of a drink of intoxicating liquor, fermented malt
beverage or other drink from any customer or patron or other
person on the premises, and no entertainer or employee shall
solicit any such drink from any customer, patron or other person on
such premises.
(9) Fraternization. No licensee, either personally or through his agent
or employee, shall permit any entertainer, waiter, waitress or other
employee to sit at any table or in any booth or elsewhere on the
licensed premises with any customer or patron; provided, however,
that this subsection shall not apply to a member of the immediate
family of the licensee or to any person claiming under him who lives
in the same household as the licensee and is over 18 years of age.
(10) Violations; penalties. In addition to all other penalties provided in
this chapter, a violation of this Subsection (p) constitutes sufficient
grounds for suspending, revoking or nonrenewing an alcohol
beverage license under Wis. Stats. § 125.12.
(q) Presence of underage persons in Class B premises. Notwithstanding the
restrictions and exceptions applicable to underage persons on licensed
premises as set forth in Wis. Stats. § Ch. 125, and as adopted by this
chapter, an underage person may enter or remain in a room in a Class B
licensed premises separate from any room where alcohol beverages are
sold or served if no alcohol beverages are furnished or consumed by any
person in the room where the underage person is present, provided that
the licensee shall have accomplished each of the following:
(1) The licensee shall have submitted to and obtained the approval of
the License Committee of the Village Board for the plan of
§ 6-13 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 6-13
1:82
§ 6-14. Contents and expiration of licenses. [Code 1993, § 12.03(7)]
All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall clearly state the specific premises for which the licenses are granted,
the date of issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee and, unless
sooner revoked, such licenses shall expire on June 30 after the issuance
thereof, except as otherwise provided.
§ 6-15. Transfer of licenses. [Code 1993, § 12.03(8)]
operation and anticipated schedule of events for such activity,
together with such other information as the License Committee
requests.
(2) The licensee has obtained the approval of the Police Department in
the form of a written authorization permitting underage persons to
be present under the terms of this Subsection (q) on the date
specified in the authorization. The licensee shall obtain a separate
authorization from the Police Department for each day on which
underage persons will be present on the premises. In determining
whether to issue such authorization, the Police Department shall
make a determination that the presence of underage persons on
the licensed premises would not endanger the health, welfare or
safety of such underage persons or that of the other members of
the community. The following criteria shall be utilized by the Police
Department in making such a determination:
a. The licensee shall have presented to, and obtained the
approval of, the Police Department with respect to a detailed
security plan encompassing both the licensed premises and the
parking areas servicing the licensed premises.
b. Ensure that the protective services of the Village are not
unduly strained, and no more than two such authorizations
shall be granted for any one day.
c. The plan and information submitted by the licensee is
consistent with that presented to the License Committee when
obtaining initial approval.
(r) Gambling Machine.
(1) Definition. For the purpose of this section, gambling machine shall
be as defined in Wis. Stats. § 945.01.
(2) Regulation and Penalty. For the purpose of this section, regulation
and penalties of gambling machines shall be as defined in Wis.
Stats. § 945.02 to § 945.041.
(a) Persons. No license shall be transferable to a different licensee, except
as provided by Wis. Stats. § 125.04(12)(b). The granting of the
§ 6-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-15
1:83
§ 6-16. Regulation of licensed premises and licensees. [Code 1993,
§ 12.03(9)]
§ 6-17. Closing hours. [Code 1993, § 12.03(10); amended 6-8-2015
by Ord. No. 03-2015]
transferred license to the new licensee is to be reviewed in the same
manner as the granting of a new license by the Village Board.
(b) Places. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be transferred to
another premises once during any license year as provided in Wis.
Stats. § 125.04(12). Application for such transfer shall be made on
forms furnished by the state department of revenue. Proceedings for
such transfer shall be had in the same manner and form as the original
application. The fee for such transfer shall be as stated in § 6-8.
(a) Gambling and disorderly conduct. Each licensed premises shall be
conducted in an orderly manner at all times, and no disorderly, riotous
or indecent conduct or gambling shall be allowed on any licensed
premises at any time.
(b) Employment of underage persons. No licensee shall employ any
underage person who does not have a valid operator's license to serve,
sell, dispense or give away any alcohol beverage.
(c) Sales by clubs. No club shall sell intoxicating liquors or fermented malt
beverages, except to members and guests invited by members.
(d) Safety and sanitation requirements. Each licensed premises shall be
maintained and conducted in a sanitary manner and shall be a safe and
proper place for the purpose for which it is used.
(a) No premises for which a retail liquor or fermented malt beverage
license has been issued shall remain open for the sale of alcohol
beverages during the following hours:
(1) Retail Class "A" licensees: Between 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m.
(2) Retail "class A" licensees: Between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(3) Retail Class B licensees: Between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on
weekdays and between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturdays and
Sundays. On January 1, a premises operating under a Class B
license is not required to close. No package, container or bottle
sales may be made after 12:00 midnight.
(b) Hotels and restaurants, the principal business of which is the furnishing
of food or lodging to patrons, bowling alleys, indoor horseshoe pitching
facilities, curling clubs, golf courses and golf clubhouses may remain
open for the conduct of their regular business, but no intoxicating
liquors or fermented malt beverages shall be sold during prohibited
hours.
§ 6-15 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 6-18
1:84
§ 6-18. Underage persons. [Code 1993, § 12.03(11)]
§ 6-19. Revocation, suspension and nonrenewal of licenses. [Code
1993, § 12.03(12); Ord. No. 3-2009, 1-26, 2009]
(a) Any underage person who does any of the following is guilty of a
violation:
(1) Procures or attempts to procure alcohol beverages.
(2) Knowingly possesses or consumes alcohol beverages.
(3) Enters or is on licensed premises in violation of Wis. Stats.
§ 125.07(3)(a).
(4) Falsely represents his age for the purpose of receiving alcohol
beverages from a licensee or permittee.
(b) Any underage person not accompanied by his parents, guardian or
spouse who has attained the legal drinking age who knowingly
possesses or consumes fermented malt beverages is guilty of a
violation.
(c) The following fines shall be imposed for violations of this section:
(1) For a first violation, a forfeiture of not more than $200.
(2) For a violation committed within 12 months of a previous violation,
a forfeiture of not more than $300.
(3) For a violation committed within 12 months of two or more
previous violations, a forfeiture of $400.
(d) This section does not prevent an underage person in the employ of a
licensee or permittee from possessing alcohol beverages for sale or
delivery to customers.
(a) The following provisions shall apply to the revocation, suspension or
nonrenewal of any license issued pursuant to this chapter,
notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, except provisions
providing for revocation or suspension of any license by the court. The
provisions in this section are in addition to any other provisions of this
Code.
(1) Complaint. Upon complaint made in writing under oath by any
person and filed with the Clerk-Treasurer that any person or other
entity licensed pursuant to this chapter has violated any provision
of this chapter or any provision of law; has failed to maintain the
premises according to standards prescribed for sanitation by the
Village health office; that the licensee has not observed and obeyed
any lawful order of the Village or police officer; or for any other
good reason, the Village Board or License Committee shall issue a
summons commanding the licensee complained of to appear before
§ 6-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-19
1:85
the License Committee or a special committee designated by the
Village Board on a day and time, and at a place named in the
summons to show cause why the license should not be revoked
or suspended. Such summons shall be served not less than three,
nor more than 10 days before the time at which the licensee is
commanded to appear and may be served personally upon the
licensee or his agent, or upon the person in charge of the licensed
premises. The complaint shall be served with the summons and
shall set forth the offense allegedly committed, the date and place
of such offense, and the facts constituting the alleged offense.
(2) Procedure on hearing.
a. If the licensee does not appear as required by the summons,
the allegations of the complaint shall be taken as true and, if
the License Committee finds the allegations sufficient, the
license shall be revoked. The Clerk-Treasurer shall give notice
of the revocation to the person whose license is revoked.
b. The License Committee shall serve as the hearing agency for
the Village Board. The chair of the License Committee or his
designee shall conduct the hearing, administer oaths to all
witnesses and may issue subpoenas. As far as practicable, the
rules of evidence provided in Wis. Stats. § 227.45 shall be
followed. The complainant shall have the burden of proving the
charges by a preponderance of the evidence. If the licensee
appears as required by the summons and denies the complaint,
both the complainant and the licensee may produce witnesses,
cross examine witnesses and be represented by counsel. The
licensee shall be provided with a written transcript of the
hearing, at his expense. All proceedings and testimony shall be
recorded on tape and transcribed, unless waived by both the
complainant and the licensee. If either party requests a
stenographic recording and transcription, Village staff shall
make the necessary arrangements, but the expense shall be
borne by the requesting party. The secretary to the License
Committee shall mark and receive all exhibits admitted into
the record. Within 20 days of the completion of the hearing, the
License Committee shall submit a report to the Village Board,
including findings of fact, conclusions of law and a
recommendation as to what action, if any, the Village Board
should take with respect to the license. The License Committee
shall provide the complainant and the licensee with a copy of
the report. Either the complainant or the licensee may file an
objection to the report and shall have the opportunity to
present arguments supporting the objection to the Village
Board. The Village Board shall determine whether the
arguments shall be represented orally or in writing, or both. At
the meeting of the Village Board after the filing of the License
Committee's recommendation, the Village Board shall act on
§ 6-19 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 6-19
1:86
the recommendation. If the recommendation is based upon
a stipulation of the parties, the Village Board may accept or
reject the recommendation by a simple majority vote. If the
Village Board rejects the recommendation, the matter shall
be referred back to the License Committee for a full fact
finding hearing. If the recommendation is based upon a full
fact finding hearing, the recommendation shall become the
decision of the Village Board, unless reversed or modified by
a simple majority vote. No further evidence shall be allowed
before the Village Board. Only the members of the Village
Board who have certified to the Clerk-Treasurer in writing
that they have read the transcript, unless waived by both the
complainant and licensee, exhibits and report of the License
Committee shall be permitted to vote on the matter. If the
Village Board finds the complaint to be true, after considering
the License Committee's report and any arguments presented
by the complainant or the licensee, or if there is no objection to
the report recommending suspension or revocation, the license
shall be suspended for not less than three days, nor more than
90 days, or revoked. The decision of the Village Board shall
be a final determination for purposes of judicial review. If the
complaint is found to be true, the licensee shall pay the actual
costs of the proceedings to the Village.
(3) Notice. The Clerk-Treasurer shall give notice of each license
suspension or revocation to the person whose license is suspended
or revoked.
(4) Dismissal. If the Village Board finds the complaint to be untrue, the
proceeding shall be dismissed without cost to the accused. If the
Village Board finds the complaint to be malicious and without
probable cause, the costs shall be paid by the complainant. The
Village Board or License Committee may require the complainant
to provide security for such costs before issuing the summons
under Subsection (a)(1) of this section.
(5) Effect of revocation. When a license is revoked under this section,
the revocation shall be recorded by the Clerk-Treasurer and no
other license issued under this chapter shall be granted to such
licensee or for such premises for a period of 12 months from the
date of the revocation.
(6) Judicial review. The action of the Village Board in granting, failing
to grant, suspending or revoking any license or the failure of the
Village Board to revoke or suspend any license for good cause may
be reviewed by the circuit court for the county in which the
application for the license was issued, upon application by any
applicant, licensee or resident of the Village.
(7) Nonrenewal of license. The Village Attorney may, after
investigation, hear evidence and make a recommendation to the
§ 6-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-19
1:87
Village Board that a license issued pursuant to this chapter not
be renewed. The president shall notify the licensee in writing of
the consideration of nonrenewal. Such notification shall be in the
form of and shall serve as the summons and complaint and shall
include a statement of the reasons for the consideration of the
nonrenewal of the license in the same specificity required for a
summons and complaint for revocation or suspension. If the license
is recommended for nonrenewal, costs may be assessed against the
licensee and any renewal application fee shall be forfeited. In all
other respects, the provisions of §§ 6-1 and 6-2 shall apply.
(8) Other regulations and restrictions. Any license issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be subject to such further regulations and
restrictions as may be imposed by the Village Board. If any licensee
shall fail or neglect to meet the requirements imposed by such new
restrictions and regulations, his license may be revoked in
accordance with this chapter. In case of revocation of any license or
any violation of any provision of this section in accordance with this
chapter, or by the court or for any reasonable cause, except the
imposition of new restrictions, no refund shall be made of any part
of the license fee. If a license issued under this chapter is not used
within 15 days after its issuance or its usage is discontinued for a
period of 15 days or more, such situation shall be grounds for
cancellation of the license in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(9) Point values for license violations, revocations and suspensions.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to administratively
interpret the portions of this chapter relating to establishing
an alcohol beverage demerit point system to assist in
determining which license holders should be subject to
suspension or revocation procedures.
b. Scale. The scale of demerit points is listed according to the
type of alcohol beverage violation. The demerit point system is
used to identify habitually troublesome license holders who
have repeatedly violated statutes and any provision of this
Code for the purpose of recommending suspension or
revocation of their alcohol beverage licenses. In construing the
number of points to be assessed for an alleged violation, it is
the Code section number, rather than the type of the violation
which shall control.
§ 6-19 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 6-19
1:88
Violations of Village Ordinances
Code
Section
Number Type of Violation Point Value
6-2 License required 100
6-11 False statement on application 100
6-13(k) Limitation on use of area outside
licensed premises
100
6-13(l) Continuity of business required 50
6-13(n) Curtains and doors to be open 100
6-13(o) Premises to be kept open to
public
50
6-13(p)(4) Certain entertainment and other
practices prohibited
100
6-13(p)(5) Certain acts prohibited;
simulation prohibited
100
6-13(p)(6) Stage areas limited 50
6-13(p)(7) Disorderly conduct prohibited 25
6-13(p)(8) Solicitation prohibited 50
6-13(p)(9) Fraternization prohibited 50
6-15 Transfer of license without
permission
50
6-16(a) Gambling and disorderly conduct
prohibited
25
6-16(b) Employment of underage
persons prohibited
100
6-16(c) Sales by clubs limited 25
6-16(d) Safety and sanitation
requirements
25
6-17 Closing hours 50
Any other Village ordinance 20
Violations of Statutes
Wis. Stats.
Section
Number Type of Violation Point Value
125.04(10) Failure to frame and post license 25
125.07(1) Traffic to underage person 50
125.07(2) Traffic to intoxicated person 50
§ 6-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-19
1:89
Violations of Statutes
Wis. Stats.
Section
Number Type of Violation Point Value
125.07(3) Presence of minor in places of
sale
25
125.07(7) Failure to keep proper book 25
Any other provision of Wis. Stats. Ch. 125 20
c. Calculation of violations. As the basis for determining the
accumulated demerit points against a license within 12
months, the Village shall use the date each violation was
committed.
d. License suspension and revocation.
1. For purposes of a revocation or suspension hearing, the
License Committee shall call before it all licensees holding
alcohol beverage or service licenses who have
accumulated 100 points in a twelve-month period as a
result of court imposed convictions or who have had
reports referred to the License Committee from the Village
Attorney which, if believed, would result in 100 demerit
points in 12 months. In instances in which a licensee has
accumulated less than 50 demerit points as determined by
the Village Attorney and additional violations on one date
would result in the accumulation of at least 50 points, but
not more than 200 points, the License Committee may call
such licensee before it for purposes of a formal expression
of concern. If the licensee appears, no discussion of the
alleged facts underlying the assessment of demerit points
shall be permitted unless the licensee requests such
discussion, but only if the licensee is advised that any
statements made by him and/or his representatives
regarding the alleged facts may be considered by the
License Committee in any subsequent suspension/
revocation hearing which may result from the alleged
violations which are the subject of the formal expression of
concern. Whether the licensee appears, or not, points shall
still be assessed for the alleged violations which triggered
the formal expression of concern. Service of the notice to
appear shall be by first class mail sent to the agent if the
licensee is a corporation, to the licensee if an individual or
to any partner if the licensee is a partnership. If the notice
is returned by the post office as undeliverable, the notice
may be left with any employee found on the licensed
establishment at least 24 hours before the date and time of
the scheduled appearance before the License Committee.
§ 6-19 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 6-19
1:90
§ 6-20. Violations by agents and employees. [Code 1993,
§ 12.03(14)]
A violation of this chapter by an authorized agent or employee of a licensee
shall constitute a violation by the licensee.
§ 6-21. Sale of fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquors at
drive through dispensaries. [Ord. No. 14-2005, 8-8-2005]
§ 6-22. Mandatory identification examination. [Ord. No. 4-2009, § 1,
4-1-2009]
A formal expression of concern in lieu of the assessment
of demerit points may only occur once within a three-year
period.
2. If the demerit point accumulation calculated from the date
of violation meets or exceeds 100 points in a twelve-month
period, the suspension shall be for not less than three
days, nor more than 90 days. If the license is revoked, no
other license shall be granted to such licensee for a period
of 12 months from the date of such revocation.
3. The procedure to be used for license suspension or
revocation shall be that found in this section.
(a) No license shall be issued to any person, firm, corporation or entity for
the retail sale of any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage at
or from any type of "drive through" dispensary.
(b) No retail establishment with a license to sell intoxicating liquor and/or
fermented malt beverages shall sell either intoxicating liquors or
fermented malt beverages to any member of the public by way of a
drive through dispensary.
(a) Required acts and conditions. All holders of a Class A license shall be
required to ask for and examine identification of any individual who
attempts to purchase alcoholic liquor in order to determine whether
said individuals can lawfully purchase alcohol. The form of the
identification to be examined shall be at the discretion of the license
holder and may include a driver's license, state identification card or
membership in an organization which requires its members to be 50
years of age or older; or such other identification which unmistakably
depicts the holder of same to be over 21 years of age. Alternatively, the
licensee may register the identification information, including a
photograph, of its customers and keep such information on file on the
premises. In such case, when the customer attempts to purchase
alcohol, the file must be reviewed by the licensee or its agent for any
customer who elects this alternative method of checking identification.
§ 6-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-22
1:91
§ 6-23. through § 6-50. (Reserved)
(b) Signage. All Class A licensed establishments shall display a sign on the
licensed premises advising the customers of the mandatory
identification examination requirement, which sign shall be provided by
the Village and in such form as approved by the Village.
§ 6-22 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 6-23
1:92
ARTICLE II
Cabarets
§ 6-51. Permit required; termination date. [Code 1993, § 12.17(1)]
§ 6-52. Permit issuance; fees. [Code 1993, § 12.17(2)]
A cabaret permit will be issued, subject to the conditions and regulations
set forth in this section, upon application to the Clerk-Treasurer and the
payment of the fee as specified in § 6-8.
§ 6-53. Regulations. [Code 1993, § 12.17(3)]
(a) No holder of a retail Class "B" alcohol beverage license shall perform,
engage in or permit the following activities by patrons or hired
performers upon the licensed premises without first obtaining a cabaret
permit from the Clerk-Treasurer:
(1) Live music performances.
(2) Specifically advertise or feature dancing.
(3) Live entertainment, including, but not limited to, the performance
of any act, play or stunt, amateur talent contest or disc jockey show.
(b) A cabaret permit shall terminate as a matter of due course on the date
the holder thereof ceases to hold a retail Class "B" alcohol beverage
license without refund of any portion of the license fee for such permit.
(a) No dancing shall be permitted within six feet of a bar over which
patrons are directly served.
(b) While dancing is in progress, the dance area shall be illuminated by at
least two footcandles per square foot.
(c) Good order shall be maintained at all times.
(d) The management shall obey all reasonable orders or directions of any
police officer or official dance supervisor.
(e) The performance of any act, stunt or dance by performers under the
auspices of the management shall be given only on a stage, platform or
floor which is separated by a railing or other device from the patrons so
as to deter patrons from participating in any act, stunt or dance.
Patrons may not tip the entertainers or performers by placing money or
other articles of value in their costumes or otherwise engaging in
physical contact with the entertainers or performers.
(f) No permit holder, personally or through his agent or employee, shall
permit any patron to participate in any act, stunt or dance with
performers who are under the auspices or furnished by the
management.
§ 6-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-53
1:93
§ 6-54. Permit revocation. [Code 1993, § 12.17(4)]
Upon written charges made and filed with the Clerk-Treasurer by the Chief
of Police or any citizen, the Village Board may, after a public hearing
thereon, revoke any permit issued under this article.
§ 6-55. through § 6-90. (Reserved)
(g) No patron shall participate in any act, stunt or dance by performers
who appear under the auspices of the management.
(h) All permit holders shall abide by the provisions of § 6-13(p), relating to
the prohibition of certain entertainment and other practices.
(i) No patron shall participate in any amateur striptease, wet T-shirt or
similar contest.
§ 6-53 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 6-55
1:94
ARTICLE III
Nonintoxicating Beverages
§ 6-91. Licenses. [Amended 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 17-2018]
(a) Class "E" nonintoxicating beverages. A Class "E" license shall authorize
the manufacture, sale and distribution of nonintoxicating beverages
and the sale of soda water beverages. A fee, as stated in § 6-8, shall be
charged per year or fractional part thereof.
§ 6-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-91
1:95
Chapter 10
ANIMALS
§ 6-91 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 6-91
1:96
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 10-1. Definitions; license required; incorporation of statutory
regulations. [Ord. No. O1-2003, § 7-1-1, 1-14-2003]
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANIMAL — Mammals, reptiles and birds.
AT LARGE — To be off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of a person by leash. However, a dog, cat, potbellied pig or
ferret within an automobile of its owner or with the consent of the
owner shall be deemed to be upon the owner's premises. Hunting dogs,
under the control of the owner when hunting with the landowner's
permission, and law enforcement animals are exempt from this
definition.
CAT — Any feline, regardless of age or sex.
COOP — Any barn, warren or other structure, together with the yard
in connection therewith, used for the housing of any chicken, rabbit or
other small animal or bird, except dogs.
CRUEL — Causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering, or
unjustifiable injury or death.
DOG — Any canine, regardless of age or sex.
FARM ANIMAL — Any animal normally raised on a farm in the United
States and used for food or fiber. Such term also includes horses,
donkeys, mules and ponies.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Has the meaning as it appears in
Wis. Stats. § 967.02(5), and includes a humane officer under Wis. Stats.
§ 58.07, but does not include a conservation warden appointed under
Wis. Stats. § 23.10.
LEASH — A cord, thong or chain not more than 10 feet in length, by
which an animal is controlled by the person accompanying the animal.
A retractable lead may also be used by a responsible individual if the
lead is of adequate strength to control the animal. Retractable leads
shall only be used in open areas.
NEUTERED and SPAYED — A dog, cat, potbellied pig or ferret having
nonfunctional reproductive organs.
OFFENSIVE BUSINESS — The killing or dressing, or both, of any
animal in the usual course of a business or occupation, except the
killing or dressing, or both, by farms of animals produced on their own
farms where such killing or dressing, or both, occurs.
OWNER — Any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog, cat,
potbellied pig or ferret, and the occupant of any premises on which
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1
1:97
a dog, cat, potbellied pig or ferret remains or to which it customarily
returns daily for a period of 30 days. An occupant of any premises
on which a dog, cat, potbellied pig or ferret remains or to which it
customarily returns daily for a period of 30 days is presumed to be
harboring or keeping the dog, cat, potbellied pig or ferret within the
meaning of this definition. Such term shall not apply to veterinarians,
kennel operators or qualified nonprofit animal rescue groups (e.g.,
501-c3) temporarily maintaining animals owned by others on their
premises.
PET — A domestically owned animal.
POTBELLIED PIG — A purebred Vietnamese potbellied pig, registered
through a North American Vietnamese potbellied pig registry.
Potbellied pigs may not exceed 100 pounds in weight.
SERVICE ANIMAL — Any guide dog, signal dog or other animal trained
to provide assistance to an individual with a disability.
SLAUGHTERHOUSE — A place where cattle, swine, sheep, goats or
horses are killed or dressed, or both, for human consumption, except
by farmers of animals produced on their own farms where killing or
dressing, or both, occurs, and except occasionally such killing or
dressing, or both, by individuals for their own use.
STABLE — Any barn, sty, building or other structure, together with the
yard in connection therewith, used for the housing of any horse, cow,
pig, sheep, goat or other animal, except only dogs, chickens, rabbits or
other small animals and birds.
VETERINARIAN — A person duly licensed to practice veterinary
medicine in the state and possessing a doctor's degree in veterinary
medicine.
VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL —
Any animal that, when unprovoked, attacks, bites or injures a
human being, pet, companion animal or livestock on either public
or private property;
(1)
Any animal that has a history, known to the owner thereof, of
attacking, without provocation;
(2)
(3) Any animal trained or used for fighting against another animal.
§ 10-1 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 10-1
1:98
§ 10-2. Rabies vaccinations. [Amended 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
03-2011]
Notwithstanding this definition of the term "vicious or dangerous
animal," no animal may be declared vicious if death, injury or
damage is sustained by a person who, at the time such death,
injury or damage was sustained, was committing a criminal
trespass upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal,
or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or
was committing, or attempting to commit, a crime, or violating,
or attempting to violate, an ordinance which protects persons
or property. No animal shall be declared to be vicious if death,
injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal which, at
the time such death, injury or damage was sustained, was teasing,
tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal. No animal may be
declared to be vicious if the animal was protecting or defending a
human being within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an
unjustified attack or assault. This definition shall not be construed
to include animals that are part of a governmental organization or
a trained guard dog in the performance of its duties. Any person
who owns or harbors a vicious animal that has, on the basis of two
or more previous violations of this chapter, shall be required to
have such animal destroyed. Failure to comply with this provision
shall constitute a separate offense and subject such person to the
provisions of § 1-15, and such animal may be taken into custody by
the police or other authorized agent of the Village for the purpose
of having such animal destroyed. This definition shall not apply to
an attack or biting by an animal when such animal is within the
confines of a fenced in or enclosed building area, if such building
or fenced in area has a sign warning or stating, "Beware of Dog,"
or other animal.
(b) License required. It shall be unlawful for any person in the Village to
own, harbor or keep any dog or cat more than six months of age after
July 1 of the license year without complying with the provisions of this
chapter relating to the listing, licensing and tagging of such dog or cat.
(c) Incorporation of statutory regulation. Wis. Stats. §§ 174.01 — 174.046,
and such sections as may be amended and/or renumbered, are hereby
incorporated by reference with respect to restraining action against
dogs, the imposition of forfeitures for violations of such regulations and
other regulations of dogs imposed under this Code, and the
impoundment and subsequent delivery, treatment and disposition of
dogs; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to
restrict or limit any authority granted to the Police Department with
respect to the regulation of dogs and shall not operate to reduce any
forfeitures or other penalties which might otherwise be imposed under
this Code.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2
1:99
§ 10-3. Licenses and permits. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-13; amended
1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 03-2011]
(a) Requirement for vaccination. The owner of a dog or cat shall have the
dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian or, if a
veterinarian is physically present at the location the vaccine is
administered, by a veterinary technician, pursuant to s. 453.05(2)(d), at
no later than five months of age and revaccinated within one year after
the initial vaccination. If the owner obtains the dog or brings the dog or
cat into this state after the dog has reached five months of age, the
owner shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies within 30
days after the dog or cat is obtained or brought into the state unless the
dog or cat has been vaccinated as evidenced by a current certificate of
rabies vaccination from this state or another state. The owner of a dog
or cat shall have the dog or cat revaccinated against rabies by a
veterinarian or, if a veterinarian is physically present at the location the
vaccine is administered, by a veterinary technician, pursuant to s.
453.05(2)(d), before the date that the immunization expires as stated on
the certificate of vaccination or, if no date is specified, within three
years after the previous vaccination.
(b) Exemption from vaccination. Any dog or cat which a veterinarian
licensed by the state issues a certificate to the effect that the proposed
vaccination will be harmful shall be exempt from the vaccination
prescribed by this article.
(c) Proof of vaccination and licensing for dogs and cats. Owners of dogs or
cats must provide required rabies vaccination and licensing certificates
upon request by personnel authorized to do so by the Village.
(a) Dog and cat licenses.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person in the Village to own, harbor or
keep a dog or cat more than six months of age without complying
with the provisions of Wis. Stats. §§ 174.05 — 174.10, relating to
the listing, licensing and tagging of dogs and cats.
(2) The owner of any dog or cat more than six months of age on
January 1 of any year, or six months of age within the license year,
shall annually, or on or before the date the dog or cat becomes six
months of age, pay a license tax and obtain a license for such dog or
cat.
(3) The license year shall be from January 1 — December 31. The
Village Board, by resolution, shall establish a minimum dog or cat
license tax for a neutered male dog or cat, or spayed female dog or
cat, upon presentation of evidence that the dog or cat is neutered
or spayed, and for an unneutered male dog or cat, or unspayed
female dog or cat.
§ 10-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 10-3
1:100
(4) Upon payment of the required license tax and presentation of
evidence that the dog or cat is currently immunized against rabies
as required by § 10-2, the Clerk-Treasurer shall complete and issue
to the owner a license for such dog or cat, containing all
information required by state law. The Clerk-Treasurer shall also
deliver to the owner, at the time of issuance of the license, a tag of
durable material, bearing the same serial number as the license,
the name of the county in which issued and the license year.
(5) The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar and the collar
with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog or cat for which the
license is issued at all times, except as provided in § 10-2(d)(1). The
owner shall keep the license readily available for inspection by law
enforcement officers if the dog or cat is involved in an at large and/
or biting incident. A dog or cat observed without a tag attached to
its collar shall be presumed to be unlicensed and may be seized,
impounded or restrained by any police or humane officer, or the
owner may be cited.
(6) Upon annual application with the Clerk-Treasurer, the license fee
shall be waived for any animal specifically trained as a service
animal.
(7) A special half price rate will be given to senior citizens 65 years of
age or older, but only if such person's dog or cat is neutered. Such
special rate dose not apply to pet fanciers.
(b) Kennel licenses.
(1) Definition. For the purposes of this Subsection (b), the term
"kennel" means a permanent shelter for more than three dogs that
are more than six months of age, except shelters for which a pet
fancier permit is issued under Subsection (c) of this section.
(2) Required. Any person who provides permanent shelter for more
than three dogs that are more than six months of age shall be
required to obtain a kennel license unless such person has a pet
fancier permit under Subsection (c) of this section.
(3) Exemption. The county's animal control facility is covered under a
separate contract and is exempt from the requirements of this
Subsection (b).
(4) Restrictions. No kennel license shall be issued to any person for
any residentially zoned lot, except persons currently holding a
kennel license, provided that all of the other provisions of this
chapter are complied with. Every dog kennel shall be located and
operated at least 200 feet from the nearest inhabited dwelling,
exclusive of the dwelling of the person operating such dog kennel.
Dog kennels existing on the effective date of the ordinance from
which this section is derived, which are not located and operated at
least 200 feet from any such dwelling, may remain in existence, but
§ 10-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-3
1:101
shall not be improved or extended in violation of the provisions of
this section. (See zoning restrictions set forth in §§ 90-311(d) and
90-671(d).)
(5) Public hearing for new licenses. A public hearing for a new license
shall be held by the licensing committee of the Village Board to
ensure that the issuance of the license is not contrary to the
public's health, safety or welfare.
(6) Issuance of new licenses.
a. After a public hearing, upon recommendation by the licensing
committee and payment of the appropriate fee, the Village
Board may approve the issuance of a kennel license.
b. Upon presentation of evidence to the Clerk-Treasurer that all
dogs over six months of age are currently immunized against
rabies, the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the kennel license and a
number of tags equal to the number of dogs authorized to be
kept in the kennel.
c. Any such license shall be subject to compliance with §§ 10-10
and 10-25 of this chapter and Section 22-112 of the County
Zoning Code.
(7) Renewal.
a. The renewal application for each kennel license must be
reviewed and approved by the licensing committee. Upon
recommendation by the licensing committee and payment of
the proper fee, the renewal license may be issued.
b. Any such license shall be subject to compliance with §§ 10-16
and 10-25 of this chapter and Section 22-112 of the County
Zoning Code.
(8) Fees. Applicants for any kennel license covering up to 12 dogs shall
pay an annual fee as set by the Village Board. An additional fee as
set by the Village Board shall be charged for each dog in excess of
12.
(9) Revocation. In the event of a complaint regarding a current kennel
license, the licensing committee may discuss the complaint at a
public hearing and take appropriate action, up to, and including,
revocation.
(10) Tags required. The owner or keeper of a kennel shall at all times
keep a kennel license tag attached to the collar of each dog over six
months of age, except during competition or training.
(11) Transfer of tags. Tags may be transferred from one dog to another
within the kennel whenever any dog is removed from the kennel;
however, the rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag shall at all
§ 10-3 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 10-3
1:102
times remain attached to the dog for which it is issued, except on a
show dog during competition or training.
(12) Strays and taking outside kennel limits. No dog bearing a kennel
tag shall be permitted to stray or be taken any place outside the
limits of the kennel unless the dog is on a leash or on a temporary
basis for the purpose of hunting, breeding, trials, training or
competition.
(13) Fenced in areas. Kennel owners shall provide adequate housing
and care for the animals, including a fenced in run area sufficient to
accommodate the number of dogs in the kennel. (See § 10-16.)
(c) Pet fancier permit.
(1) Required.
a. Any person who resides in a single-family dwelling may apply
for a pet fancier permit to allow such person to provide
permanent shelter for up to seven pets.
b. Residents of multiple-family units are only allowed two animals
per unit, and may not be issued a pet fancier permit.
(2) Issuance of new permit.
a. The Clerk Treasurer may approve the issuance of a pet fancier
permit upon such conditions as it deems appropriate.
b. The Clerk Treasurer may issue a pet fancier permit, upon
evidence that each pet to be covered by the pet fancier permit
is properly licensed under Subsection (a) of this section.
c. All pet fancier permits, whether new or renewed, shall be
subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter, as well as any applicable provisions of this Code.
d. The permit year shall be from January 1 through December 31,
the same as pet licensing term.
(3) Renewal.
a. Pet fancier permits shall be renewed annually.
(4) Amendments. The Clerk Treasurer may issue an amended pet
fancier permit if the holder of the permit requests to delete and/or
add a pet to the permit, provided the number of pets do not exceed
the total allowed by the permit and provided evidence is presented
to the Clerk Treasurer to show that any pets to be added to the
permit are properly licensed under Subsection (a) of this section.
(5) Fee. Applicants for any pet fancier permit shall pay a
nonrefundable annual fee as set by the Village.
§ 10-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-3
1:103
§ 10-4. Late fees. [Amended 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 03-2011]
The collecting official shall assess and collect a late fee of $10 established
by the Village Board from any owner of a dog, cat five months of age or
older, if the owner fails to obtain a license prior to February 1st of each
year or within 30 days of acquiring ownership of a licensable dog or cat or
if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before the dog or cat reached
licensable age. All late fees collected shall be paid in to the Village treasury.
In addition, if the Village gives written notice to the owner of any licensable
dog, cat and the owner fails to pay the late fee within 30 days after such
notice, the owner shall be liable for prosecution for a violation of this section
under § 1-15.
The Village Clerk shall, in addition to the license fee provided for in this
article, assess and collect a late fee of $10 for every application for a license
for a dog, or cat more than five months of age, unless such application is
made prior to February 1st of any calendar year or unless such application
is made within 30 days of acquiring ownership of a licensable dog or cat,
whichever is later.
§ 10-5. Rabies control. [Ord. No. 14-2009, § 28, 10-26-2009]
See § 39-3.
§ 10-6. Dogs, cats, fowl and other animals.
(6) Revocation. If there are complaints regarding a current pet fancier
permit, the Licensing Committee may schedule a public hearing on
the matter and take appropriate action up to, and including,
revocation of the permit.
(7) Adequate housing and care required. A holder of a pet fancier
permit shall provide adequate housing and care for the animals.
(a) Ownership restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person within the
Village to own, harbor or keep any domestic animal which:
(1) Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or
highway in the Village.
(2) Assaults or attacks any person as described in Subsection (b) of this
section, or destroys property.
(3) Is at large within the Village limits.
(4) Habitually barks or howls to the annoyance of any person. (See
§ 10-12.)
(5) Kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal.
(6) Is known by such person to be infected with rabies or to have been
bitten by an animal known to have been infected with rabies.
§ 10-3 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 10-6
1:104
§ 10-7. Impoundment of animals. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-7,
1-14-2003]
(7) Is unlicensed, in the case of a dog or cat.
(b) Vicious animals.
(1) No vicious animal shall be allowed off the premises of its owner
unless such animal is muzzled and/or on a leash in the charge of the
owner or a member of the owner's immediately family who is over
16 years of age. For purposes of enforcing this Subsection (b), an
animal shall be deemed as being of a vicious disposition if, within
any twelve-month period, it attacks, bites or injures a human being,
pet, companion animal or livestock in unprovoked circumstances
off of the owner's premises. Any vicious animal which is found off
the premises of its owner, other than as provided in this subsection,
may be seized by any person and, upon delivery to the proper
authorities, may, upon establishment to the satisfaction of a court
of competent jurisdiction of the vicious character of the animal, by
testimony, under oath, reduced to writing, be euthanized by the
police authorities.
(2) No person shall harbor or permit to remain on their premises any
animal that is habitually inclined toward attacking persons or
animals, destroying property, barking excessively or making
excessive noises or running after vehicles.
(c) Running at large. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any
animal to permit or suffer such animal to be at large. For the purposes
of this subsection, the term "at large" means that such animal is off the
premises of its owner or keeper and upon any public street or alley,
school ground, public park or any other public or private property
without the permission of the owner of the property; provided, however,
an animal shall not be deemed to be at large if it is:
(1) Attached to a leash not more than 10 feet in length, or a retractable
leash which is of sufficient strength to restrain the animal, the
leash is held by a person at least 10 years of age and physically able
to control the animal, and prevents the animal from annoying or
worrying pedestrians or trespassing on private property or public
property where animals are forbidden; or
(2) Properly restrained within a motor vehicle.
(d) Owner's liability for damage caused by dog; penalties. The provisions of
Wis. Stats. § 174.02 relating to the owner's liability for damage caused
by animals, together with the penalties set forth in such statute, are
hereby adopted and incorporated in this section by reference.
(a) Animal control agency.
§ 10-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-7
1:105
§ 10-8. Domestically owned animals in cemeteries and on school
grounds. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-8, 1-14-2003]
(1) The Village may contract, or enter into an agreement, with a person
to provide for the operation of an animal shelter, impoundment of
stray animals, confinement of certain animals, disposition of
impoundment animals and assisting in the administration of rabies
vaccination programs.
(2) The Village does hereby delegate to any such animal control agency
the authority to act pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(b) Reasons. In addition to any penalty provided for a violation of this
chapter, any police or animal control officer may impound any dog, cat
or other animal which habitually pursues any vehicle upon any street,
alley or highway of the Village, assaults or attacks any person, is at
large within the Village, habitually barks, cries or howls, kills, wounds
or worries any domestic animal or is infected with rabies. In order for
an animal to be impounded, the impounding officer must see or hear the
violation of this section or have in his possession a signed statement of
complaining witness, made under oath, alleging the facts regarding the
violation and containing an agreement to reimburse the Village for any
damages it sustains for improper or illegal seizure.
(c) Claiming seized animals; disposal of unclaimed animals. After seizure of
animals under this section by a law enforcement or animal control
officer, the animal shall be impounded. The officer shall notify the
owner, either personally or through the U.S. mail, if such owner is
known to the officer or can be ascertained with reasonable effort. If,
within seven days after impoundment, the owner does not claim such
animal, the officer may either sell or dispose of the animal in a proper
and humane manner. If an animal bit a person before being impounded,
the animal shall be retained in the animal shelter for a period of 10 days
for observation purposes. Within such time, the owner may reclaim the
animal upon payment of impoundment fees established by resolution of
the Village Board. In the alternative, animal control or humane
agencies serving the Village may provide notice pursuant to their
operating procedures and state law. No animal shall be released from
the pound without being properly licensed, as required by state law or
this chapter.
(d) Liability. The Village and/or its animal control agency shall not be liable
for the death of any animal which has been impounded or disposed of
pursuant to this section.
(a) No domestically owned animal shall be permitted in any public
cemetery, except service animals and law enforcement animals.
(b) No person shall walk a pet upon public or private school grounds unless
express permission from persons in control of the school grounds has
been secured.
§ 10-7 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 10-9
1:106
§ 10-9. Duty of owner in case of animal bite. [Ord. No. 14-2009,
§ 29, 10-26-2009]
See § 39-3.
§ 10-10. Animal feces. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-10, 1-14-2003]
§ 10-11. Injury to property by animals. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-11,
1-14-2003]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing an animal to permit
such animal to go upon any parkway, or private land or premises without the
permission of the owner of such land or premises, and to habitually break,
bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, flower bed, plant, shrub, tree or
garden, in any manner whatsoever, or to defecate or urinate thereon.
§ 10-12. Habitually noisy animals. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-12,
1-14-2003]
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly keep or harbor any animal
which habitually barks, howls, yelps or cries to the great discomfort of the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood or in such a manner as to materially
disturb or annoy persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary
(a) Public and private property. It shall be unlawful for any person in
immediate control of any animal to permit fecal matter which is
deposited by such animal while off of its own premises to remain on any
street, alley, sidewalk, lawn, field or any public property, and it shall be
solely the responsibility of the person in control of such animal to
immediately, after such deposit, remove and dispose of all such fecal
matter. Any person owning or having control of an animal on any
property, public or private, which is owned or occupied by such person,
shall promptly remove excrement left by such animal and place it in a
proper receptacle, bury it or flush it in a toilet on property owned or
occupied by such person. This subsection shall not apply to a person
who is visually or physically handicapped. Any person causing or
permitting an animal to be on any property, public or private, not owned
or occupied by such person shall have in his immediate possession a
device or object suitable for removal of excrement and a depository for
the transmission of excrement to the property owned or occupied by
such person.
(b) Complaints of neighbors. If a neighbor complains of fecal odor from a
resident's property who owns animals, the health department or Police
Department may issue an order to correct such nuisance. If such
nuisance is not corrected, a citation may be issued.
(c) Filing complaints with Police Department. Any adult person, alone or
together with other adults, may seek relief from animal fecal matter
deposits as described in Subsection (a) and/or (b) of this section by
making a complaint to the Police Department.
§ 10-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-12
1:107
sensibilities. Such animals are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
An animal is considered to be in violation of this section when written
complaints from two or more adults living in separate residences within
audible distance of the noisy animal are filed with the Police Department
within a four-week period. No prosecution shall be commenced, except
upon the request of the Police Department, following a written petition
signed by two or more adult persons residing at different residences.
§ 10-13. Protected and prohibited animals, fowl, reptiles and
insects. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-13, 1-14-2003]
(a) Protected animals.
(1) Possession and sale. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess,
with the intent to sell or offer for sale, or buy or attempt to buy,
within the Village, any of the following animals, alive or dead, or
any part or product thereof:
a. Any wild cat of the family felidae;
b. Polar bear (thalarctos maritimus);
c. Red wolf (canis niger);
d. Vicuna (vicugna vicugna);
e. Alligator, caiman or crocodile of the order of crocodilia;
f. Gray or timber wolf (canis lupus);
g. Sea otter (enhydra lutris);
h. Pacific ridley turtle (lepidochelys olivacea);
i. Atlantic green turtle (chelonia mydas);
j. Mexican ridley turtle (lelpidochelyskempi).
(2) Compliance with federal regulations. It shall be unlawful for any
person to buy or sell, or attempt to buy or offer for sale, a native or
foreign species or subspecies of mammal, bird, amphibian or
reptile, or the dead body or parts thereof, which appears on the
endangered species list designated by the United States Secretary
of the Interior and published on the Code of Federal Regulations
pursuant to the Endangered Species Act of 1969 (PL 135, 91st
Congress).
(3) Regulating the importation of certain birds. No person shall import,
or cause to be imported, into the Village any part of the plumage,
skin or dead body of any species of hawk, owl or eagle. This
subsection shall not be construed to forbid or restrict the
importation or use of the plumage, skin or body, or any part thereof,
legally collected for use by the Native Americans for ceremonial
§ 10-12 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 10-13
1:108
purposes or in the preservation of their tribal customs and
heritage.
(4) Exceptions. The provisions of this Subsection (a) shall not be
deemed to prevent the lawful importation, possession, purchase or
sale of any species by any public agency, institute of higher
learning, persons holding federal permits, persons holding a
scientific collector's permit issued by the secretary of the state
department of natural resources, or to any person or organization
licensed to present a circus. The Village may waive the provisions
of this Subsection (a) for premises with appropriate federal and
state permits.
(b) Wild animals.
(1) Unlawful act. Unless prior approval is received from the Village, it
shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his
possession or under his control within the Village any poisonous
reptile or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal, insect or
reptile with any vicious or dangerous propensities. Specifically, it
shall be unlawful, without Village approval, for any person to keep,
maintain or have in his possession or under his control within the
Village any animal, reptile or insect, including, but not limited to:
a. Any warmblooded, carnivorous or omnivorous, wild or exotic
animal, including, but not limited to, nonhuman primates,
raccoons, skunks, foxes and wild and exotic cats, but not
including potbellied pigs.
b. All poisonous animals and reptiles, including rear-fang snakes.
c. Apes, including chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (hylobates);
gorillas (Gorilla); orangutans (Pongo); and ans siamangs
(Symphalangus).
d. Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus).
e. Bears (Ursidae).
f. Bison (Bison).
g. Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus).
h. Crocodilians (Crocodilians), including alligators, caymans and
gavials.
i. Constrictor snakes.
j. Coyotes (Canis latrans).
k. Deer (Cervidae), including all members of the deer family
(example: white-tailed deer, elk, antelope and moose).
l. Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonta).
§ 10-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-13
1:109
m. Foxes.
n. Game cocks and other fighting birds.
o. Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae).
p. Hyenas (Hyaenidae).
q. Jaguars (Panthera onca).
r. Leopards (Panthera pardus).
s. Lions (Panthera leo).
t. Lynxes (Lynx).
u. Monkeys, old world (Cercopithecidae).
v. Ostriches (Struthio).
w. Pumas (Felis concolor), also known as cougars, mountain lions
and panthers.
x. Raccoons.
y. Rhinoceroses (Rhinocero tidae).
z. Skunks.
aa. Snow leopards (Panthera uncia).
bb. Tigers (Panthera tigris).
cc. Wolves (Canis lupus).
dd. Poisonous insects, including tarantulas.
(2) Exceptions. The prohibitions of Subsection (b)(1) of this section
shall not apply to:
a. Creatures used as assistance animals.
b. Creatures in the care, custody or control of a veterinarian for
treatment; agricultural fairs; shows or projects of 4-H Clubs; a
display for judging purposes; an itinerant or transient carnival,
circus or other show; dog or cat shows or trials; public or
private educational institutions; or zoological gardens, if:
1. Their location conforms to the provisions of Chapter 90 of
this Code.
2. All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and
sanitary condition and maintained so as to eliminate
objectionable odors.
§ 10-13 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 10-13
1:110
§ 10-14. Rabbits, chicks and artificially colored animals. [Ord. No.
01-2003, § 7-1-14, 1-14-2003]
3. The animals are maintained in quarters constructed to
prevent their escape.
4. No person lives or resides within 100 feet of the quarters
in which the animals are kept.
c. Such animals are ferrets, nonpoisonous snakes,
nonconstricting snakes, rabbits and laboratory rats which have
been bred in captivity and which have never known the wild.
(c) Livestock.
(1) Definition. For the purposes of this Subsection (c), the term
"livestock" means cattle, horses, donkeys, swine, sheep, goats,
llamas, emus, ostriches, alpacas or farm raised deer and other such
animals susceptible to use for commercial purposes, including
domesticated fowl, such as chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks,
guineas or other poultry.
(2) Keeping. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any livestock
within the Village unless otherwise permitted by this Code. (See
§§ 90-311(d) and 90-371(c)(7).)
(3) Exceptions.
a. Livestock may be kept on any parcel zoned for agricultural use,
provided the area of the parcel is at least two acres.
b. Livestock may be kept on any parcel zoned for residential use,
provided, the area of the parcel is at least five acres and the
livestock is kept more than 300 feet from every residence not
on the parcel.
c. Livestock kept on a parcel prior to the adoption of the
ordinance from which this section is derived shall be allowed to
remain on the parcel, notwithstanding a violation of this
section, provided that the livestock is not determined by the
Village to be a nuisance following a hearing on the matter, if
one is requested, in writing, by a neighbor residing on a parcel
within 300 feet of the parcel where the livestock is kept.
(a) No person may sell, offer for sale, raffle, give as a prize or premium, use
as an advertising device or display living chicks, ducklings, other fowl
or rabbits that have been dyed or otherwise artificially colored.
(b) No person may sell, offer for sale, barter or give away living chicks,
ducklings or other fowl without providing proper brooder facilities for
the care of such chicks, ducklings or other fowl during the time they are
in such person's care, custody or control.
§ 10-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-14
1:111
§ 10-15. Provision of proper food and drink to confined animals.
[Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-15, 1-14-2003]
§ 10-16. Provision of proper shelter. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-16,
1-14-2003]
(c) No retailer, as in Wis. Stats. § 100.30(2)(e), may sell, offer for sale,
barter or give away living baby rabbits, baby chicks, ducklings or other
fowl under two months of age, in any quantity of less than six, unless
the purpose of selling such animals is for agricultural, wildlife or
scientific purposes.
(a) No person owning or responsible for confining or impounding any
animal may refuse or neglect to supply the animal with a sufficient
supply of food and water as follows:
(1) The food shall be sufficient to maintain all animals in good health.
(2) If potable water is not accessible to the animals at all times, it shall
be provided daily and in a sufficient quantity for the health of the
animal.
(a) Required. No person owning or responsible for confining or impounding
any animal may fail to provide the animal with proper shelter as
prescribed in this section. In the case of farm animals, nothing in this
section shall be construed as imposing shelter requirements or
standards more stringent than normally accepted husbandry.
(b) Indoor standards. Minimum indoor shelter standards shall include the
following:
(1) Ambient temperatures. The ambient temperature shall be
compatible with the health of the animal.
(2) Ventilation. Indoor housing facilities shall be adequately ventilated
by natural or mechanical means to provide for the health of the
animals at all times.
(c) Outdoor standards. Minimum outdoor shelter standards shall include
the following:
(1) Shelter from sunlight. When sunlight is likely to cause heat
exhaustion of an animal, sufficient shade, by natural or artificial
means, shall be provided to protect the animal from direct sunlight.
(2) Shelter from inclement weather.
a. Animals generally. Natural or artificial shelter, appropriate to
the local climatic conditions for the species concerned, shall be
provided, as necessary, for the health of the animal.
b. Dogs. If a dog is tied or confined unattended outdoors under
weather conditions which adversely affect the health of the
§ 10-14 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 10-16
1:112
dog, a shelter of suitable size to accommodate the dog shall be
provided.
(d) Space standards. Minimum space requirements for both indoor and
outdoor enclosures for animals other than dogs shall include:
(1) Structural strength. The housing facilities shall be structurally
sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animals from
injury and to contain the animals.
(2) Space requirements. Enclosures shall be constructed and
maintained so as to provide sufficient space to allow each animal
adequate freedom of movement. Inadequate space may be
indicated by evidence of debility, stress or abnormal behavior
patterns.
(e) Sanitation standards. Minimum standards of sanitation for both indoor
and outdoor enclosures shall include periodic cleaning to remove
excreta, other waste materials, dirt and trash so as to minimize health
hazards.
(f) Specific housing requirements for dogs. The minimum requirements for
a dog house shall be as follows:
(1) The floor shall rest on an enclosed base, four inches in height.
(2) The height of the dog house shall be at least four inches above the
height of the occupant dog.
(3) The length and width of the dog house shall be of such dimensions
that the occupant dog can lie flat on its side on the floor.
(4) The dog house shall have a tight board floor.
(5) The roof and sides of the dog house shall be constructed so as to be
waterproof and windproof.
(6) A baffle shall be placed over the door in inclement weather. A baffle
shall consist of some material or structure that will protect the
occupant dog from direct exposure to the elements of weather.
(7) The whole floor shall be bedded with hay or straw to a thickness of
at least six inches.
(8) The dog house run shall be located at least 15 feet from the owner's
lot line.
(9) Shade from the direct rays of the sun in the months of June —
September, inclusive, shall be provided in the area of the dog
house.
(10) The area around the dog house shall be reasonably dry, without
standing water or mud, and shall be kept reasonably clean.
§ 10-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-16
1:113
§ 10-17. Neglected, abandoned and injured animals. [Ord. No.
01-2003, § 7-1-17, 1-14-2003]
(11) The minimum outdoor dog run enclosure size shall be four feet by
six feet, and shall be of a height and strength sufficient to contain
the dog.
(12) The minimum allowable tie out length is 15 feet.
(g) Coop maintenance. No person shall maintain or operate a coop unless
the coop is established at least 25 feet from the nearest inhabited
dwelling, exclusive of the dwelling of the person operating such coop.
Coops existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this
section is derived, which are not located and operated at least 25 feet
from any such dwelling, may remain in existence, but shall not be
improved or extended in violation of this section. Every coop shall be
operated and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition so as not to
endanger the health, comfort, safety and welfare of the public. (See
§ 90-371(c)(7)c.)
(a) Neglected and abandoned animals.
(1) No person may abandon any animal.
(2) Any law enforcement officer may remove, shelter and care for an
animal found to be cruelly exposed to the weather, starved or
denied adequate water, neglected, abandoned or otherwise treated
in a cruel manner, and may deliver such animal to another person
to be sheltered, cared for and given medical attention, if necessary.
In all cases, the owner, if known, shall be immediately notified and
such officer, or other person having possession of the animal, shall
have a lien thereon for the animal's care, keeping and medical
attention and the expense of the notice.
(3) If the owner or custodian is unknown and cannot, with reasonable
effort, be ascertained or does not, within seven days after notice,
redeem the animal by paying the expenses incurred, it may be
treated as a stray and dealt with as such.
(4) Whenever, in the opinion of any such officer, an animal is hopelessly
injured or diseased so as to be beyond the probability of recovery, it
shall be lawful for such officer to kill the animal and the owner
thereof shall not recover damages for the killing of such animal
unless he shall prove that such killing was unwarranted.
(5) Wis. Stats. § 948.17 is hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this section.
(b) Injured animals. No person who owns, harbors or keeps any animal
shall fail to provide proper medical attention to such animal when and if
such animal becomes sick or injured. If the owner of such animal cannot
be located, the Village or any animal control agency with which the
§ 10-16 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 10-17
1:114
§ 10-18. Cruelty to animals and birds. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-18,
1-14-2003]
Village has an agreement or contract shall have the authority to take
custody of such animal for the purpose of providing medical treatment,
and the owner thereof shall reimburse the person or organization for
the costs of such treatment.
(a) Birds' nests and eggs. No person, except a police officer, Health Officer
or humane officer in the pursuit of their duties, shall, within the Village,
shoot or kill, or commit an act of cruelty to an animal or bird or disturb
any bird's nest or bird's eggs.
(b) Leading animal from motor vehicle. No person shall lead any animal
upon a Village street from a motorized vehicle or a trailer or semitrailer
drawn by a motorized vehicle.
(c) Use of poisonous and controlled substances. No person may expose any
pet owned by another person to any known poisonous substance or
controlled substance listed in Wis. Stats. § 161.14, whether or not it is
mixed with meat or other food, where it is reasonable to anticipate the
substance may be eaten by such animal or for the purpose of harming
the animal. This subsection shall not apply to poison used on a person's
own premises and designed for the purpose of rodent and pest
extermination, nor the use of a controlled substance used in accepted
veterinarian practice or in research by persons or organizations
regularly engaged in such research.
(d) Use of certain devices prohibited. No person may, directly or indirectly,
or by aiding, abetting or permitting the doing thereof, either put, place,
fasten, use or fix upon, or to, any animal used or readied for use for a
work purpose, or for use in an exhibition, competition, rodeo, circus or
other performance, any bristle bur, tack bur or similar device, or a
poling device used to train a horse to jump which is charged with
electricity or to which nails, tacks or other sharp points have been
affixed.
(e) Shooting at caged or staked animals. No person may instigate,
promote, aid or abet, as a principal, agent, employee, participant or
spectator, or participate in the earnings from, or intentionally maintain
or allow any place to be used for, the shooting, killing or wounding with
a firearm or any deadly weapon of any animal that is tied, staked out,
caged or otherwise intentionally confined in a man-made enclosure,
regardless of size.
(f) Fighting of animals. No person shall:
(1) Own, possess, keep or train any animal with the intent that such
animal shall be engaged in an exhibition of fighting.
(2) Build, make, maintain or keep a pit or enclosure on any premises
owned or occupied by him, or allow a pit or enclosure to be built,
§ 10-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-18
1:115
§ 10-19. Trapping animals. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-19, 1-14-2003]
§ 10-20. Animalnapping. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-20, 1-14-2003]
No person may take an animal of another person from one place to another
without the owner's consent, or cause such animal to be confined or carried
out of the Village or held for any purpose without the owner's consent. This
section does not apply to law enforcement officers or humane society agents
engaged in the exercise of their official duties, or as otherwise permitted in
this chapter.
§ 10-21. Vehicle accidents. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-21, 1-14-2003]
The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to,
or death of, a domestic animal which appears to be a pet shall immediately
notify the Police Department or an animal control agency the jurisdiction of
which extends into the Village.
made, maintained or kept on such premises for the purpose of an
exhibition of animal fighting.
(3) Exercise an animal with weights for the purpose of fighting,
including, but not limited to, heavy items strapped to the animal's
chest or neck.
(4) In any manner encourage, instigate, promote or assist in an
exhibition of animal fighting or intentional combat.
(5) Charge admission, be an assistant, umpire or participant, or be
present as a spectator to any exhibition of animal fighting or
combat.
(g) Impoundment. Any animal control officer or other officer empowered to
act by law may impound any animal found to be cruelly treated.
(a) In the interest of public health and safety, it shall be unlawful for any
person within the Village to set, place or tend any trap for the purpose
of trapping, killing, catching, wounding, worrying or molesting any
animal, except by use of live box type traps only. For the purposes of
this subsection, the term "live box type traps" means traps which
capture and hold an animal in an alive and unharmed condition. Any
person requiring deviations from this section must receive written
approval from the Village Board.
(b) All such traps set, placed or tended on Village-owned land shall comply
with Wis. Stats. Ch. 29, as such chapter relates to trapping.
(c) Nothing in this section shall prohibit or hinder the Village or its
employees or agents from performing their official duties.
§ 10-18 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 10-22
1:116
§ 10-22. Sale or display of certain birds in food establishments.
[Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-22, 1-14-2003]
No person shall sell or display birds of the Psittacine family in any store
selling, giving away or preparing food or drink for human consumption
unless the birds are enclosed so as to prevent any possible contamination of
the food or drink.
§ 10-23. Keeping bees. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-23, 1-14-2003]
§ 10-24. Care of livestock. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-24, 1-14-2003]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any hive,
stand or box where bees are kept or keep any bees in or upon any
premises zoned residential within the limits of the Village unless the
bees are kept in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) No hive, stand or box where bees are kept shall be located closer
than 20 feet to any property boundary. Such hives, stands or boxes
may only be located in the rear yard.
(2) If bee colonies are kept within 50 feet of any exterior boundary of
the property on which the hive, stand or box is located, a barrier
that will prevent bees from flying through it, no less than six feet
high, shall be installed and maintained along the exterior boundary.
Such barrier may be either a natural or artificial planting.
(3) Watering facilities for bees shall be provided on the premises.
(4) The bees and equipment shall be kept in accordance with the
provisions of statute.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to prohibit the
keeping of bees in a hive, stand or box located within a school or
university building for the purpose of study or observation.
(c) No person shall keep, establish or maintain any hive, stand or box
where bees are kept without first obtaining a permit from the health
department. A brief and simple plan, including a diagram describing
the location of the hive, stand or box in relationship to lot boundaries
and the barrier, shall be submitted to the health department prior to the
issuance of a permit. No fee shall be charged for such permit.
(d) The health department may deny or revoke a permit under this section
if, based on the plan submitted or a verified complaint signed by two or
more witnesses residing in different households, it is determined that
the beehive creates a nuisance. A person whose permit is denied or
revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal the health
department's denial or revocation to the board of health.
§ 10-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-24
1:117
§ 10-25. Number of dogs and cat. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-25,
1-14-2003]
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
HORSES — Includes donkeys, mules and ponies.
(b) Stable maintenance. No person shall maintain or operate a stable
unless the stable shall be established at least 200 feet from the nearest
inhabited dwelling, exclusive of the dwelling of the person operating
such stable. Stables existing on the effective date of the ordinance from
which this section is derived, which are not located and operated at
least 200 feet from any such dwelling, may remain in existence, but
shall not be improved or extended in violation of the provisions of this
section. Every stable shall be operated and maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition so as not to endanger the health, comfort, safety and
welfare of the public. No horse, cow, pig, sheep, goat or other small
animal or bird shall be kept and maintained other than in a stable which
conforms to the requirements of this section. (See §§ 90-311(d) and
90-371(c)(7).)
(c) Responsibility. The owner of a horse shall be responsible, at all times,
for the care and welfare of such animal.
(d) Shelters in pastures. All horses kept in pastures without access to barn
facilities during the months of October — April, inclusive, shall have
access to a shelter which shall consist of at least three walls and a roof.
The shelter shall be of such size and type of construction as will permit
all horses in such pasture to be completely underneath its roof and
protected from direct exposure to weather.
(e) Barns. The stalls wherein horses are kept shall be cleaned at least once
a day. An adequate supply of bedding straw or comparable material
shall be kept in the stalls at all times.
(f) Food and water. Proper feed of an adequate amount and adequate
water shall be provided to the horses at all times. When the usual water
supply becomes frozen, water shall be provided to horses twice a day in
such amounts as will permit such animals to drink their fill.
(g) Defects. Any horse adjudged by a law enforcement officer of the Village,
Health Officer or animal control officer to be sick, lame or injured shall
not be used for work or recreation.
(h) Shoeing. A horse ridden on the road or any hard surface must be shod.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FAMILY — One or more persons.
§ 10-24 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 10-25
1:118
§ 10-26. Slaughterhouses. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-26, 1-14-2003]
§ 10-27. Violations; penalties. [Ord. No. 01-2003, § 7-1-27,
1-14-2003]
RESIDENTIAL LOT — A parcel of land zoned as residential, which is
intended to be occupied by a dwelling.
(b) Limitation. No family shall own, harbor or keep in their possession
more than three dogs or cats, or any combination thereof, on any lot,
except that a litter of puppies or kittens, or a portion thereof, may be
kept for not more than 10 weeks from birth unless such family has been
issued, and are in compliance with, a kennel license, as provided in
§ 10-3(b). If more than one family resides on a residential lot, then only
a total of three dogs or cats, or any combination thereof, shall be
allowed on a residential lot unless prior approval is obtained from the
Village.
(c) Transient dogs and cats. Any dog or cat shipped or transported through
the Village or entering the Village only for the purpose of a temporary
stay, when such stay shall not exceed 30 days, shall be exempt from the
license fees and collars and tag requirements of this chapter; however,
all other provisions of this chapter are applicable to such transient
animals.
(a) License required. No person shall construct, operate or maintain a
slaughterhouse in the Village without first obtaining a license from the
state department of agriculture under Wis. Stats. § 97.42(2).
(b) Location. No person shall construct, operate or maintain a
slaughterhouse in the Village within one mile of any residence or other
structure used for dwelling purposes. (See §§ 90-671 and 90-691.)
(a) The following fee structure shall apply to violations of this chapter:
Section
Number First Offense
Subsequent
Offense Injunction?
10-1 Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable
10-2 $25 — $200 $100 — $400 No
10-3 $25 — $200 $100 — $400 No
10-4 Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable
10-5 $50 — $200 Yes
10-6 $25 — $100 $50 — $200 No
10-7 $25 — $100 $50 — $200 No
10-8 $25 — $100 $50 — $200 No
10-9 $25 — $100 $50 — $200 No
10-10 $25 — $100 $50 — $200 No
§ 10-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-27
1:119
Section
Number First Offense
Subsequent
Offense Injunction?
10-11 $25 — $100 $50 — $200 No
10-12 $25 — $100 $50 — $200 No
10-13 $25 — $100 $50 — $200 No
10-14 $25 — $100 $50 — $200 No
10-15 $50 — $200 Yes
10-16 $50 — $200 Yes
10-17 $50 — $200 Yes
10-18 $500 — $2,00 Yes
10-19 $50 — $200 Yes
10-20 $500 — $1,000 Yes
10-21 $50 — $200 No
10-22 $50 — $200 Yes
10-23 $50 — $200 Yes
10-24 $50 — $200 Yes
10-25 $25 — $100 $50 — $200 No
10-26 $50 — $200 Yes
(b) In addition to the fee structure set forth in Subsection (a) of this section
for violations of this chapter, zoning ordinance penalties may apply.
(See § 90-10, as amended on July 9, 1985).
§ 10-27 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 10-27
1:120
Chapter 14
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
§ 10-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-27
1:121

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 14-1. Purpose. [Code 1993, § 14.02]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide certain minimum standards,
provisions and requirements for safe and stable design, methods of
construction and uses of materials in buildings and structures erected,
constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, converted to other uses
or demolished, and to regulate the equipment, maintenance, use and
occupancy of all buildings and structures.
§ 14-1.5. Commercial Building Code adopted.
Chapters SPS 360-366, Wisconsin Administrative Code (Wisconsin State
Commercial Building Code for multi-family dwellings, public buildings and
places of employment) and Chapters SPS 375-379 are hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter with respect to those classes of buildings
to which this building code specifically applies. Any future amendments,
revisions and modifications of said Chapters SPS 360-366 and 375-379
incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this construction
code. A copy of said Chapters SPS 360-366 and 375-379 and amendments
thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector.
§ 14-1.6. Description and value of work. [Added 11-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 24-2019]
Prior to receiving an occupancy permit, all applications for building permits,
except for one- or two-family dwellings, shall submit a description of work
and scheduled value on a form to be furnished by the Village.
§ 14-2. Uniform Dwelling Code adopted. [Code 1993, § 14.03]
(a) Fees. The fees referred to in this section shall be established by
resolution of the Village Board and shall be listed in a fee schedule
available at the office of the Village Clerk and Building Inspector. These
fees may from time to time be modified by Village Board resolution.
Fees shall be related to costs involved in handling permit applications,
reviewing plans, conducting site inspections and administering the
building inspection program.
(a) The following Wis. Admin. Code, Chs. Comm. 20 — 25, Uniform
Dwelling Code, as amended and effective April 10, 1981, and all
amendments thereto, are adopted and incorporated by reference in this
section and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this
section:
Comm. 20 Administration and Enforcement
Comm. 21 Construction Standards
Comm. 22 Energy Conservation
§ 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-2
1:123
§ 14-3. Street openings. [Code 1993, § 15.09]
All street openings shall be in compliance with the terms of § 70-1.
§ 14-4. Interference with drainage. [Code 1993, § 14.05]
The damming, filling, relocating or otherwise interfering with the natural
flow of surface water in a natural drainagecourse, the intended flow of
surface water in an approved subdivision or the existing flow between other
properties shall not be permitted, except with the approval of the Village,
county and state agencies having jurisdiction.
§ 14-5. Foundation survey requirements. [Code 1993, § 14.10]
Comm. 23 Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Standards
Comm. 24 Electrical Standards
Comm. 25 Plumbing and Potable Water Standards
(b) The Building Inspector and his delegated representatives are
authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions
of the Uniform Dwelling Code.
(c) At the time application for a building permit is made, the Building
Inspector shall collect the state fee required under the Uniform
Dwelling Code, and an additional fee as set by the Village Board shall be
charged by the Village for plan examination and additional costs
incurred by the Village in administering the state code provisions.
(a) Submission; comparisons.
(1) Any person erecting, moving, enlarging or reconstructing a
habitable structure which requires a zoning permit, shall, upon
completion of construction of the footings, concrete slab or other
foundations, submit to the Building Inspector a survey prepared by
a registered land surveyor, showing the locations, boundaries,
dimensions, elevations and sizes of the boundaries of the lot and all
existing structures, including foundations, and their relationship to
the lot lines.
(2) The Building Inspector shall compare the location of all new or
extended foundations, including adjacent properties, with the
location of all proposed construction activity reported on the
permit application. No further construction shall commence unless
the Building Inspector finds and certifies that the foundation
location is consistent with the approved drainage/grading plan.
(b) Assumption of liability.
(1) At the option of the permit applicant, the foundation survey
requirements may be waived for any construction, if the permit
applicant files and records with the Building Inspector and county
§ 14-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 14-5
1:124
§ 14-6. Swimming pools. [Code 1993, § 14.04]
register of deeds an assumption of liability, which shall be binding
on the permit applicant and his estate and shall forewarn future
owners of the parcel of the lack of a certified foundation survey
verifying that structures located on the parcel are in conformity
with this section and, if an error is made on the placement of any
construction or structure or a zoning violation is later discovered,
the applicant and his estate shall move the construction or
structure or, if a zoning violation is later discovered, the applicant
and his estate shall move the construction or structure so as to
conform with the zoning regulations effective on the date the
permit was issued and shall pay all consequent damages.
(2) Structures illegally located on a parcel are in violation of the
Village zoning ordinance (Chapter 90 of this Code). The applicable
statute of limitations for prosecution of such violations shall not
begin until such time as a certified survey has been filed with the
Building Inspector and the register of deeds indicating the location
of the structures on the parcel.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHILD OF TENDER YEARS — Any child who has not attained the age
of eight years.
SWIMMING POOL — Any depression in the ground, either temporary
or permanent, or a container of water, either temporary or permanent,
and either above or below the ground, in which water of more than
18 inches in depth is contained, and which is used primarily for the
purpose of bathing or swimming, except temporary pools with an area
of 150 square feet or less shall not come within the provisions of this
section.
(b) Private swimming pools. No swimming pool shall be erected in the front
of the residence of the owner or occupant of the premises connected
therewith. In the case of lots bordered on two sides by public streets, no
swimming pool may be erected in the area between the setback lines of
the main building and the street right-of-way line and, in no case, less
than five feet from any lot line or building wall.
(c) Safety guidelines. Every person who owns, directly or indirectly, or
operates, uses or has custody or control of, or the right to use any
swimming pool located in the Village, shall erect the swimming pool in a
manner so as to prevent a child of tender years from falling into such
swimming pool. Such erection will be accomplished by constructing the
swimming pool to meet the following safety guidelines:
(1) Aboveground swimming pools.
§ 14-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-6
1:125
a. Aboveground swimming pool walls shall be a minimum of 42
inches in height along all sides of the swimming pool, when
measured from the outer pool wall top to the ground level. All
such swimming pools shall have a removable ladder. When the
forty-two-inch minimum height is not met, a fence with a total
height of 48 inches must be erected no closer than six feet from
the closest vertical swimming pool wall.
b. Swimming pool fences shall completely enclose the swimming
pool and be constructed so as to not allow the passage of a sixinch
sphere between the spindles.
c. If a fence is to be attached to the top of the swimming pool, the
fence shall extend the overall height of the swimming pool and
fence combination to be no less than four feet, nor greater than
six feet in height. The distance between the top of the
swimming pool and bottom of the fence shall be no greater
than three inches. The distance between spindles shall not
exceed six inches on center.
Any door, gate or other opening in the fence shall be locked at
all times when the swimming pool is not in use, and shall have
its hinges located in order that it may swing open only from the
inside out.
d. An aboveground swimming pool shall be located no closer than
eight feet from the side lot line and no closer than 10 feet from
the rear lot line.
(2) In-ground swimming pools.
a. All in-ground swimming pools shall be fully enclosed by an
approved fence of at least 42 inches in height.
b. All gates which provide access to the swimming pool area shall
be self-closing and self-latching, with the latch mechanisms
positioned so that they are not readily accessible by young
children.
c. An in-ground swimming pool shall be located no closer than
eight feet from the side lot line, and no closer than 10 feet from
the rear lot line.
(d) Draining. No private swimming pool shall be constructed so as to allow
water from the swimming pool to drain into any sanitary sewer or septic
tank, nor to overflow upon, or cause damage to, any adjoining property.
Provision may be made for draining the contents of any swimming pool
into a storm sewer, but such installation shall be subject to prior
approval of the plumbing and health inspector. In all cases where a
private swimming pool is to be constructed on premises served by a
private sewage disposal system, approval of the state department of
§ 14-6 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 14-6
1:126
§ 14-7. Filling of lands. [Code 1993, § 14.06]
health shall be necessary before the construction of any such swimming
pool may commence.
(e) Filtration. All private swimming pools, within the meaning of this
section, shall have, in connection therewith, some filtration system to
assure proper circulation of the water therein and maintenance of the
proper bacterial quality thereof.
(f) Finish. All swimming pools of a permanent type shall have the sides and
bottom of a smooth finish and no sand or dirt bottom shall be permitted.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: Fill
means the normal and usual soil resulting from excavating or grading of
land, but shall not include building materials, refuse or any other
manufactured articles of any kind, the use of which, as fill, is prohibited.
(b) Permit required. Whenever any party desires to deposit fill in any
amount, except any fill used for topsoil dressing on any lands in the
Village, such party shall first obtain a fill permit from the Building
Inspector. A permit shall not be required for fill deposited at a licensed
landfill site or for any lands for which a valid building permit has been
issued. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "topsoil dressing"
means hand application of topsoil to existing turf.
(c) Permit applications. The Building Inspector shall provide application
forms for fill permits, which shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Place where fill is to be deposited and the owner thereof.
(3) Existing and proposed elevation of the area to be filled, at a
distance of not more than twenty-five foot intervals.
(4) Existing elevation of adjacent lands within 50 feet of the land to be
filled, at distance of not more than 25-foot intervals.
(5) A sketch showing the information set forth in Subsections (c)(1) —
(4) of this section, and the route to be traveled to the fill site.
(6) Approximate quantity of fill.
(7) Time required for filling.
(8) Party responsible for leveling, seeding or sodding.
(9) Method for erosion control during filling.
§ 14-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-7
1:127
§ 14-8. Violations; penalties. [Code 1993, §§ 14.15, 15.15]
Except as otherwise provided, any person found to be in violation of any
provision of this chapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated under this
chapter, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-15.
§ 14-9. through § 14-40. (Reserved)
(d) Refusal to issue permit. If the Building Inspector is satisfied that
issuance of a fill permit is not in the best interests of the owners of
adjacent lands or the Village, he shall refuse to issue such fill permit.
(e) Fee. Before issuance of the fill permit, the Building Inspector shall
collect the fee set from time to time by resolution of the Village Board,
and shall deliver such fee to the Clerk-Treasurer. Failure to obtain a fill
permit shall result in the imposition of double fees. Such permit shall be
posted on the site where the fill is to be deposited so as to be visible
from the public roadway.
(f) Leveling. All fill deposited pursuant to a fill permit shall be leveled
within 30 days of the last deposit.
(g) Violations. No person shall deposit any fill in the Village without a valid
fill permit. In case of any violation of this section, the Building
Inspector, Village Board, Village Attorney, police officers or any
neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such violation
may institute appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin a violation of
this section.
§ 14-7 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 14-9
1:128
ARTICLE II
Electrical
§ 14-41. Electrical and electricians. [Code 1993, §§ 12.01(18),
12.18; amended 2-24-2020 by Ord. No. 4-2020]
(a) State Electrical Code Adopted. Chapter SPS 316 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code and all amendments thereto are hereby adopted
and made part of this chapter, and a copy shall be kept on file of the
office of the Electrical Inspector. To the extent of any conflict between
this code and the Wisconsin Administrative Code, the Wisconsin
Administrative Code section shall apply.
(b) Electrical Inspector. An Electrical Inspector shall act as head of this
department. The Electrical Inspector shall have a certification per
Chapter SPS 305.62 [Wis. Stats. § 101.875(1)]. The Electrical Inspector
may be provided with the assistance of such additional persons as the
Village Board may direct.
(c) Authority to discontinue electric operation. The Electrical Inspector
may authorize the disconnection of all electrical currents to any wiring
or equipment which is found to be in an unsafe condition or to any
electrical service where such electrical currents are a hazard to life or
property. No person shall reconnect any electrical wiring or equipment
without authorization from the Electrical Inspector.
(d) Licensing requirements. No person or entity may engage in the
business or offer to engage in the business of installing, repairing or
maintaining electrical wiring unless the person or entity holds a license
or certification issued per Subsection (e).
(e) Electrical contractor defined. An "electrical contractor" is a person or
firm that may engage in the business of or offer to engage in the
business of installing, repairing, or maintaining electrical wiring and
holds a license or certification issued per Chapter SPS 305.41 (Wis.
Stats. § 101.862).
(f) Electrician defined. An "electrician" is a person that holds a license or
registration issued per Chapter SPS 305.40 (Wis. Stats. 101.80).
(g) Owner-occupied. Except as specified in Subsection (h)(1), a residential
property owner who installs, repairs or maintains electrical wiring on
premises that the owner owns and occupies as a residence shall not be
required to hold a license or certification per Subsection (e) or per
Subsection (f). NOTE: A new dwelling being constructed cannot be
designated owner-occupied until final inspections are completed and
occupancy allowed. An existing dwelling unfit for human habitation
cannot be designated owner-occupied.
(h) Permits. An electrical permit is required for the installation, repairing
or maintenance of electrical wiring except as specified in Subsection
(h)(2).
§ 14-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-41
1:129
(1) An owner-occupant of a residential property that is not licensed per
Subsection (e) or per Subsection (f) shall not be issued a permit to
perform any of the following electrical work:
a. Installation, repair or replacement of an electrical service,
service equipment, meter housing and meter pedestal.
(2) No permit shall be required for:
a. Minor repairs made necessary for proper maintenance of an
existing electrical installation, provided that there are no
alterations or extensions of the existing circuit.
b. Connecting a replacement furnace, air conditioner,
dishwasher, water heater or other similar appliances to the
existing disconnect, provided that the existing branch circuit
and existing disconnect is utilized and there are no alterations
to the existing circuit.
c. Replacement or repair of light fixtures, receptacles, switches,
circuit breakers or other similar devices, provided that there
are no alterations or extensions of the existing circuit.
d. Reconnecting, installation, repair or replacement of machines,
tools, process equipment and apparatus used in commercial,
manufacturing and industrial facilities, provided that there are
no alterations to the existing circuit or the existing disconnect.
(i) Inspections. Inspections performed shall be of the following types (SPS
316.940).
(1) A rough electrical inspection before the electrical work is
concealed.
(2) A re-inspection of the electrical work if applicable.
(3) A final inspection of the electrical work.
(4) An electrical service (SPS 316.950).
(j) Right of entry. The Electrical Inspector may, during reasonable hours,
request to enter any building or premises in the discharge of his or her
official duties for the purpose of performing inspections or reinspections.
If entry is denied, the Electrical Inspector may obtain a
special inspection warrant authorizing such entry.
(k) Plans. The Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to request
drawings, plans, specifications or any relevant information to ensure
compliance with the electrical code.
(l) Fees. Permit fees shall be as set by the Village Board. A copy of said fees
shall be kept on file in the office of the Electrical Inspector.
§ 14-41 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 14-41
1:130
§ 14-42. through § 14-70. (Reserved)
(m) Emergency. Under emergency conditions, the necessary electrical work
may be commenced without submitting an application for a permit. The
person performing the emergency electrical work shall report the
electrical work no later than the following business day and shall
submit an electrical permit for such work.
(n) Liability. This section shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen
the responsibility or liability of any person supplying electricity to, or
selling, renting, leasing, owning, using, operating, controlling,
installing, repairing, removing, replacing, disturbing, connecting,
disconnecting or maintaining any electrical wiring, device or equipment
for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein or
therefrom, nor shall the Village or any of its officials be held as
assuming any such responsibility or liability by reason of the issuance
or revocation of any permit, or the inspection or re-inspection of any
electrical equipment, sales, rentals, drawings, plans, specifications,
materials, samples, test reports, literature, information or schedules
authorized by this section, nor shall the Village or any of its officials be
held liable for any damage resulting from the enforcement of this
section.
§ 14-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-42
1:131

ARTICLE III
Plumbing
§ 14-71. Adoption of state plumbing code. [Code 1993, § 15.01]
The provisions of the plumbing code issued by the state department of
commerce, and all amendments and additions, in effect at any specified
time, are incorporated in this section by reference, with the same force and
effect as though set forth in this section. The provisions of such code and
this article shall govern all plumbing as therein defined, and no plumbing
shall be installed, except in accordance with such code and this article.
§ 14-72. Plumbing supervisor. [Code 1993, § 15.02]
(a) Office authorized. In order to enforce the provisions of this article, the
office of the plumbing supervisor is authorized in accordance with Wis.
Stats. § 145.05. The plumbing supervisor shall, under the direction of
the Village Board, have control of the inspection of plumbing, water
supply and drainage installation from street mains, curbs or other
terminals and installations inside, and in connection with, any building
as set forth in this article.
(b) Qualifications. The plumbing supervisor shall be a practical plumber,
skilled sanitarian or a competent person familiar with plumbing. He
shall not be interested, directly or indirectly, in the plumbing or
drainlaying business, and shall devote his full time to the duties of his
office.
(c) Appointment, term of office and salary. The plumbing supervisor shall
be appointed by the Village Board for a term of one year, or until his
successor shall be duly appointed and qualified, and at such
compensation as shall be established by the Village Board.
(d) Removal from office. The plumbing supervisor shall hold office during
his term, except that the Village Board may, at any time, remove him
from office for insufficiency, neglect of duties or malfeasance in office.
(e) Deputy plumbing supervisors and assistants. The Village Board may,
from time to time, for such length of time as it deems advisable, employ
one or more deputy plumbing supervisors and such other assistants for
the plumbing supervisor as it may deem necessary, and may discharge
any of such deputies or assistants at will, and pay them such
compensation as shall be established by the Village Board. During the
absence or inability to act of the plumbing supervisor, the Village Board
may appoint any deputy plumbing supervisor as acting plumbing
supervisor.
(f) Requirements, authorities and duties. The Village Board may require
any or all plumbing supervisors, deputy plumbing supervisors and
assistants to furnish bonds in such amounts, for the faithful
performance of their duties as it deems advisable. The plumbing
§ 14-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-72
1:133
§ 14-73. Permits. [Code 1993, § 15.03]
supervisor, under the direction of the Village Board, is authorized and
empowered to exercise such supervision over all plumbing installations
as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this article, state
law and the state plumbing code, and to make all plumbing safe and
sanitary and to promote public welfare in all classes of buildings,
private and public. He shall have the right to enter any building during
reasonable hours in the discharge of his official duties, and he shall
prepare suitable forms for the applications and permits required and
keep copies for reference. He shall file a monthly and yearly report with
the Village Board. Defects revealed during inspections shall be set forth
in detail, in writing, and a copy thereof shall be given to the permit
holder. He shall be under the direct supervision of the Village Board
and shall enforce all of the provisions of this article. The plumbing
supervisor is authorized to withhold approval of an application for a
plumbing permit to any person who has not complied with a lawful
order of the plumbing supervisor. The person refused such a permit
may appeal to the Village Board within 10 days.
(a) No person shall do any plumbing until a permit for such plumbing has
been taken out with the plumbing supervisor. Before a permit to install
plumbing may be issued, a plot plan of the premises upon which the
plumbing is to be installed shall have been approved by the Building
Inspector and the plumbing supervisor. The plot plan shall include the:
(1) Size of the building and its location on the lot.
(2) Size and location of the proposed system of private sewage
disposal.
(3) Location, in feet, of all water wells not on the lot, but within 45 feet
of the lot.
(4) Location of the water well on the lot.
(5) Location, in feet, of any system of private sewage disposal that is
less than 20 feet from the lot.
(6) Slope of the land surface of the lot, in feet, per 100 feet, or the
percent of slope.
(7) Location of all percolation test holes and the data of the test of each
hole. The data shall include the rate, in minutes, for the water to
fall one inch, plus any data from borings, if needed.
(b) The application forms for permits shall be furnished by the plumbing
inspector. Such forms shall contain an accurate description of the
property, the name of the street to be opened and between what streets,
and all purposes for which the plumbing is to be used. No permit shall
be deemed to authorize anything not stated in the application. The
applications shall be signed by either the owner or his authorized agent
§ 14-72 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 14-73
1:134
§ 14-74. Fees. [Code 1993, § 15.04]
§ 14-75. House sewer inspections; tees; backfilling. [Code 1993,
§ 15.05]
and, where the work is not to be performed by the owner in person, by
the person who is to perform the work.
(c) A plan shall be submitted with the application for a permit, which shall
include a clear description of the plumbing.
(d) All plans shall be approved or rejected within five days of the time the
plans are submitted to the plumbing supervisor.
(e) No permit shall be issued unless the plans are approved and the
application is properly made out. No permit shall be issued unless the
lot on which a system or private sewage disposal is to be installed is
large enough to install such a system in full compliance with the
Wisconsin Administrative Code; provided, however, that this restriction
shall not apply to plumbing to be installed in a building in existence on
the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived.
(f) A permit shall become void if the plumbing work shall not have been
commenced within three months of the date of the permit and may be
voided at the request of the permit holder.
(g) Sewer permits issued by the Village shall be in effect for installation on
normal working days only. Saturdays, Sundays and all holidays
approved by the Village Board are excluded.
(a) Before a permit is granted under § 14-73, the applicant shall pay to the
plumbing supervisor the permit fee prescribed from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board.
(b) If a building is occupied before a final inspection is made, an additional
fee as set by the Village Board shall be paid by the permit holder. If any
plumbing work is done prior to the issuance of a permit, the permit fee
shall be double the amount that would otherwise be payable under this
section.
(c) All money received for permits under this article shall be paid weekly to
the Clerk-Treasurer and placed by him in a separate fund, and shall be
used only for payment of operation and maintenance expenses,
depreciation or bond redemption of the Village sanitary sewerage
system.
(a) The plumbing supervisor shall be notified whenever any house sewer
work from main-to-curb-to-building is ready for inspection, and all
work, except when otherwise permitted by the plumbing supervisor,
shall be left uncovered until it has been examined and approved. All
such notifications shall specify the correct location of the premises and
the permit number of the job.
§ 14-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-75
1:135
§ 14-76. Notice for final inspection; certificate of inspection. [Code
1993, § 15.06]
Notice for final inspection of the plumbing installation, after the fixtures,
appurtenances and appliances have been tested and completed, and after
the installation is considered ready for use, shall be given by the person to
whom the permit was issued within 48 hours of such completion. The final
inspection shall be made with the water supply serving the plumbing system
turned on for such test purposes. The plumbing supervisor shall furnish a
certificate of inspection to the person to whom the permit was issued.
§ 14-77. Bond and insurance. [Code 1993, § 15.07]
(b) All house sewers shall have a tee for test purposes installed as close as
practicable to the main sewer, or to the lateral if the lateral is already
installed.
(c) The first two feet of backfilling shall be done in a careful manner so as
not to break any joints.
(a) Before a permit is granted under § 14-73, the applicant shall execute to
the Village, and have on file with the plumbing supervisor, a bond of
undertaking, to be approved by the president. Such bond shall be:
(1) In the sum of $2,000, conditioned to save and keep the Village
harmless from all damages to, and losses of, property of the Village,
and expenses arising therefrom, which may be incurred by the
Village by reason of such plumbing or drainlaying by the applicant
or his contractors, servants, agents or employees.
(2) In the sum of $50,000, conditioned to save and keep the Village
harmless from all liability arising by reason of the plumbing and
drainlaying, and to indemnify the Village against any and all such
judgments, claims, costs and expenses on account of bodily injury
to, or death of, third persons.
(3) In the sum of $10,000, conditioned to save and keep the Village
harmless from all liability arising by reason of the plumbing or
drainlaying, and to indemnify the Village against any and all such
judgments, claims, costs and expenses by reason of damage to
property other than that of the Village.
(b) Before a permit is granted under § 14-73, the applicant shall cause to be
issued, in his name, a policy of liability insurance, in the form and by an
insurance corporation to be approved by the president, by the terms of
which policy the insurance corporation shall assume the liability and
obligations of the applicant under the bond, which policy shall further
provide, by its specific terms, that it may not be cancelled or otherwise
terminated without at least 10 days' prior notice to the president and
plumbing supervisor. The applicant shall file a certificate of insurance
§ 14-75 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 14-77
1:136
§ 14-78. Additional regulations and requisites. [Code 1993, § 15.08]
with the plumbing supervisor in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
(a) Wis. Admin. Code, Ch. Comm. 85, is hereby made a part of this article
by reference, except § 85.06, which is revised to read as follows: "Soil
borings and percolation tests shall be made by or under the direction
and control of an engineer, architect, surveyor or sanitarian registered
in Wisconsin, or master plumber or master plumber restricted licensed
in Wisconsin and approved by the Village Board, to install private
sewage disposal systems. The approved person supervising the tests
shall certify as to the correctness of the procedure and results. Blank
forms supplied by the division shall be used for reporting results and
providing certification. The provisions of this section shall be enforced
by the plumbing supervisor."
(b) House sewers are made a part of this article.
(1) A bed of a six-inch depth of stone chips that will page a one-halfinch
sieve shall be installed so that three inches is under the pipe
and three inches along side of the pipe the entire width of the ditch.
(2) The minimum size of any waste or vent pipe in the ground or under
the basement or ground floor shall be three inches in diameter,
except that basement or ground floor fixtures may be two inches in
diameter, not to exceed 20 feet in length.
(3) In addition to the septic tank manhole, a four-inch diameter
cleanout shall be installed directly over the center of the inlet baffle
and extended to grade. The cleanout shall be of the same material
and design as the house sewer cleanout.
(4) A septic tank shall be a minimum of five feet from any building.
Septic tanks shall be no less than 10 feet from any basement wall.
The minimum liquid capacity shall be 750 gallons for any
installation, and shall be of a one-piece design and watertight
structure from the bottom of the tank to a point above the inlet and
outlet baffles of such tank.
(5) All household waste shall be piped to the septic tank, including all
floor drainage.
(6) Percolation tests are to be made as specified in Wis. Admin. Code
§ Comm 85.06(4). The bottom area shall be based upon results of
such tests.
(7) All sumps installed for the purpose of discharging clear water
drains shall discharge in the opposite direction of private disposal
systems. The discharge pipe shall be no less than 1 1/4-inch
diameter.
§ 14-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-78
1:137
(8) All clear water sumps shall be located as far as possible or
practicable from any sanitary drain opening. A minimum distance
of 15 feet shall be kept in all installations unless otherwise
approved by the plumbing supervisor.
(9) All water pumps shall be installed in compliance with the state well
construction and pump installation code and any future
amendments. The codes are made a part of this section by
reference.
(10) A sanitary sewer lateral must be water tested before it can be
connected to an existing line. If the existing line is found to be
unsatisfactory, it must either be remedied before approval or the
new sanitary lateral must be brought into the building below the
basement floor level.
(11)No permits for house sewer installations shall be issued until the
roof is on the building, the house drain has been installed and
approved, and the basement floor is finished.
(12) All ditches must be pumped completely dry during the entire
period of construction and be kept clean of loose material. In no
case shall the trench, surface or foundation water be allowed to
drain through the lateral or sewer main. All ditches shall be
properly braced.
(13) Where practical, and unless otherwise approved, the lateral shall
be connected to the existing wye. Where no wye is available, the
Village shall tap and install an adaptor on the sewer main, under
the supervision of the plumbing inspector.
(14) All buildings must be provided with a sump and sump pump to
collect and discharge all clear water on the ground surface. No
footing tile or other clear water shall be allowed into the sanitary
sewer.
(15) This section does not obligate the plumbing supervisor, the
installer or the Village to guarantee how long any private sewage
disposal system will operate in a satisfactory manner.
(16)Water service shall have a minimum size of one inch.
(17)No AC electric supply shall be used in the installation of sewer
mains or lateral work.
(18) All footing drain tiles shall be collected into a sump crock, and all
sumps shall extend not less than two inches above the finished
floor.
(19) All footing tile sump pump discharge pipes shall discharge above
the finished grade toward the street for which the address is given
on building permit, unless otherwise approved.
§ 14-78 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 14-78
1:138
§ 14-79. Report of existing unsanitary conditions. [Code 1993,
§ 15.10]
Whenever the plumbing supervisor reports to the Village Health Officer
that the plumbing in any building is contrary to ordinances of the Village
or a menace to health, or upon a complaint made to the Health Officer
by any person that the plumbing in any building is defective, the Health
Officer shall direct the plumbing supervisor to investigate the cause for the
complaint in such building and report his findings, in writing, to the Health
Officer, suggesting such changes as are necessary to put the building in
proper sanitary condition. The Health Officer shall then direct such changes
to be made as he deems necessary and fix a time for having the changes
done. Any person refusing to comply with such direction shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this article, and each day's continuance thereof shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 14-80. Holding tanks. [Code 1993, § 15.11]
The use of holding tanks for disposal of sanitary liquid waste for all existing
structures and any new construction commenced after the effective date of
the ordinance from which this section is derived shall only be by a permit
issued at the discretion of the holding tank board. The holding tank board
shall consist of the plumbing inspector, administrator and trustee selected
by the Village Board. It is the policy of the Village to permit holding tanks
only in instances of failed on-site sanitary systems for existing developments
or in areas to be served, within a reasonable time period, with public
sanitary sewer service for new developments. Any appeal from a decision
of the holding tank board shall be directed to the full Village Board for a
decision. Such appeal shall be made within 30 days following denial of the
request by the holding tank board.
§ 14-81. Cross connections. [Code 1993, § 15.12]
(20) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subsection (b), each
property owner shall be responsible for the installation, repair,
maintenance and replacement of any laterals extending from the
property owner's improvement to the main sewer and the
appropriate Village utility commission shall be responsible for the
main sewer only.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CROSS CONNECTION — Any physical connection or arrangement
between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable
water from the public water system, and the other contains water from
a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam,
gases or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system
to the other, and the direction of the flow depends on the pressure
differential between the two systems.
§ 14-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-81
1:139
(b) Prohibited. No person shall establish or maintain, or permit to be
established or maintained, any cross connection. No interconnection
shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply, other than the regular public water supply,
may enter the supply distribution system of the public, unless such
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
plumbing supervisor and the state department of natural resources in
accordance with Wis. Admin. Code, Ch. NR 811.
(c) Inspections.
(1) It shall be the duty of the plumbing supervisor or the manager of
the public water system to cause inspections to be made of all
properties served by the public water system where cross
connections with the public water system are deemed possible. The
frequency of inspections and reinspections, based on potential
health hazards involved, shall be as established by the Village
Board and as approved by the state department of natural
resources.
(2) Upon presentation of credentials, the plumbing supervisor or his
representative shall have the right to request entry at any
reasonable time to examine any property served by a connection to
the public water system for a cross connection. If entry is refused,
such representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant under
Wis. Stats. § 66.0119. Upon request, the owner, lessee or occupant
of any property served by a connection to the public water system
shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information
regarding the piping systems on such property.
(d) Disconnection of water service.
(1) The plumbing supervisor or the manager of the public water
system are authorized and directed to discontinue water service to
any property wherein any connection in violation of this section
exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public
water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after
reasonable notice and opportunity for a hearing under Wis. Stats.
Ch. 68. Water service to such property shall not be restored until
the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the
provisions of this section.
(2) If it is determined by the plumbing supervisor or the manager of
the public water system that a cross connection or an emergency
endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate
action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the Village
Board and delivered to the customer's premises, service may be
immediately discontinued. Within 10 days of such emergency
§ 14-81 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 14-81
1:140
§ 14-82. through § 14-110. (Reserved)
discontinuance, the customer shall have an opportunity for a
hearing under Wis. Stats. Ch. 68.
§ 14-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-82
1:141

ARTICLE IV
Moving Buildings
§ 14-111. Generally. [Code 1993, § 14.07]
(a) Permit required. No building located in the Village shall be moved to
another location in the Village, and no building located outside the
Village shall be moved to a location in the Village, and no building
located in the Village shall be moved to a location outside the Village
without a permit.
(b) Permit application, documents and bond.
(1) An application for a moving permit shall be signed by the applicant
and filed with the Clerk-Treasurer, and shall set forth, in detail, a
description of the building to be moved and the route to be followed
in the moving of such building, an estimate of how long the move
will take, but no move shall take longer than six months, and, if the
building is to be located in the Village, shall state the building's
use, construction and location and the proposed new location, the
substructure that it is to be placed upon, the use intended in the
future, the remodeling or renovation planned for such building, and
the names and mailing addresses of all of the residents and owners
of property located within a radius of 300 feet of the exterior
boundary lines of the property upon which the building is to be
located.
(2) At the time of filing an application for a moving permit, the
applicant for such permit shall also file the following documents
with the Clerk-Treasurer:
a. Two accurate photographs of the building at its present
location.
b. An accurate plat or survey of the property on which the
building is to be located, if the building is to be located in the
Village. A plat or survey shall also show the proposed location
of the building and any existing buildings or other structures
thereon. In addition, the applicant shall file a rendering of the
final four elevations of the building, its exterior material and its
engineered grading and drainage plan.
c. A bond in favor of the Village and signed by the applicant, to be
approved by the president and the Village Attorney, in the sum
set by the Village Board, and:
1. Conditioned to save and keep the Village harmless from all
damages to, and loss of, property of the Village, and
expenses arising therefrom, which may be incurred by the
Village by reason of the moving of buildings by the
applicant or his contractors, servants, agents or
employees.
§ 14-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-111
1:143
2. Conditioned to save and keep the Village harmless from all
liability arising by reason of the moving of buildings and to
indemnify the Village against any and all such judgments,
claims, costs and expenses on account of bodily injury to,
or the death of, third persons.
3. Conditioned to save and keep the Village harmless from all
liability arising by reason of moving buildings, and to
indemnify the Village against any and all such judgments,
claims, costs and expenses by reason of damage to
property other than that of the Village.
4. Conditioned on completion of the move of the building
within the time set forth in the application, but not to
exceed six months. It shall further be conditioned upon
compliance with any and all applicable provisions of this
article or the zoning ordinance of the Village (Chapter 90
of this Code). Such bond will pay for the demolition and
disposal of the building to be moved or for the completion
of the move if the building is not moved within the time
limit as set forth in this subsection.
d. An insurance policy in the form, and by an insurance
corporation, to be approved by the president and Village
Attorney, by the terms of which policy the insurance
corporation shall assume the liability and obligations of the
applicant under the bond, which policy shall further provide,
by its specific terms, that it may not be cancelled or otherwise
terminated without at least 10 days' prior notice to the
president and Building Inspector.
(c) Public hearing.
(1) Notice, time and place. A public hearing shall be held at the Village
hall on all applications for moving permits, when the building is to
be located in the Village. If the applicant shall have complied with
the provisions of Subsection (b) of this section prior to a period of
10 days before the fourth Monday of the calendar month, such
public hearing shall be held on the fourth Monday, but, if the
applicant shall not have complied, such public hearing shall be held
on the fourth Monday of the following calendar month. The Clerk-
Treasurer shall mail notices of such hearing by regular mail, in
such form as he shall determine, to all residents and owners of
property located within a radius of 300 feet of the exterior
boundary lines of the property on which the building is to be
located.
(2) As an alternative to holding a public hearing as provided in
Subsection (c)(1) of this section, the applicant may present to the
Clerk-Treasurer an agreement, in writing, signed by not less than
three-fourths of all the residents and owners of property located
§ 14-111 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 14-111
1:144
within a radius of 300 feet of the exterior boundary lines of the
property on which the building is to be located, affirming that
the residents and owners have no objection to the building being
moved to the property in question, provided each resident who has
signed such agreement shall have received an accurate drawing/
rendering of how the building will appear following the move,
together with the engineered grading and drainage plans. In any
event, such drawing/rendering and engineered grading and
drainage plans shall be available for inspection at the office of the
Building Inspector before and after a permit is issued.
(d) Powers of board and president.
(1) Every applicant for a permit to move any building to be located in
the Village shall be referred to the Plan Commission for review and
recommendation to the Village Board. No permit for the moving of
any such building shall be issued unless the Village Board, by at
least a majority vote, after a review of the building to be moved and
any plans for the remodeling or renovation of such building, the
four final elevations and the Village approved grading and drainage
plans as may be presented to it, determines that the exterior
architectural design or appearance of the building to be moved is
compatible with the immediate neighborhood.
(2) The Village Board shall approve an application for a permit subject
to the promise of the applicant that he will remodel or renovate the
building, if feasible, as the Village Board may require. To secure the
performance of such promise, the Village Board shall require of the
applicant either a cash or surety bond running to the Village in
such an amount as is estimated by the Village Board to be equal to
the cost of such remodeling or renovation, or as may be agreed
upon by the Village Board and the applicant, but not less than
$5,000.
(3) Every application for a permit to move any building shall be
referred to the Building Inspector, and no permit shall be granted
by the Building Inspector authorizing the moving of any building
until the president shall have approved, in writing, the route to be
followed in the moving of such building, and the approved route
must be followed in every instance.
(4) The president is authorized to make his approval conditional upon
the reduction in size of the building to be moved in every case
where, in his judgment, such reduction in size will aid in preserving
the condition of streets, trees or other vegetation and, in every
case, such building shall be reduced in size before being placed
upon any public street.
(5) No permit shall be granted for the moving of any structure which
has deteriorated, or been damaged from any cause, to 50% or more
of its original value.
§ 14-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-111
1:145
(e) Requirements. Every moving permit issued shall be construed as
demanding the fulfillment of the following requirements, whether or
not stated in such permit, and the Building Inspector shall not be at
liberty to waive performance of any of such requirements:
(1) Every permit to move a building shall state the conditions to be
complied with, designate the route to be taken and limit the time
for removal.
(2) The moving of any building along any street or alley shall be
carried on without interruption during working hours.
(3) In the moving of any building along busy or crowded streets or
alleys, the president may require the moving of the building to be
carried on at nighttime as well as daytime in order to complete the
moving process with the least possible obstruction to streets or
alleys.
(4) Every person to whom a permit is issued shall notify the Building
Inspector when the actual work of moving the building is to be
commenced.
(5) Upon receiving the notice as provided in Subsection (d) of this
section, the president shall name an inspector, whose duty it shall
be to supervise the moving of the building. The person receiving
the permit shall pay to the Building Inspector the expense of such
inspector and for all labor involved in the trimming or removal of
trees along the route as provided in Subsection (e)(6) of this
section.
(6) In every case where it shall be necessary to trim or remove any tree
along the route, such trimming or removal shall be done under the
supervision of the Building Inspector.
(7) No building shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street
crossing or intersection, or so near thereto as to prevent easy
access to any fire hydrant.
(8) Lighted lanterns displaying a red light shall be attached to every
building being moved along a street during the period from 30
minutes after sunset to 30 minutes before sunrise. Such lighted
lanterns shall be attached to the building, one at each corner, and
in every case, lanterns shall not be placed farther apart than 12
feet.
(9) Every person who has moved a building as provided in this article
shall report to the Building Inspector and the president within one
day after the building has reached its destination. The president
shall thereupon inspect the streets and alleys over or along which
the building has been moved. The president shall report the
damage ascertained by such inspection to the Building Inspector
and the person to whom the permit was issued, and the permit
§ 14-111 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 14-111
1:146
§ 14-112. through § 14-140. (Reserved)
holder shall immediately repair such damage. In every case where
the permit holder shall fail to repair the damage to the satisfaction
of the president, the president shall cause such damage to be
repaired and charged against the permit holder.
(f) Fee. The fee for each moving permit shall be as determined from time to
time by resolution to the Village Board.
§ 14-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-112
1:147

ARTICLE V
Building Numbering
§ 14-141. Uniform system of numbering houses and buildings.
[Code 1993, § 14.08]
(a) Uniform system established. There is established a uniform system of
numbering houses and buildings fronting on all streets, avenues and
public ways in the Village, and all houses and buildings shall be
numbered in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(b) Baselines. Shirley Avenue shall constitute the baseline of numbering
along all streets running north and south, and the city limits of the City
of Racine shall constitute the baseline for numbering all streets running
east and west.
(c) Procedure.
(1) The numbering for each street shall begin at the baseline. The
numbers in the first block shall be from 10 — 99, the second block
from 100 — 199, the third block from 200 — 299, etc., except on the
streets running east and west the numbering shall commence with
the next 100 from the last 100 within the city limits of the City of
Racine. One hundred numbers shall be assigned to each block,
square or space that would be one block or square, if streets each
way were extended so as to intersect each other, and one number
shall be assigned to each 20 feet of frontage.
(2) All lots and houses on the south and east side of all streets shall be
numbered with odd numbers, and all lots and houses on the north
and west side of all streets shall be numbered with even numbers,
each commencing with the 100 numbers assigned to that block,
and shall increase one number from the baseline for each 20 feet of
frontage, or fraction thereof. Where any building has more than
one door serving separate occupants, a separate number shall be
assigned to each door serving a separate occupant, provided, the
building is 25 feet or more in width. If the building is not 25 feet or
more in width, and the entrances are not that far apart, the next
consecutive number shall be marked as a fractional. Buildings
fronting on two or more streets shall have a number fronting on the
main entrance or the main arterial/collector street, unless other
entrances serve other occupants.
(3) All streets not extending through to the baseline shall be assigned
the same relative numbers as if the streets had extended to the
baseline.
(d) Assignment, cost and placement.
(1) The Village has caused a survey to be made and there is assigned to
each house and building located on any street, alley, highway or
avenue in the Village its respective number under the uniform
§ 14-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-141
1:149
§ 14-142. through § 14-170. (Reserved)
system provided for in this section. Within 30 days after the
effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived,
the owner, occupant or agent shall place, or cause to be placed,
upon each house or building controlled by him the number
assigned under the uniform system provided for in this section.
(2) The cost of such number shall be paid for by the owner.
(3) The number shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on
or at the side of the proper door of each building so that the
number can be plainly seen from the street, and shall be in place
prior to the Building Inspector granting occupancy of such
building. In cases of extended building setbacks, grade differentials
or other unique circumstances, alternative placement of address
numbers may be permitted, subject to approval by the Building
Inspector.
(e) Information. The Building Inspector shall inform any party applying for
a building number of the number belonging to, or embraced within, the
limits of the lot or property as provided in this section. In case of doubt
as to the proper number to be assigned to any lot or building, the
Building Inspector shall determine the number of each lot or building.
(f) Enforcement. If the owner or occupant of any building required to be
numbered by this section shall neglect for more than 30 days to attach
and maintain the proper number of such building, the Building
Inspector shall cause to be served upon such person the notice
requiring such owner or occupant to properly number the building and,
if such person neglects to do so for 10 days after the serving of such
notice, he shall be deemed to have violated this section.
§ 14-141 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 14-142
1:150
ARTICLE VI
Wells
§ 14-171. Generally. [Code 1993, § 15.13]
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM — A community water system owned by
a city or town, under contract with a city, or a federal, state, county or
municipally owned institution for congregate care or correction, or a
privately owned water utility serving such municipalities.
NONCOMPLYING — A well or pump installation which does not comply
with Wis. Admin. Code § NR 812.42, concerning standards for existing
installations, and which has not been granted a variance, and any well
or pump installation which fails a water quality standard test.
PUMP INSTALLATION — The pump and related equipment used for
withdrawing water from a well, including the discharge piping,
underground connections, pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits,
sampling faucets and well seals or caps.
UNSAFE — A well or pump installation which produces water which is
bacteriologically contaminated or exceeds the drinking water standards
of Wis. Admin. Code § NR 812.06, or for which a health advisory has
been issued by the department of natural resources.
UNUSED — A well or pump installation which is not used or does not
have a functional pumping system.
WELL — An excavation or opening into the ground made by digging,
boring, drilling, driving or other methods for the purpose of obtaining
groundwater for consumption or other use.
WELL ABANDONMENT — The filling and sealing of a well according to
the provisions of Wis. Admin. Code § NR 812.26.
(b) Applicability. This section applies to all wells in the Village.
(c) Abandonment required. All wells on premises served by the municipal
water system shall be abandoned in accordance with the terms of this
section and Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 812, not later than one year from
the date of connection to the municipal water system, unless a well
operation permit has been obtained by the well owner from the
plumbing supervisor.
(d) Operation permit. The plumbing supervisor shall grant a permit to a
well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed five years,
provided, the conditions of this section are met. An owner may renew a
well operation permit by submitting information verifying that the
conditions of this section are met. The plumbing supervisor or his agent
may conduct inspections or have water quality tests conducted, at the
§ 14-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-171
1:151
applicant's expense, to obtain or verify information necessary for
consideration of a permit application or renewal. Well operation permit
applications and renewals shall be made on forms provided by the
plumbing supervisor. The following conditions must be met for issuance
or renewal of a well operation permit:
(1) The well and pump installation shall meet, or be upgraded to meet,
the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code § NR 812.42, and have a
functional pumping system;
(2) The well construction and pump installation shall have a history of
producing bacteriologically safe water, as evidenced by at least two
samples taken a minimum of two weeks apart. No exception to this
condition may be made for unsafe wells, unless the department of
natural resources approves, in writing, the continued use of the
well;
(3) There shall be no cross connection between the well's pump
installation and the municipal water system; and
(4) The proposed use of the well and pump installation can be justified
as reasonable, in addition to water provided by the municipal water
system.
(e) Abandonment procedures.
(1) All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this section shall be
abandoned according to the procedures and methods of Wis.
Admin. Code § NR 812.26. All debris, pumps, piping, unsealed
liners and any other obstructions which may interfere with sealing
operations shall be removed prior to abandonment.
(2) The owner of the well or his agent shall notify the plumbing
supervisor at least 48 hours prior to commencement of any well
abandonment activities. The abandonment of the well shall be
observed by an employee of the Village.
(3) An abandonment report form supplied by the department of natural
resources shall be submitted by the well owner to the plumbing
supervisor and the department of natural resources within 30 days
of completion of the well abandonment.
(f) Violations; penalties. Any well owner violating any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a forfeiture as provided
in § 1-15. Each day of a violation is a separate offense. If any person
fails to comply with this section for more than 30 days after receiving
written notice of the violation, the Village may impose a penalty and
cause the well abandonment to be performed, and the expense thereof
to be assessed as a special tax against the property.
§ 14-171 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 14-171
1:152
Chapter 18
COURT
§ 18-1. Municipal Judge and municipal court. [Amended 1-13-2014
by Ord. No. 03-2014; 1-13-2014 by Ord. No. 04-2014]
(a) Municipal Judge.
(1) Office created. Pursuant to the authority granted by statute, there
is created the office of municipal Judge for the Village.
(2) Election and term. The municipal Judge shall be elected at large at
the regular spring election in April for a term of four years,
commencing from the first day of May next following his election.
(3) Salary. The municipal Judge shall receive an annual salary as
established by the Village Board, which shall be in lieu of fees and
costs. No salary shall be paid to the municipal Judge for any time
during his term for which he has not executed and filed his official
bond and oath as required by Subsection (a)(4) of this section.
(4) Bond and oath. The municipal Judge shall execute and file with the
county Clerk of the circuit court the oath prescribed by law and a
bond in the penal sum of $1,000.
(5) Jurisdiction.
a. The municipal Judge shall have such jurisdiction as provided in
Wis. Stats. § 755.045, and exclusive jurisdiction of violations of
Village ordinances.
b. The Village of Elmwood Park and the Village of Mount Pleasant
have entered into an agreement whereby the Village of
Elmwood Park Police Department will enforce certain state and
local laws and ordinances at certain times within the Village of
Elmwood Park. Pursuant to statute and the agreement
between the Village of Elmwood Park and the Village, there is
created and established in and for the Village of Elmwood Park
and the Village, a joint municipal court, pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 755.01(4). Pursuant to the agreement and statute, the Village
of Elmwood Park Constable may patrol and enforce state and
local laws and ordinances within the boundaries of the Village
of Elmwood Park. The current elected Judge for the Village
shall have jurisdiction and authority to enforce the state and
local laws and ordinances and any infractions thereof
occurring within the boundaries of the Village of Elmwood Park
and all fines, forfeitures and costs shall be retained by the
Village. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 775.01(4), the current Judge
of the Village shall serve as the Judge for the joint court until
§ 14-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-1
1:153
Chapter 22
ELECTIONS
the end of the current term or until a special election is held
under Wis. Stats. § 8.50(4)(fm).
(6) Qualifications. No person shall be elected to the office of Municipal
Judge who is not at the time of his/her election and for the entire
tenure of his/her office, a citizen of the State of Wisconsin, a
resident of the Village of Mt. Pleasant and an attorney licensed to
practice law in the State of Wisconsin.
(b) Municipal court.
(1) The court of the municipal Judge shall be known as the "Municipal
Court for the Village of Mount Pleasant, Racine County, Wisconsin,"
and shall be open as determined by the municipal Judge.
(2) The municipal Judge shall keep his office and hold court in the
Village hall.
(3) Except as provided by law, the procedure in municipal court shall
be the same as provided in Wis. Stats. Ch. 800.
(4) The municipal Judge shall collect all forfeitures and taxable costs in
any action or proceeding before him, and shall pay over such
monies to the Village Clerk-Treasurer not later than the 30th
business day succeeding his receipt thereof.
(5) The provisions of Wis. Stats. § 800.12, relating to municipal court
contempt procedures, are adopted by reference in this section as if
set forth in full in this section.
(6) The municipal Judge may impose a forfeiture for contempt in an
amount not to exceed $50 or, upon nonpayment of the forfeiture, a
penalty assessment under Wis. Stats. § 757.05, jail assessment
under Wis. Stats. § 302.46, crime laboratories and drug law
enforcement assessment under Wis. Stats. § 165.755, any
applicable consumer protection assessment under Wis. Stats.
§ 100.261, any applicable domestic abuse assessment under Wis.
Stats. § 973.055(1), and a jail sentence not to exceed seven days.
(7) The Municipal Judge may impose as a cost to a party appearing
before the municipal court the actual cost of an interpreter at his/
her normal hourly rate, including mileage, if any.
§ 18-1 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 22-1
1:154
§ 22-1. Election officials. [Ord. No. 6-2002, 7-8-2002; Ord. No.
5-2004(2), § 1.40, 4-26-2004; Ord. No. 13-2009, 10-12-2009]
The number of election officials in each precinct of the Village shall be five
inspectors. Any inspector shall, when necessary or required by law, perform
the duties or an act as Clerk of Election or Ballot Clerk.
§ 22-2. Wards and polling places. [Amended 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
07-2011]
(a) The Village is divided into 23 wards which shall conform to the
following boundaries:
(1) Ward 01: Bounded on the north by STH 20 (Washington Avenue);
bounded on the east by Willow Road; bounded on the south by the
City of Racine and Chicago/Milwaukee St. Paul and Pacific Railroad
Right-of-way and Racine/Sturtevant Bike Trail; bounded on the east
by the City of Racine; bounded on the south by the City of Racine,
bounded on the east by STH 31(Green Bay Road); bounded on the
south by Braun Road; bounded on the west by Village of Sturtevant;
bounded on the south by the Village of Sturtevant; bounded on the
west by the Village of Sturtevant; bounded on the south by the
Village of Sturtevant; bounded on the west by the Village of
Sturtevant.
(2) Ward 02: Bounded on the north by STH 20 (Washington Avenue);
bounded on the east by the City of Racine; bounded on the south by
the City of Racine; bounded on the south by the City of Racine;
bounded on the east by STH 31 (Green Bay Road); Racine; bounded
on the south by the City of Racine; bounded on the south by the City
of Racine; bounded on the east by STH 31 (Green Bay Road);
bounded on the north by the City of Racine; bounded on the east by
the City of Racine; bounded on the south by 16th Street (Village
properties on south side); bounded on the east by STH 31 (Green
Bay Road, including Village properties east of STH 31 and north of
City of Racine boundary); bounded on the south the City of Racine;
bounded on the west by the City of Racine; bounded on the south by
City of Racine; bounded on the west by the City of Racine; bounded
on the west by Meadow Lane.
(3) Ward 03: Bounded on the north by CTH C (Spring Street); bounded
on the east by Newman Road; bounded on the south by STH 20
(Washington Avenue); bounded on the west by Sunnyslope Drive;
bounded on the south by Mariner Drive; bounded on the west by
Emmertsen Road.
(4) Ward 04: Bounded on the north by CTH C (Spring Street); bounded
on the east by STH 31 (Green Bay Road) including Village
properties east of STH 31 and adjacent to City of Racine boundary;
bounded on the south by STH 20 (Washington Avenue); bounded on
the west by Newman Road.
§ 22-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2
1:155
(5) Ward 05: Bound on the north by the Village of Caledonia boundary;
bounded on the east by the City of Racine boundary; bound on the
south by the City of Racine; bound on the west by Illinois Street and
the City of Racine boundary; bound on the south by the City of
Racine boundary; bound on the west by Ole Davidson Road and
STH 31 (Green Bay Road); including properties on Eaton Lane.
(6) Ward 06: Bound on the north by the Village of Caledonia; bound on
the east by Ole Davidson Road and STH 31 (Green Bay Road);
bound on the south by CTH C (Spring Street); bound on the west by
Newman Road.
(7) Ward 07: Bound on the north by Independence Road; bound on the
east by Newman Road; Bound on the south by CTH C (Spring
Street); bound on the west by Emmertsen Road.
(8) Ward 08: Bound on the north by the Village of Caledonia boundary;
bound on the east by Newman Road; bound on the south by
Independence Road; bound on the west by Emmertsen Road.
(9) Ward 09: Bound on the north by the Village of Caledonia; bound on
the east by Emmertsen Road; bound on the south by CTH C (Spring
Street); bound on the west by Airline Road.
(10)Ward 10: Bound on the north by CTH C (Spring Street); bound on
the east by Emmertsen Road; bound on the south by Mariner Drive;
bound on the west by Sunnyslope Drive; bound on the south by
Greenhill Drive; bounded on the west by Summerset Drive.
(11)Ward 11: Bound on the north by STH 20 (Washington Avenue);
bound on the east by Meadowlane; bound on the 16th Street and
the City of Racine boundary; by on the east by the City of Racine
boundary; bound on the south by the Chicago/Milwaukee St. Paul
and Pacific Railroad Right-of-way and Racine/Sturtevant Bike Trail;
bound on west by Willow Road.
(12)Ward 12: Bound on the north by CTH C (Spring Street); bound on
the east by Summerset Drive; bound on the south by Greenhill
Drive; bound on the east by Sunnyslope Drive; bound on the south
by STH 20 (Washington Avenue); bound on the west by the Union
Pacific Railroad (former Wisconsin Great Northern Railroad).
(13)Ward 13: Bound on the north by the Village of Caledonia; bound on
the east by Fancher Road; bound on the south by CTH C (Spring
Street); bound on the west by Wisconsin Interstate 94.
(14)Ward 14: Bound on the north by the Village of Caledonia; bound on
the east by Airline Road; bound on the south by CTH C (Spring
Street); bound on the west by Fancher Road.
(15)Ward 15: Bound on the north by CTH C (Spring Street); bound on
the east by the Union Pacific Railroad (former Wisconsin Great
§ 22-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 22-2
1:156
Northern Railroad); bound on the south by STH 20 (Washington
Avenue) and the Village of Sturtevant; bound on the east by the
center line of the Hoods Creek waterway.
(16)Ward 16: Bound on the north by CTH C (Spring Street); bound on
the east by the center line of the Hoods Creek waterway and Village
of Sturtevant boundary; bound on the south by Braun Road and the
Village of Sturtevant boundary; bound on the east by CTH Y (Taylor
Avenue); bound on the south by CTH KR (County Line Road); bound
on the west by Wisconsin Interstate 94.
(17)Ward 17: Bound on the north by STH 11 (Durand Avenue); bound
on the east by Elwood Drive; bound on the south by Tahoe Drive;
bound on the east by Gayhardt Street; bound on the south by
Wakefield Court; bound on the east by the City of Racine boundary
and CTH Y (Taylor Avenue); bound on the south by Braun Road;
bound on the west by STH 31 (Green Bay Road).
(18)Ward 18: Bound on the north by STH 11 (Durand Avenue) including
Village properties along Oregon Street north of STH 11; bound on
the east by the City of Racine boundary; bound on the south by the
City of Racine Boundary; bound on the east by the City of Racine
boundary; bound on the south by Wakefield Court; bound on the
west by Gayhardt Street; bound on the south by Tahoe Drive; bound
on the west by Elwood Drive.
(19)Ward 19: Bound on the north by CTH Y (Taylor Avenue) and the
Village of Elmwood Park boundary; bound on the east by the City of
Racine Boundary; bound on the South by the City of Racine
boundary and Chicory Road; bounded on the east by the City of
Racine boundary and by Lathrop Avenue; bound on the south by
Garden Drive and Leslie Ann Lane and Willow Wood Drive and
Newport Lane; bound on the west by White Oak Drive; bound on
the south by Nature Trail; bound on the west by Wood Road; bound
on the north by CTH Y (Taylor Avenue); bound on the west by
Meachem Road including Village properties west of Meachem
Road; bound on the north by Maryland Avenue; bound on the east
by Indiana Street.
(20)Ward 20: Bound on the north by CTH Y (Taylor Avenue); bound on
the east by Wood Road; bound on the south by CTH KR (County
Line Road); bound on the west by Old Green Bay Road.
(21)Ward 21: Bound on the north by Nature Trail; bound on the east by
White Oak Drive; bound on the north by Newport Lane; bound on
the east by Weather Wood; bound on the north by Leslie Ann Lane
and Garden Drive and the City of Racine boundary and Chicory
Road; bound on the east by Lake Michigan; bounded on the south
by CTH KR (County Line Road) bounded on the west by Wood Road.
§ 22-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2
1:157
§ 22-3. (Reserved)3
Chapter 26
EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT
§ 26-1. Declaration of policy. [Code 1993, § 6.01]
To prepare the Village to cope with emergencies resulting from enemy
action and natural or man-made disaster, it is declared to be necessary
to establish an organization for emergency government for the Village by
conferring upon the president of the Village and others specified duties and
powers, consistent with Wis. Stats. Ch. 166.
§ 26-2. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 6.02]
(22)Ward 22: Bound on the north by Larson Street; bound on the east
by Lake Michigan; bound on the south by Sheridan Road; bound on
the west by STH 32.
(23)Ward 23: Bound on the north by STH 11 (Durand Avenue) and the
City of Racine boundary; bound on the west by STH 32; bound on
the south by 23rd Street; bound on the west by Clark Street; bound
on the north by 21st Street; bound on the east by the City of Racine
boundary; bound on the north by 24th Street; bound on the east by
Lake Michigan; bound on the south by Larson Street; bound on the
east by STH 32; bound on the south by Chicory Road; bound on the
west by the City of Racine boundary; bound on the south by South
Memorial Drive; bound on the west by the City of Racine boundary;
bound on the south by Winthrop Avenue; bound on the west by the
City of Racine boundary and Carpenter Avenue.
(b) The polling places for elections shall be established by resolution of the
Village Board from time to time.
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CIVIL DEFENSE — All measures undertaken by, or on behalf of, the
state, county and municipalities to prepare for, and minimize the effects
of, enemy action upon the civilian population.
EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT — Includes civil defense, and means all
measures undertaken by, or on behalf of, the Village in order to:
Prepare for, and minimize the effect of, enemy action and natural
or man-made disaster upon the civilian population.
(1)
3. Editor's Note: Former § 22-3, which pertained to the municipal board of absentee
canvassers and was derived from Ord. No. 8-2007, as amended, was repealed 1-26-2009 by
Ord. No. 2-2009.
§ 22-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 26-2
1:158
§ 26-3. Emergency government committee. [Code 1993, § 6.03]
§ 26-4. Coordinator of emergency government services. [Code 1993,
§ 6.04]
§ 26-5. Sharing of costs. [Code 1993, § 6.05]
Effectuate emergency repairs to, or the emergency restoration of,
vital public utilities and facilities destroyed or damaged by such
action or disaster.
(2)
(a) Constitution. The Village Board shall be the emergency government
committee, whose chair shall be the president of the Village.
(b) Duties. The emergency government committee shall:
(1) Be an advisory and planning group;
(2) Advise the coordinator of emergency government services on all
emergency government matters; and
(3) Annually prepare and adopt a budget for emergency government.
(a) The county coordinator of emergency government services shall also
hold the office of coordinator of emergency government services of the
Village. The president of the Village shall appoint deputies and
assistants to the coordinator, as requested. The coordinator of
emergency government services shall:
(1) Develop and promulgate emergency government plans for the
Village, consistent with state and county plans.
(2) Direct the emergency government program for the Village and
perform such other duties related to emergency government as are
required of the Village Board and the emergency government
committee.
(3) Direct the Village emergency government training programs and
exercises.
(4) Direct the Village participation in emergency government training
programs and exercises.
(a) Office and staff. The county board shall provide offices, office furniture,
stenographic help and such office supplies as are necessary to carry out
the functions of the county coordinator of emergency government
services, and the cost thereof shall be defrayed by the county, with the
help of the Federal Financial Assistance Program.
(b) Major equipment and services. Cost of equipment and services
requested by the Village shall be borne 100% by the Village with federal
financial assistance procured by the county/village coordinator of
emergency government services, when applicable. Federal financial
§ 26-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-5
1:159
§ 26-6. Joint meetings. [Code 1993, § 6.06]
Whenever it is deemed necessary by either the county emergency
government committee or the Village emergency government committee,
there shall be a joint meeting of the committees to decide such matters as
may arise.
§ 26-7. Utilizing of existing services and facilities. [Code 1993,
§ 6.07]
§ 26-8. Succession of officers. [Code 1993, § 6.08]
Notwithstanding any other reference to the succession of Village officers
in this chapter or statute, in the case of a civil defense emergency, should
the president of the Village be absent or otherwise incompetent to act, the
order of succession to the duties of president during such period of a civil
defense emergency shall be declared by annual resolution per Wis. Stats.
Ch. 166.
§ 26-9. Emergency regulation of water usage. [Code 1993, § 6.09]
When the Village Board determines that the effect produced on the water
table by unregulated use of water in the Village threatens the public health
and welfare of the Village's residents, the Village Board may establish such
reasonable temporary rules and regulations controlling the use of such
water as are deemed necessary to protect the public health and welfare.
Such action shall be by resolution of the Village Board.
§ 26-10. Noncompliance; penalties. [Code 1993, § 6.10]
Any person who intentionally fails to comply with the directives of
emergency government authorities promulgated under this chapter during
a state of emergency, or during any training program or exercise, shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-15.
assistance reimbursements shall be returned to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer.
(a) Policy. In preparing and executing the emergency government program,
the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the existing
departments and agencies of the Village shall be utilized to the
maximum extent practicable, and the heads and personnel of all such
departments and agencies are directed to cooperate and extend such
services and facilities as are required of them.
(b) Responsibility. In order to ensure that in an emergency all the facilities
of the existing Village government are expanded to the fullest to meet
such emergency, department and emergency heads assigned to specific
responsibilities under the Village emergency operations plan will fulfill
emergency and nonemergency duties as prescribed in the plan.
§ 26-5 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 26-10
1:160
Chapter 30
FEES AND CHARGES
§ 26-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-10
1:161

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 30-1. Development fees.
(a) Generally:
(1) The Village shall charge such fees, permits and charges as are
authorized by a resolution adopted by the Village Board, except for
impact fees (as provided in Article II, §§ 30-51 to 30-61) and room
tax for hotels and motels (as provided in Chapter 2, Article VI,
§§ 2-301 to 2-400).
(2) Board approval of fees. The Village Board may review and approve
the fees, permits, charges and other taxes specified herein as part
of the annual budget adoption or at such other time as it
determines and make changes to the schedule of fees.
(3) There shall be maintained in the office of the Village Clerk a
schedule of all fees, permits and charges, as authorized by
resolution of the Village Board.
(4) Review of fees. The Village Administrator or the Village Finance
Director shall at least every two years, prepare reports regarding
the adequacy of the fees, charges, and permits contained in this
section.
(b) Building, heating, moving and razing permit fees. Building, heating,
moving and razing permit fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Minimum permit fee for all permits $40 per inspection
One- and two-family residences and
attached garage
$0.22 per square foot
Residence additions $0.20 per square foot or
fraction thereof
Local business, office buildings or
additions
$0.20 per square foot or
fraction thereof
Manufacturing or industrial (office
areas to be included under E.)
$0.15 per square foot or
fraction thereof
Permit to start construction of footings
and foundations 150 multifamily,
industrial and commercial
Agricultural buildings, detached
garages and accessory buildings
$0.18 per square foot
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-1
1:163
Type Fee
All other buildings, structures,
alterations, residing and repairs
where square footage cannot be
calculated
$8 per $1,000 valuation
Heating, incinerator units and wood
burning appliances
$40 per unit, up to and
including 150,000 input BTU
units 15 Additional fees per
each 50,000 BTU or fraction
thereof 750 maximum per
unit
Commercial/industrial exhaust hoods
and exhaust systems
$60 per unit
Heating and air conditioning
distribution
$1.50 per 100 square foot of
conditioned area 40 minimum
Air conditioning $40 per unit up to three tons
or 36,000 BTUs. Additional
fee of $15 per each ton or
12,000 BTUs or fraction
thereof 750 maximum per
unit
One- and two-family lots $100 per lot
Multifamily units, commercial lots,
industrial lots and institutional lots
$150 per building, plus $5 per
1,000 square feet of disturbed
lot area 2,000 maximum
Failure to call for final inspection $50
Wrecking, razing or interior
demolition
$40 minimum, plus $0.50 per
square foot 500 maximum fee
for the building
Moving buildings over public ways $100, plus $0.50 per square
foot
Reinspection $50 per inspection
Plan examinations:
One- or two-family residences $100
Apartment, three-family residences,
row housing and multiple-family
buildings
$150, plus $15 per unit
Commercial/industrial alterations
and additions
$150
Additions to one- and two-family
dwellings
$50
§ 30-1 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 30-1
1:164
Type Fee
Alterations to one- and two-family
dwellings
$30
Accessory building greater than 120
square feet
$50
Decks, swimming pools $30
Heating plans, lighting and energy
calculations to heating plans,
submitted separately
$30
Priority plan review: At the discretion of the Building Inspector and
depending upon the workload of the department, two business day
priority plan reviews may be provided at double the regular rate for
plan review fees. Certified municipalities may also charge double the
regular state plan review fees in addition to the fees listed in this table.
Priority plan review shall not apply to submittals requiring review and/
or approval by other governing agencies of the municipality.
Resubmission of previously approved
plans
$30
Special inspections and reports $100
State uniform building permit seal $5, plus state fee
Occupancy permits:
Residential $30 per unit, addition,
alteration or accessory
building over 120 square feet
Office, commercial and industrial $125
Pools (in-ground and aboveground)
and spas
$8 per $1,000 valuation 40
minimum
Decks and sheds $50
Other $40 minimum
Double fees upon failure to obtain a permit before work on a building
has been started, except in emergency cases, the total fee shall be
double the fees charged.
(c) Electrical permit fees. Electrical permit fees shall be as follows:
(1) New residential construction.
Per Unit Charge
One-bedroom $27 x # of units
Two-bedroom $32.50 x # of units
Three-bedroom $42.50 x # of units
Four-bedroom $52.50 x # of units
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-1
1:165
(2) Ampere service charge for all services.
Per Unit Charge
100-amp $30 x # of units
200-amp $35 x # of units
400-amp $45 x # of units
600-amp $55 x # of units
800-amp $65 x # of units
Per Circuit Charge
$0.75 x # of circuits
(3) Commercial, industrial and agriculture work job value.
Commercial, industrial and agriculture work job values shall be
estimated as follows:
a. Estimated job value range of $50 — $500, $2 for each $100,
and $0.25 for each $10 fraction thereafter.
b. Estimated job value range of $500 — $10,000 $15 for the first
$500, plus $1.30 for each $100 fraction thereof.
c. Estimated job value range over $10,000, $150, plus $0.80 per
$100 fraction thereafter.
d. Reinspection fee shall be $40.
e. Minimum fee shall be $32.50.
(d) Plumbing permit fees. Plumbing permit fees shall be as follows:
(1) Storm sewer: $35.
(2) Outside sewer: $35.
(3) Water: $30.
(4) Well registration: $35.
(5) Well abandonment: $25.
(6) Sewer disconnect: $25.
(7) Plumbing fixtures:
a. First fixture: $25.
b. Each additional fixture: $7.
c. Road opening: $100.
(8) Manholes: $15.
§ 30-1 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 30-1
1:166
(9) Catchbasins: $15.
(10) Reinspection: $30.
(e) Fire Department review fees. Fire Department review fees shall be as
follows:
(1) Basic fire sprinkler review, per system: $250.
(2) Additional reviews of the same system, each: $200.
(3) Fire pumps, each: $250.
(4) Modifications to existing systems, per sprinkler head: $20. Up to a
maximum of $250.
(5) Review of additional hydraulic calculations, per set: $150.
(6) Fire protection underground piping, per 100 feet: $20. Up to a
maximum of $20.
(7) Fire hydrant, each: $50.
(8) Fire hose connections, each: $15.
(9) Standpipe systems: $250.
(10) Inspections, per hour: $75.
(11)Witness tests, per hour: $75.
(f) Municipal water main connection fees.
Diameter
(Inches) Amount
3/4 — 1 $450
1 1/2 $600
2 $800
4 $1,600
6 $2,400
8 $3,000
(g) Municipal sanitary sewer connection fees.
Type Fee
Single-family residential $700
Multiunit residential:
First unit $700
Second unit $350
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-1
1:167
Type Fee
Each additional unit $200
Commercial, industrial and
institutional
$1,050
Meter Size
(inches)
Capacity
(gpm)
Meter
Equivalent Base Rate $200
5/8 20 1 $1,050 $1,250
3/4 25 1.5 $1,350
1 50 2.5 $1,550 $1,550
1 1/2 100 5 $2,050
2 160 8 $2,650
3 300 15 $4,050
4 500 25 $6,050
6 1,000 50 $11,050
(h) Community development and planning fees, permits and charges.
(1) The permits for which a fee is required are:
a. Certificate of occupancy.
b. Commercial tenant operation permit.
c. Residential home occupation permit.
d. Conditional use permit.
e. Sign permit.
(2) A fee shall also be required for:
a. A zoning text or map amendment.
b. Zoning appeal or variance.
c. Site plan review (to include any type of plan review).
d. Certified survey map.
e. Zoning information letter request.
f. Comprehensive plan amendment.
g. Development agreements.
h. Subdivision plats.
i. Planned developments.
§ 30-1 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 30-2
1:168
§ 30-2. through § 30-50. (Reserved)
§ 30-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-2
1:169

ARTICLE II
Impact Fees
§ 30-51. Impact fees established. [Ord. No. 3-2007, § 1(91-1),
3-12-2007]
Pursuant to the authority to impose impact fees found in Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0617, as amended, and pursuant to the impact fees studies and plans
required therein, the Village hereby establishes and imposes impact fees as
prescribed in this article.
§ 30-52. Establishment of service area/areas. [Ord. No. 3-2007,
§ 1(91-2), 3-12-2007]
There are hereby established certain geographically defined areas which
shall be known as the service area within which it will be necessary to
enlarge and improve new and existing public facilities attendant to the
Village park system, law enforcement system, fire and rescue system,
stormwater system and transportation system as a result of land
development and growth within the Village.
The service areas are shown in Exhibit A of this article and are on file in the
office of the Clerk of the Village and made a part hereof by reference.
§ 30-53. Standards. [Ord. No. 3-2007, § 1(91-3), 3-12-2007]
(a) In accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0617, the Village adopts the
following standards for impact fees which will be imposed under this
article. Impact fees adopted by the Village:
(1) Shall bear a rational relationship to the need for new, expanded or
improved public facilities that are required to serve land
development.
(2) May not exceed the proportionate share of the capital costs that are
required to serve land development, as compared to existing uses
of land within the Village.
(3) Shall be based upon actual capital costs or reasonable estimates of
capital costs for new, expanded or improved public facilities.
(4) Shall be reduced to compensate for other capital costs imposed by
the Village with respect to land development to provide or pay for
public facilities including special assessments, special charges,
land dedications or fees in lieu of land dedications under Wis. Stats.
Ch. 236, or any other items of value.
(5) Shall be reduced to compensate for monies received from the
federal or state government specifically to provide for the public
facilities for which the impact fees are imposed.
§ 30-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-53
1:171
§ 30-54. Amount. [Ord. No. 3-2007, § 1(91.4), 3-12-2007]
(6) May not include amounts necessary to address existing deficiencies
in public facilities.
(7) Shall be payable by any person or entity that constructs, creates or
modifies any improvement to real property that creates additional
residential dwelling units within the Village, or that results in
nonresidential uses that create a need for new, expanded or
improved public facilities within the Village before a building
permit may be issued, or other required approvals may be given by
the Village.
(8) References hereinabove to public facilities shall be deemed to refer
to the following to the extent that their inclusion is permitted under
Wis. Stats. § 66.0617: Public park land areas with attendant
improvements, the Village law enforcement system, including
structural improvements and/or new buildings, Village fire and
rescue facilities, including structural improvements and new
buildings, Mount Pleasant Transportation Capital Improvements
and capital improvements to the Mount Pleasant Stormwater
Facilities.
(a) The amount of an impact fee imposed hereunder may be automatically
increased for inflation, but no such automatic increase may be effective
unless reviewed at least every three years after the first such increase.
In no case shall the adjusted amount be greater than the maximum fee
identified in the applicable study.
(b) The impact fees are adopted in the following amounts or each
residential equivalency unit (REU):
(1) Village park system impact fee: $1,100.
(2) Village law enforcement system impact fees: $250.
(3) Village fire and rescue system impact fees: $400.
(4) Village transportation system impact fees: $750.
(5) Village stormwater system impact fees:
a. Hoods creek: $800.
b. Pike river: $600.
(c) Imposition:
(1) Residential development.
a. Each impact fee shall be imposed on a residential equivalent
unit (REU) basis with each single family residential unit,
whether located within a one family, multi-family,
condominium, cooperative, rental, or owner occupied unit,
§ 30-53 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 30-54
1:172
constituting one such REU. A residential unit is defined as
any individual living unit which has, within the unit, at least
an individual lockable entrance/exit, a kitchen that includes
a cooking appliance (consisting of an appliance with burners
and an oven and/or a microwave of at least 1,000 watts), an
individual bathroom which contains a shower and/or bathtub,
and a sleeping/living area. One residence shall equal one REU
and the impact fee shall be imposed upon every residence in
the corresponding study area.
b. Notwithstanding the above:
1. Facilities such as nursing homes, and facilities such as
community based residential care facilities (CBRFs) or
residential care apartment complexes (RCACs), as defined
by statute, whether for profit or not for profit, which
include living space for five or more patients or residents
and are intended for long-term or permanent residential
purposes, are classified as nonresidential, commercial
businesses and shall pay impact fees as though they are
nonresidential development under Subsection (c)(2).
(2) Nonresidential development.
a. Nonresidential development is defined as commercial,
business, industrial, institutional and any other use which is
not defined as residential under Subsection (c)(1) above.
b. The public park system impact fee shall not be imposed on
nonresidential development as nonresidential development
does not ordinarily generate a need for these facilities.
c. The law enforcement system impact fee, the fire and rescue
system impact fee, the transportation impact fee and the
stormwater impact fee shall be imposed on nonresidential
development. These fees will be charged on an (REU) basis,
and the number of REU's to be charged will be determined in
accordance with the Needs Study by a calculation of the size of
the alteration or new development. For each new
nonresidential development the size of the structure/building,
parking area and sole use stormwater detention area shall be
calculated. The number of acres shall be determined and
multiplied by a factor of four. This figure shall represent the
number of nonresidential REU's for a determination of the total
impact fee. In the case of an alteration of an existing
nonresidential development, the above formula shall be
applied only as to the area to be altered. Resurfacing, etc., or
repaving an existing parking lot shall not trigger an impact fee.
(3) In certain cases, the Village may adjust the number of REUs
assigned, or the impact fee imposed, based upon satisfactory
evidence from the developer that such an adjustment is justified, or
§ 30-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-54
1:173
§ 30-55. Payment. [Ord. No. 3-2007, § 1(91-4), 3-12-2007]
All impact fees shall become due and payable upon application for a
building permit.
§ 30-56. Low cost housing. [Ord. No. 3-2007, § 1(91-5), 3-12-2007]
No exemption or reduction in the amount of said fee shall be made on land
development that provides for low cost housing.
§ 30-57. Separate fund established. [Ord. No. 3-2007, § 1(91-6),
3-12-2007]
There are hereby established separate impact fee funds for the public park
system, law enforcement system, fire and rescue system improvements,
transportation system, and stormwater improvements all within the Village.
Each such fund shall be placed in a segregated, interest bearing account
and shall be accounted for separately from all other funds of the Village.
Further, the stormwater impact fee fund shall have two segregated
accounts, (separate but within the fund) one for the Pike River Watershed
and one for the Hoods Creek Watershed. Revenues from said funds,
including impact fee revenues and interest earned on impact fee revenues
may be expended only for the type of capital costs for which the impact fees
were imposed.
§ 30-58. Refund of impact fees. [Ord. No. 3-2007, § 1(91-7),
3-12-2007; amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 10-2014]
because of contribution to the cost of public improvements or other
funding.
(a) Impact fees that are imposed and collected by the Village but which are
not used within a reasonable time period after they are collected, shall
be refunded to the current owner of the property that was subject to the
fee. The Village hereby determines that a reasonable time period for
improvements shall be considered as follows unless such time periods
are otherwise extended, or allowed to be extended, by authority under
Sec. 66.0617, Wis. Stats., and in such case the maximum allowable
under Sec. 66.0617, Wis. Stats.:
(1) Public park land development: 10 years.
(2) Fire and rescue systems: 10 years.
(3) Law enforcement system: 10 years.
(4) Transportation systems: 10 years.
(5) Stormwater systems: 10 years.
§ 30-54 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 30-58
1:174
§ 30-59. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 3-2007, § 1(91-8), 3-12-2007]
The following shall be exempted from payment of impact fees herein
provided:
Nonresidential development. No impact fees shall be due for improvements
and alterations to a nonresidential development that does not increase the
building size or footprint and/or the size of the impervious surface parking
lot. Any additions to a nonresidential development (the building/structure,
parking lot, storage area and sole use stormwater detention facilities shall
pay impact fees as set forth above.
§ 30-60. Violation and penalties. [Ord. No. 1(91.9), 3-12-2007]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to the
uniform penalty provisions or any other legal remedy available according to
law, including but not limited to, a forfeiture of $500 for each day of any
violation.
§ 30-61. Appeal. [Ord. No. 3-2007, § 1(91.10), 3-12-2007]
(b) Such time periods shall be in effect for impact fees collected on or after
the effective date of the original ordinance of July 1, 2007 in accordance
with Sec. 66.0617, Wis. Stats.
(a) Any person upon whom an impact fee is imposed has the right to appeal
the amount, collection, or use of the impact fee to the Village Board of
the Village. The procedure shall be as follows:
(1) Any person appealing the amount, collection, or use of the impact
fee (appellant) shall submit a letter or petition to the Village Clerk
describing the nature of the appeal and providing any supporting
documentation therewith.
(2) The Clerk shall present the appeal letter or petition to the finance
committee for its recommendation to the Village Board. The Clerk
shall notify the appellant in writing of the time and place of the
finance committee meeting at which time the appellant shall be
given an opportunity to present additional information in support of
the appeal. Within 10 days following the hearing, the finance
committee shall make its written recommendation to the Village
Board. The Village Board shall thereafter, at a subsequent meeting
upon written notice to appellant, consider said recommendation
and make a determination thereon. The appellant shall be notified
in writing as to the Village Board's decision.
(3) The appellant shall thereafter have a further right within 60 days to
request and cause the Village Board of the Village to conduct a
formal hearing of the contest within a reasonable time following
said request.
§ 30-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-61
1:175
Chapter 34
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
§ 30-61 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 30-61
1:176
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 34-1. Fire prevention codes and statutes adopted. [Code 1993,
§ 5.15]
§ 34-2. Addition ordinances and amendments. [Code 1993, § 5.18]
The chief of the Fire Department shall investigate and recommend to the
Village Board such additional ordinances or amendments to existing
ordinances as he may deem necessary for safeguarding life and property
against fire.
(a) For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion arising from the
storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and
devices and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the use or
occupancy of buildings or premises, and the safeguarding of firefighting
personnel as it relates to job requirements, duties, medical and physical
conditions, the following orders, rules and regulations of the
department of commerce, all of which are set forth in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code as amended from time to time, and the Wisconsin
Statutes that may apply to the fire service, and the Codes and
Standards and Recommended guides as set forth by the National Fire
Protection Association as amended from time to time amended, and as
they apply to the fire service, are incorporated in this section by
reference and adopted as part of this section:
(1) Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 7, Explosives and Blasting Agents.
(2) Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 10, Flammable and Combustible
Liquids.
(3) Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 14, Fire Prevention.
(4) Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 15, Cleaning and Dying.
(5) Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 30, Fire Department Health and
Safety Standards.
(6) Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 43, Anhydrous Ammonia Code.
(7) Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 66, Multifamily Dwelling: (a) Wis.
Stats. § 101.14(4m)(d).
(8) NFPA Codes and Standards, Volumes 1 — 12.
(b) Whenever the provisions of the codes or statutes set forth in Subsection
(a) of this section conflict, the stricter interpretation shall apply.
§ 34-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-3
1:177
§ 34-3. Fire drills; doors and exits required to be unlocked during
school hours. [Code 1993, § 5.23]
The chief of the Fire Department shall require the person having direct
charge of any public, private or parochial school or educational institution
to, at least once a month, without previous warning, drill all pupils in the
proper method of departure from the building in case of fire, as required
by Wis. Stats. § 118.07(2), and to keep all doors and exits unlocked during
school hours.
§ 34-4. Records. [Code 1993, § 5.24]
The Fire Chief shall keep a record of all fires and all of the facts concerning
fires investigated by the fire investigation unit.
§ 34-5. Annual report. [Code 1993, § 5.25]
The annual report of the Fire Department shall be made on or before
April 1 and transmitted to the Village Board. Such report shall contain all
proceedings under this chapter, with such statistics as the Fire Chief may
wish to include. The Fire Chief shall also recommend any amendments to
this chapter which, in his judgment, shall be desirable.
§ 34-6. Open fires. [Code 1993, § 5.26]
(a) All open fires are prohibited in the Village, except:
(1) Outdoor fires for cooking and recreation. Recreational fires shall
not consist of plastic, rubber, asphalt, oily substances or any
materials which will create dense smoke.
(2) Back fires to control forest fires.
(3) Fires set to manage wildlife habitat and forest management as
prescribed by governmental agencies.
(4) Fires set for the practice and instruction of firefighters.
(5) Burning of explosives or dangerous combustible wastes for which
there is no other means of disposal.
(6) Agricultural burning and cropland management when other
alternatives are not feasible. Farmers may burn brush and weeds
and have fires for cropland management as well as for insect and
rodent control.
(7) Open fires on the property of persons owning a one-family or twofamily
residence on that property. The fire shall be set by the owner
of the property or with his consent. The fire shall not burn wet,
combustible rubbish, garbage, oily substances, asphalt, plastics,
rubber products or any substances which create dense, black
smoke upon combustion. The fire shall not be less than 10 feet from
the property line, nor be permitted to burn within 30 feet of the
§ 34-3 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-6
1:178
§ 34-7. Contained fires. [Code 1993, § 5.27]
nearest wall of any building or wooden structure. Fires are not
allowed in any street or alley.
(b) All exceptions set forth in Subsections (a)(3) — (7) of this section shall
be permitted only between the hours of 12:00 noon and 5:00 p.m., and
require permission from the Fire Department.
(c) On days that the Fire Department is informed that atmospheric
conditions are unacceptable for burning, permission to burn will not be
granted.
(d) Every person who kindles or starts an open fire shall supervise, or
cause to have supervised, the burning of such open fire until such fire is
completely extinguished.
(e) All businesses (except farms), churches, schools, apartments and
municipalities shall arrange for disposal of their solid waste by an
method other than open burning.
(f) The burning of construction debris, such as wood scraps, shingles,
insulation, etc., in or adjacent to a subdivision in the Village is
prohibited, regardless of whether such burning is done by the property
owner, contractor or other person responsible for the site.
(a) No person shall kindle or start a fire, or permit such fire to burn within
15 feet of the nearest wall of any building or wooden structure, or in
any street or alley. Any fire kindled, started or permitted to burn within
30 feet of the nearest wall of any building or wooden structure shall be
contained in a substantial burner, constructed of metal, concrete or
brick, which burner shall be screened or covered to prevent the escape
of burning embers. No person shall kindle or start a fire, or permit such
fire to burn in any such burner, other than between the hours of 12:00
noon and 5:00 p.m. Such fires may not burn plastics, rubber, asphalt,
oily substances or any materials that will create dense smoke or cause a
nuisance. Where a business is operated from the home or an attached
structure, no business refuse may be burned under any conditions.
(b) No open flame candles or open flame fixtures shall be used for lighting
or decorative purposes in any building or structure used for public
amusement, recreation or dining purposes unless:
(1) They are well guarded on all sides.
(2) The tip of the flame does not come closer than one inch from the
top of the container, which may be accomplished by the use of a
glass chimney or glass container partly filled with wax and a wick.
(3) All flammable decorative materials shall be flameproofed and
renewed of flameproofing treatments as often as necessary to
maintain the flameproof effect. In accordance with NFPA 701
§ 34-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-7
1:179
§ 34-8. Smoke. [Code 1993, § 5.29]
No person shall cause or permit the emission of smoke from burning
material in a manner that will cause dense smoke or a nuisance. Smoky fires
or any fire which creates a nuisance for neighbors is prohibited.
§ 34-9. Storage of flammable materials. [Code 1993, § 5.30]
§ 34-10. Violations; penalties. [Code 1993, § 5.35; Ord. No. 10-03,
§ 5.35, 9-22-2003]
Unless otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision
of this chapter, provide false or misleading information for permits or
applications, or occupy a structure that is not compliant with this chapter,
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-15.
§ 34-11. through § 34-40. (Reserved)
(Decorations Flameproofing), such retreatment shall be at intervals
of not less than six months, nor more than one year.
(a) The following items shall not be stored in basements or storage bins of
apartments or other multifamily dwellings in the Village:
(1) Charcoal, except in a metal container equipped with a metal cover.
(2) Oily rags or dust mops.
(3) Flammable liquids of any nature, other than motor oils or similar
oils in metal quart containers.
(4) Bottled gases, propane, acetylene, oxygen or other substances of a
similar nature.
(5) Gasoline motors and power equipment, such as outboard motors,
power lawn equipment, snow blowers, snow plows, motor bikes,
motorcycles, etc., may be permitted if the chief of the Fire
Department grants permission to store gasoline powered
equipment, provided, the following is done:
a. Sparkplugs are removed.
b. Battery is disconnected.
c. Fuel tank is completely drained.
d. Sparkplug opening is covered with tape.
(b) For purposes of this section, the term "multifamily dwelling" means a
building, or portion thereof, designed for, and occupied by, more than
two families.
§ 34-7 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-11
1:180
ARTICLE II
Fire Department
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 34-41. Official Fire Department. [Code 1993, § 5.01]
The Mount Pleasant Fire Department is recognized as the official Fire
Department of the Village. The Fire Department shall have the duty and
authority of firefighting, providing emergency care of the sick, disabled
or injured, and the prevention of fires within the Village, and shall be
organized and governed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 34-42. Membership. [Code 1993, § 5.02]
The Fire Department shall consist of a chief and such subordinate officers
and members as the Village Board deems necessary for the operation of the
Fire Department. All personnel shall be appointed in accordance with the
civil service provisions of Chapter 2 of this Code.
§ 34-43. Responsibility; authority and requirements of Fire Chief.
[Code 1993, § 5.03]
(a) The Fire Chief shall have the following authority:
(1) Plan, organize and direct all activities of the Fire Department.
(2) Advise and make recommendations to the Village Board for the
most effective operation of the Fire Department.
(3) Perform related work, as required.
(b) The Fire Chief shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) Plan, organize and supervise the work of the Fire Department
according to the rules and regulations of the Fire Department.
(2) Enforce all fire prevention, fire protection and rescue laws and
ordinances of the state, county and Village and as directed by the
Village Board.
(3) Answer fire alarms and command the handling of firefighting
equipment on his shift and all major fire alarms that occur on other
shifts, if available.
(4) Develop policies, procedures and long range plans for keeping the
Fire Department updated.
(5) Attend schools and demonstrations on the latest fire suppression
and first aid methods and equipment.
§ 34-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-43
1:181
§ 34-44. Report instructions and forms. [Code 1993, § 5.19]
The Fire Chief shall prepare instructions for the chief inspector and his
assistants, and forms for their use in the reports required by this chapter.
§ 34-45. Investigations. [Code 1993, § 5.20]
(6) Conduct and supervise training sessions to maintain a high degree
of efficiency within the Fire Department and local industrial firms.
(7) Perform necessary public relations and initiate activities to
generate citizen participation.
(8) Supervise fire inspections of buildings in order to maintain a
current rating according to state fire regulations.
(9) Maintain records and prepare reports, including an annual budget.
(c) The Fire Chief shall have the following essential knowledge and
abilities:
(1) Advanced knowledge of laws, rules, regulations and general
statutes relating to fire prevention and suppression.
(2) Be well versed in all of the facts of fire prevention, fire protection,
firefighting methods and advanced knowledge of the causes of
fires.
(3) Ability to assign and supervise men, and participate in and
supervise firefighting activities.
(4) Ability to establish and maintain effective working and public
relationships.
(5) Ability to maintain records and prepare reports.
(d) The Fire Chief shall have the following desirable education, training
and experience:
(1) Graduation from a four-year college or university with major course
work in fire, public or business administration or a related field.
(2) Special training in modern firefighting methods and
administration.
(3) A valid state driver's license.
(a) Authority. Authority to conduct investigations is given to the Fire Chief
in Wis. Stats. § 165.55(1). The chief of the Fire Department or company
of every city, Village and town in which a Fire Department or company
exists shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, the cause, origin
and circumstance of every fire occurring in his city, Village or town by
which property has been destroyed or damaged when the damage
exceeds $500, and fires of unknown origin he shall especially
§ 34-43 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-45
1:182
§ 34-46. Assistant Fire Chief. [Code 1993, § 5.04]
investigate, whether the fire was the result of negligence, accident or
design.
(b) Fires resulting in property destruction or damage. The Fire Department
shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstance of every fire
occurring in the Village by which property has been destroyed or
damaged, and so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the
result of carelessness or design. Such investigations shall begin
immediately upon occurrence of such fire, if it appears to the fire
investigator making such investigation that such fire is of suspicious
origin, and the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction shall be
notified. All physical evidence at the scene of such fires shall be
guarded and maintained until collected by proper authorities as
evidence for prosecution of the case. Other agencies, as deemed
necessary by the Fire Chief, may be notified for assistance to
supplement the investigation.
(a) The Assistant Fire Chief shall:
(1) Be under direction to assist in the organizing, planning, directing
and control of all activities of the Fire Department.
(2) Be responsible for supervising and commanding all Fire
Department activities in the absence of the Fire Chief.
(3) Perform related work, as required.
(b) The Assistant Fire Chief shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) Assist in the planning, organizing and supervision of the work of
the Fire Department in compliance with the rules and regulations
of the Fire Department.
(2) Assist in the enforcement of all fire prevention, fire protection and
rescue laws and ordinances of the state, county and Village.
(3) Answer fire alarms and command the handling of Fire Department
equipment, in the absence of the Fire Chief.
(4) Conduct or assist in handling Fire Department training sessions.
(5) Attend schools and demonstrations on the latest fire suppression
methods, first aid methods and equipment.
(6) Assist in the development of policies, procedures and long range
plans for keeping the Fire Department updated.
(7) Perform necessary public relations and assist in initiating activities
to generate citizen participation.
(8) Maintain records, prepare reports and assist in the preparation of
an annual budget.
§ 34-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-46
1:183
§ 34-47. Assistant chief of support services. [Code 1993, § 5.05]
(c) The Assistant Fire Chief shall have the following essential knowledge
and abilities;
(1) Advanced knowledge of the laws, rules, regulations and general
statutes relating to fire prevention and suppression.
(2) Advanced knowledge of the causes of fires and fire suppression
methods.
(3) Thorough knowledge of first aid and rescue work.
(4) Ability to assign and supervise firefighting activities.
(5) Ability to secure respect and cooperation.
(6) Ability to establish and maintain effective working and public
relationships.
(7) Ability to maintain records and prepare reports.
(d) The Assistant Fire Chief shall have the following desired education,
training and experience:
(1) High school graduate.
(2) Three or more years of responsible experience above the rank of
firefighter.
(3) Special training in modern firefighting methods and
administration.
(4) Valid state driver's license.
(a) In general.
(1) A support services in the Fire Department is established, which
shall be operated under the supervision of the Fire Chief.
(2) The Fire Chief shall designate an officer or member of the Fire
Department as assistant chief of support services, who shall hold
such office at the pleasure of the Fire Chief.
(3) The Assistant Fire Chief may designate such number of fire
inspectors as shall be authorized by the Fire Chief from time to
time.
(b) The assistant chief of support services shall have the same
responsibilities and authority as Assistant Fire Chiefs as set forth in
§ 34-46 and, in addition, shall enforce all laws and ordinances of the
state, county and Village, covering the:
(1) Prevention of fires.
§ 34-46 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-47
1:184
(2) Storage and use of explosives and flammables.
(3) Installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm
systems and fire extinguishing equipment.
(4) Maintenance and regulation of fire escapes.
(5) Means and adequacy of exits, in case of fire, from factories,
schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls,
theaters, amphitheaters and all other places in which numbers of
persons work, live or congregate, from time to time, for any
purpose.
(6) Conduct and supervision of training sessions to maintain a high
degree of efficiency within the support services.
(7) Performance of necessary public relations and initiation of
activities to generate citizen participation.
(8) Maintenance of a written record card of each property inspected,
which shall conform to the requirements of the Fire Department.
(9) Making of recommendations for, and develop of, fire safety
legislation or regulations, as may be necessary.
(10) Coordination of the activities of the support services with other
agencies of the Village.
(11) Perform related work as required by the Fire Chief.
(c) The assistant chief of support services shall have the following essential
knowledge and abilities:
(1) Considerable knowledge of laws, rules, regulations and general
statutes relating to fire prevention and suppression.
(2) Good knowledge of the causes of fires, suppression methods and
equipment.
(3) Ability to assign and supervise men, and participate in and
supervise firefighting activities.
(4) Ability to establish and maintain effective working and public
relationships.
(5) Ability to maintain records and prepare reports.
(6) Ability to supervise personnel and evaluate skills relative to fire
prevention and fire education.
(d) The assistant chief of support services shall have the following desired
education, training and experience:
(1) High school graduate.
§ 34-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-47
1:185
§ 34-48. Lieutenant. [Code 1993, § 5.06]
(2) Three or more years of responsible experience above rank of
firefighter.
(3) Special training in modern firefighting methods and
administration.
(4) Valid state driver's license.
(5) Experience in fire inspections.
(a) The Lieutenant of the Fire Department shall:
(1) Be under the general supervision to assist in the planning and
direction of all activities of the Fire Department.
(2) Perform related and miscellaneous work, as required.
(b) The Lieutenant shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) Assist in planning and supervising the work of the Fire Department
in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Fire
Department.
(2) Assist in the development of policies, procedures and long range
plans for the efficient operation of the Fire Department.
(3) Attend schools and demonstrations on the latest first aid and fire
suppression methods and equipment.
(4) Conduct and supervise, when required, training sessions to
maintain a high degree of efficiency within the Fire Department
and local industrial firms.
(5) Answer fire alarms and command the handling of first aid and
firefighting equipment on his shift in the Fire Chief's absence.
(6) Assist the Fire Chief in the preparation of reports, and maintain a
high degree of efficiency within the Fire Department and local
industrial firms.
(c) The Lieutenant shall have the following essential knowledge and
abilities:
(1) Considerable knowledge of laws, rules, regulations and general
statutes relating to fire prevention and suppression.
(2) Good knowledge of first aid, rescue work and causes of fires,
suppression methods and equipment.
(3) Ability to assign and supervise men, and participate in and
supervise firefighting activities.
§ 34-47 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-48
1:186
§ 34-49. Fire Department property. [Code 1993, § 5.09]
§ 34-50. Police power. [Code 1993, § 5.10]
(4) Ability to establish and maintain effective working and public
relationships.
(5) Ability to maintain records and prepare reports.
(d) The Lieutenant shall have the followed desired education, training and
experience:
(1) High school graduate.
(2) Five or more years of responsible experience at the rank of
firefighter.
(3) Special training in modern firefighting methods and
administration.
(4) Valid state driver's license.
(5) Satisfactorily pass a written test and oral interview for the position
of Lieutenant.
(a) Control. The Fire Chief shall have control of all apparatus used by the
Fire Department and shall be responsible for the proper maintenance
thereof. Emergency repairs of such apparatus may be authorized by the
Fire Chief.
(b) Use. No apparatus shall be used for any purpose, except for official Fire
Department use within the limits of the Village or in training therefor,
except pursuant to an agreement approved by the Village Board with
other municipalities with whom agreements have been executed or with
the prior approval of the Village Board.
(c) Damage. No person shall willfully injure, in any manner, any hose,
hydrant or fire apparatus belonging to the Village and no vehicle,
without the consent of the Fire Department official in command, shall
be driven over an unprotected hose of the Fire Department when such
hose is laid down on any street, private driveway or other place in order
to be used at any fire or alarm of fire.
(a) Vestment. The Fire Chief and assistants or officers in command at any
fire are vested with full and complete police authority at fires. Any
officer of the Fire Department may cause the arrest of any person
failing to give the right-of-way to the Fire Department in responding to
a fire.
(b) Fire safety limits. The Fire Chief may prescribe certain limits in the
vicinity of a fire within which no person, except firefighters, police
officers and persons admitted by order of any officer of the Fire
Department, shall be permitted to come. The Fire Chief shall have the
§ 34-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-50
1:187
§ 34-51. Appropriation of funds. [Code 1993, § 5.11]
The Village Board shall appropriate funds to provide for operation and for
such apparatus and equipment for the use of the Fire Department as it may
deem expedient and necessary to maintain efficient and proper protection
of life and property from fire.
§ 34-52. Emergency ambulance services. [Ord. No. 5-2002, § 5.12,
10, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 4-2007, 4-23-2007; Ord. No. 12-2008,
9-8-2008]
power to cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become
necessary for the preservation of such property from fire, to prevent
the spread of fire or to protect the adjoining property, and during the
progress of any fire, he shall have the power to order the removal or
destruction of any property which is necessary to prevent the further
spread of the fire. He shall also have the power to cause the removal
of all wires or other facilities and the turning off of all electricity or
other services where such wires or facilities impede the work of the
Fire Department during the progress of a fire.
(c) Authority to enter adjacent property. Any firefighter, while acting under
the direction of the Fire Chief or other officer in command, shall enter
upon the premises adjacent to, or in the vicinity of, any building or other
property then on fire for the purpose of extinguishing such fire, and in
the case of any person hindering such entry, or resisting or obstructing
any firefighter in the discharge of his duty, as provided for in this
subsection, the offending person shall be deemed guilty of resisting
firefighters in the discharge of their duty.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADMIN. HSS 112 RULE — A person who has more extensive training
than the EMT-BASIC and, under medical direction, provides, but is not
limited to:
(1) Airway management.
(2) Starting and administration of intravenous fluids.
(3) Advanced rescue, emergency care and resuscitation.
(4) Cardiac rhythm interpretation and defibrillation.
(5) Advanced assessment.
(6) Insertion of advanced airways.
(7) Parenteral injections.
(8) Treatment of shocks and burns.
§ 34-50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-52
1:188
ADVANCE LIFE SUPPORT (ALS) — Emergency medical care provided
by emergency medical technicians-paramedics that requires the use of
life sustaining equipment, utilizing an ambulance equipped with a radio
or constant telephone contact with a physician/hospital.
ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (ALS) WITHOUT TRANSPORT —
Emergency medical care provided by emergency medical techniciansparamedics
that requires the use of life sustaining equipment, with a
radio or constant telephone contact with a physician/hospital, without
transport.
BASIC LIFE SUPPORT (BLS) — Emergency first aid services which do
not meet the ALS criteria.
DISPOSABLE MEDICAL SUPPLIES — Equipment designed to have a
one-time use, and then be properly disposed of, to aid in the prevention
and spread of infectious diseases.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN (EMT BASIC) — A person
licensed to provide basic life support and who is properly trained to
transport sick, disabled and injured individuals. As defined by Wis.
Stats. Admin. HSS 110 Rule and/or the Fire Department's medical
direction. Training includes, but is not limited to:
PARAMEDIC-ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT INTERCEPTS — When it is
necessary for a patient that is being transported by a nonparamedic
ambulance service, to require the services of a paramedic-advanced
life support ambulance service. This includes, when necessary, for two
ambulance services to be involved in the transport of a patient, when
either the patient is transferred from the nonparamedic ambulance
to the paramedic ambulance or where the paramedic staff and/or
equipment board the nonparamedic ambulance.
(9) Administration of emergency medications.
Basic assessment with basic cardiac life support, CPR (health care
provider).
(1)
(2) Anatomy and physiology.
(3) Treatment of bleeding and shock.
(4) Use of pneumatic shock garment.
(5) Soft tissue injuries.
(6) Fractures and dislocations.
(7) Emergency childbirth.
(8) Burns and hazardous materials.
(9) Automatic defibrillation.
(b) Provision of service. The Village provides emergency ambulance service
to persons needing emergency medical attention after the sudden onset
§ 34-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-52
1:189
of a medical condition or trauma manifesting itself by acute symptoms
of such severity, including severe pain, that the absence of immediate
attention could reasonably be expected to result in placing the patient's
health in serious jeopardy, or the serious impairment of bodily
functions, or serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part.
(c) Fees.
(1) Applicability; exception. Every person receiving emergency service
from the Village by the use of its emergency equipment, medical
drugs and disposable medical equipment in attending to and/or
transporting such person from the scene of an incident to an
emergency hospital, shall pay for such service if rendered within
the Village, unless such person is a child who is under the direction
of his school of attendance or is a participant in a recreation
activity sponsored by the Village.
(2) Outlying areas with a mutual aid agreement. In all cases where the
emergency service of the Village is summoned in response to an
emergency call in areas outside the Village where a mutual aid
agreement does exist, every person receiving such emergency
service, the administration of medical drugs and disposable
medical equipment use in attending at the scene of the incident and
transporting such person to an emergency hospital shall be
charged for such service.
(3) Outlying areas without a mutual aid agreement. In all cases where
the emergency service of the Village is summoned in response to an
emergency call in areas outside of the Village where no mutual aid
agreement exists, every person receiving such emergency service,
the administration of medical drugs and disposable medical
equipment used in attending at the scene of the incident and
transporting such person to a private or emergency hospital shall
be charged for such service.
(4) Paramedic-advanced life support intercepts. In all cases where
paramedic-advanced life support intercept service is requested
from the Village by a municipal ambulance service or rescue squad
that does not provide a paramedic level of care, that municipality or
rescue squad shall be billed for the paramedic service provided.
(5) Schedule of fees for service, transfer service and disposable
medical equipment. The following fees shall be applicable for
ambulance service, transfer service and disposal medical
equipment:
a. ALS, transport (nonresident): $650.
b. ALS, transport (resident): $600.
c. ALS, nontransport: $300.
§ 34-52 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-52
1:190
d. BLS, transport (nonresident): $500.
e. BLS, transport (resident): $450.
f. Extra ambulance attendant, 250 pounds or combative: $100.
g. Disposable supplies: $50.
h. Mileage, per loaded mile: $14.
i. IV and supplies: $65.
j. Oxygen: $60.
k. Intubation: $65.
l. Defibrillation: $60.
m. EKG, 3-lead: $30.
n. EKG, 12-lead: $30.
o. Percutaneous cricothyrotomy (under Adv. Airway): $135.
p. OB kit/burn kit: $15.
q. Pericardiocentesis: $86.
r. IO: $200.
s. Rescue Pod (Adv. Airway): $110.
t. Mutual aid use of autopulse: $225.
u. If Capnography used add $50 to base rate. If Autopulse used
add $175 to base rate.
v. If no transport is given and no ALS (Advanced Life Support) the
following be charged:
1. Zero to three calls within one year (January 1 through
December 31): no charge.
2. Four to six calls within one year (January 1 through
December 31): $75.
3. Seven plus calls within one year (January 1 through
December 31): $150.
w. If no transport is given and BLS skills are provided fee is: $200.
(6) Medications used in ALS and BLS services. The following fees are
established for medications used in ALS and BLS services. The Fire
Chief shall periodically, no less than once per calendar year, report
such fees to the finance department, which may modify such fees.
§ 34-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-52
1:191
Such fees are as stated as of the date of adoption of the ordinance
from which this section is derived, until revised:
a. Adensine, six mg: $40.
b. Albuterol/Ventolin/Proventil, 0.5% ml by nebulizer: $25.
c. Amyl Nitrate, capsule: $25.
d. Ativan: $50.
e. Atropine, 1 mg/10 ml syringe: $25.
f. Benadryl/Diphenhydramine, 50 mg syringe: $25.
g. Bretylium, 500 mg: $25.
h. Calcium Chloride, 1 gm/10 ml syringe: $25.
i. Cardizem, per syringe: $26.50.
j. Cordarone/Amiodarone, 300 mg: $200.
k. Dextrose/D5W, 500 ml: $25.
l. Dextrose/D25/syringe: $25.
m. Dextrose/D50/syringe: $25.
n. Diazepam/Valium up to 5 mg: $175.
o. Dopamine/Intropine, 200 mg: $26.
p. Epinephrine/Adrenalin, 1:1,000: $25.
q. Epinephrine/Adrenalin, 1:10,000, 1 gm/10 ml syringe: $25.
r. Furosemide/Lasix, up to 20 mg: $25.
s. Geodon: $25.
t. Glucagon up to 1 mg: $70.
u. Isoproterenol bu inhalation 0.5% ml: $5.15.
v. Lidocaine drip and D5W, 500 cc: $25.
w. Lidocaine 50 ml: $25.
x. Magnesium Sulfate, up to 10 mg: $25.
y. Midazolan, up to 1 mg: $25.
z. Morphine Sulfate, up to 10 mg: $25.
aa. Narcan/Naloxone: $30.
bb. Nitro sublingual, each tab/spray/dose: $25.
§ 34-52 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-52
1:192
§ 34-53. Charges when responding to illegal fires. [Code 1993,
§ 5.14]
Whenever the Fire Department responds to a fire call determined to be in
violation of §§ 34-6, 34-7(a), 34-8 and the definition of the terms "garbage"
and "refuse" in § 34-121, it may collect the actual costs of control and
extinguishment from the responsible party, and in default of payment, may
proceed to a court of competent jurisdiction to collect such costs as in any
other civil action.
§ 34-54. Bureau of Fire Prevention.
cc. Normal saline/capped IV, 1 - 5 ml: $25.
dd. Normal saline 251 - 500 ml: $25.
ee. Normal saline 501 - 1,000 ml: $25.
ff. Procainamide, 1 gram: $25.
gg. Sodium Bicarbonate: $25.
hh. Sodium Chloride: $25.
ii. Zofran: $25.
(a) Established; inspections.
(1) A Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department is established,
which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the
Fire Department.
(2) The chief of the Fire Department shall designate an officer or
member of the Fire Department as chief inspector of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention, who shall hold such office at the pleasure of the
chief of the Fire Department.
(3) The chief of the Fire Department may also designate such number
of assistant inspectors as shall be authorized from time to time by
the Village Board.
(b) Duties. The officers of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall enforce all
laws and ordinances of the state, county and Village pertaining to the:
(1) Prevention of fires.
(2) Storing and use of explosives, flammables, combustibles,
hazardous materials, extremely hazardous substances or toxic
gases.
(3) Installation and maintenance of automatic fire alarm systems, fire
extinguishment equipment and smoke detection devices.
(4) Maintenance of exitways, including hallways, stairways and aisles.
§ 34-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-54
1:193
§ 34-55. Fire inspector. [Code 1993, § 5.17]
§ 34-56. Fire inspections. [Code 1993, § 5.22]
(5) Investigation of the causes, origins and circumstances of fires and
explosions, and of fire related deaths and injuries.
(6) Instruction of all firefighters in their inspection duties.
(7) Making available of public education to interested citizens and
promoting sound fire prevention practices.
Such officers shall have such other powers and perform such other duties
as are set forth in other sections of this chapter, and as may be conferred
and imposed by law from time to time. The chief of the Fire Department
may delegate any of his powers or duties under this chapter to the assistant
chief of fire prevention.
(a) Duties. The chief of the Fire Department shall hold the office of fire
inspector, with the power to appoint one or more deputy fire inspectors,
who shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as the fire
inspector.
(b) Inspections. The fire inspectors shall inspect, or cause to be inspected,
as often as may be necessary, all buildings (except private dwellings),
premises and thoroughfares within the Village to correct any conditions
liable to cause a fire or any violation of this chapter relating to fire
hazards. The fire inspectors shall also investigate the storage and
handling of explosives and flammable liquids within the Village.
(c) Hazards. Whenever and wherever in the Village any inspection by the
Fire Chief or his deputies reveals a fire hazard, the Fire Chief or his
deputies shall serve a notice, in writing, upon the owner of the property,
giving the owner a reasonable time in which to remove the hazard.
(d) Reports. The Fire Chief shall keep a written record of each property
inspected, which report shall conform to the requirements of the
department of commerce.
(e) Hindering and obstructing fire inspector. No person shall hinder or
obstruct the fire inspector in the performance of his duty or refuse to
perform any lawful direction given by him.
(a) Right of entry.
(1) The Fire Chief, the chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, officers
of the Fire Department or any inspector shall inspect, or cause to
be inspected, as often as may be necessary, at all reasonable hours,
enter any buildings, premises and public thoroughfares, except the
interiors of private premises, for the purpose of ascertaining and
causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or any
§ 34-54 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-56
1:194
§ 34-57. Fire prevention insepctions and fees. [Ord. No. 9-2009,
6-22-2009]
violation of the provisions or intent of any ordinance affecting fire
hazards.
(2) The Fire Chief may obtain an administrative inspection warrant
under statute, when necessary, in his opinion, for the purpose of
making an inspection or investigation of any building or premises
where the owner has refused admission to such building or
premises.
(b) Order to remove hazards. Whenever any inspector shall find, in any
building or upon any premises or other place, combustible or explosive
matter, or hazardous, extremely hazardous or toxic materials which are
situated so as to endanger property; or shall find obstructions to, or on,
fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere
with operations of the Fire Department or egress of occupants in case
of fire, the fire inspector shall order such dangerous conditions or
materials to be removed or remedied in such a manner as may be
specified.
(c) Compliance of owner or occupant within reasonable period. Any owner
or occupant failing to comply with an order as set forth in Subsection
(b) of this section within a reasonable period after service of the order
shall be liable to a penalty as provided in § 34-10.
(d) Service of order. The service of such order may be made upon the
occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, either by personally
delivering a copy of the order to such occupant or by delivering the
order to and leaving the order with any adult person in charge of the
premises, or putting the order in a conspicuous place on the door to the
entrance of the premises or, if such owner is absent from the
jurisdiction of the officer serving the order, by mailing such copy to the
owner's last known post office address.
(e) Order to install appliances. The Fire Chief or officers of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention shall survey inspectable buildings and order required
fire appliances to be installed.
(f) Appeal of orders issued. Any such order shall forthwith be complied
with by the owner or occupant of such premises or building. If such
order is made by the chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention or one of the
inspectors, such owner or occupant may, within 24 hours, appeal to the
chief, in writing, who shall review such order and file his decision
thereon. Unless, by his authority, the order is revoked or modified, it
shall remain in full force and be complied with within the time fixed in
the order or decision of the chief.
(a) Fees, based on occupancy classification:
§ 34-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-57
1:195
§ 34-58. through § 34-80. (Reserved)
Classification Fee
1. Public assembly Per the annual fee schedule
2. Education institutions Per the annual fee schedule
3. Institutional Per the annual fee schedule
4. Residential, multifamily (three
units and up)
Per the annual fee schedule
5. Stores, offices Per the annual fee schedule
6. Basic industry, utility, defense Per the annual fee schedule
7. Manufacturing Per the annual fee schedule
8. Storage, warehouse Per the annual fee schedule
9. Special, not classified Per the annual fee schedule
10. Compliance inspections for
Wisconsin Health and Social
Services community-based
residential facilities (CBRF)
Per the annual fee schedule
11. Single-family home Per the annual fee schedule
12. Multi-family homes Per the annual fee schedule
(b) The annual fire prevention inspection fee shall constitute a special
charge against the property under Wis. Stats. § 66.601(16), and shall be
placed on the annual tax roll for collection as a special charge if unpaid
by October 15. All proceedings related to the collection of real estate
taxes shall apply.
(c) All buildings, structures and premises owned by the Village of Mount
Pleasant, the Village of Sturtevant, the State of Wisconsin, and the
United States Government shall be exempt from the fire prevention fee.
§ 34-57 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-58
1:196
DIVISION 2
Hazardous Materials
§ 34-81. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 5.21(2)(a), (b)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Materials, not otherwise covered in this
chapter, which are highly flammable, or which may react to cause fires or
explosions, or which, by their presence, create or augment a fire explosion
hazard, or which, because of their toxicity, flammability or liability to
explosion hazard, render firefighting abnormally dangerous or difficult;
and flammable and combustible liquids which are chemically unstable and
which may spontaneously form explosive compounds or undergo
spontaneous reactions of explosive violence or with sufficient evolution
of heat to be compressed gases, flammable solids, corrosive liquids,
radioactive materials, oxidizing materials, potentially explosive chemicals,
highly toxic materials and poisonous gases.
INFECTIOUS AGENT — A bacterial, mycoplasmal, fungal, parasitic or viral
agent known to cause illness in humans, which is used, researched,
produced or stored within or on the premises.
§ 34-82. Applicability. [Code 1993, § 5.21(2)]
The provisions of this division shall apply to all persons using, researching,
producing or storing hazardous materials and/or infectious agents on and
after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived.
§ 34-83. Notification of Fire Department. [Code 1993, § 5.21(1)]
All persons using, researching or producing hazardous materials and/or
infectious agents shall notify the Fire Department as prescribed by this
division.
§ 34-84. Amount requiring license; fee. [Code 1993, § 5.21(3)]
(a) No person shall store or handle the following without obtaining a
license from the Fire Chief prior to such storing or handling:
(1) More than 55 gallons of corrosive liquids;
(2) More than 500 pounds of oxidizing materials;
(3) More than 500 millicuries of radioactive materials;
(4) More then 2,000 cubic feet of flammable compressed gas;
(5) Ten pounds or more of organic peroxides;
(6) Five hundred pounds or more of ammonium nitrate; or
§ 34-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-84
1:197
§ 34-85. General requirements. [Code 1993, § 5.21(4)]
(7) Any amount of highly toxic material or poisonous gas.
(b) The license fee will be as set by the Village Board per calendar year, or
portion thereof.
(a) The following general requirements shall apply to the manufacture,
storage, handling and use of hazardous materials:
(1) The manufacture, storage, handling and use of hazardous
chemicals shall be safeguarded with such protective facilities as
public safety requires.
(2) The Fire Chief may require the separation or isolation of any
chemical that, in combination with other substances, may bring
about a fire or explosion or may liberate a flammable or poisonous
gas. The Fire Chief may require separation from other storage,
occupancies or buildings when the quantity stored constitutes a
material hazard.
(3) Defective containers which permit leakage or spillage shall be
disposed of or repaired in accordance with recognized safe
practices. No spilled materials shall be allowed to accumulate on
floors or shelves.
(4) Where hazardous materials are kept for retail sale in containers or
packages usual to the retail trade, storage shall be neat and orderly
and shelves shall be of substantial construction.
(5) Where specific requirements are not otherwise established,
storage, handling and use of hazardous chemicals shall be in
accordance with nationally recognized good practices.
(6) Any person using, researching, producing and/or storing any
hazardous or infectious materials shall provide to the Fire
Department, in writing, the following information:
a. Address and location of where hazardous/infectious materials
are used, researched, stored or produced;
b. Trade name of the hazardous/infectious materials;
c. Chemical name and any commonly used synonym for the
hazardous/infectious material and its major components;
d. Exact locations on the premises where such hazardous/
infectious materials are used, researched, stored and/or
produced;
e. Amounts of hazardous/infectious materials on the premises per
the exact locations;
§ 34-84 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-85
1:198
§ 34-86. Compressed gases. [Code 1993, § 5.21(5)]
The regulations contained in the Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 13 will be
enforced by the Fire Chief.
§ 34-87. Oxidizing materials. [Code 1993, § 5.21(6)]
Oxidizing materials shall be stored in dry locations and separated from
organic materials, including wood surfaces.
§ 34-88. Radioactive materials. [Code 1993, § 5.21(7)]
f. Boiling point, vapor pressure, vapor density, solubility in water,
specific gravity, percentage volatile by volume, evaporation
rate for liquids, and appearance and odor of the hazardous/
infectious materials;
g. Flash point and flammable limits of the hazardous substance;
h. Any permissible exposure level, threshold limit value or other
established limit value for exposure to a material;
i. Stability of the material;
j. Recommended fire extinguishing media, special firefighting
procedures and fire explosion hazard information for the
material;
k. Any effect of overexposure to the material, emergency and first
aid procedures and telephone numbers to call in an
emergency;
l. Any condition or material which is incompatible with
hazardous/infectious material and which must be avoided;
m. Any personal protective equipment to be worn or used and
special precautions to be taken when handling or coming into
contact with the material;
n. Procedures for handling or coming into contact with the
material;
o. Any methods of route or transmission of the infectious agents;
p. Any symptoms or effect of infection, emergency first aid
procedure and a telephone number to be called in an
emergency.
(a) Radioactive materials shall have readily legible signs warning of
radiation dangers and shall be placed at entrances to locations where
radioactive materials are used or stored. Signs will not be required for
storage of manufactured articles, other than liquids, such as
instruments or clock dials, of which radioactive materials are a
§ 34-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-88
1:199
§ 34-89. Potentially explosive chemicals. [Code 1993, § 5.21(8)]
Potentially explosive chemicals shall be protected from external heat, fire
and explosion, and good housekeeping shall be maintained. All spilled
materials shall be promptly gathered and destroyed in an approved manner.
Smoking shall be prohibited in the storage area.
§ 34-90. Poisonous gases. [Code 1993, § 5.21(9)]
§ 34-91. Corrosive liquids. [Code 1993, § 5.21(10)]
Corrosive liquids shall have satisfactory provisions made for containing and
neutralizing or safely flushing away leakage of such corrosive liquids which
may occur during storage or handling.
§ 34-92. Reimbursement for expense of cleanup of spills. [Code
1993, § 5.21(11)]
Any person who possesses or controls a hazardous material or infectious
agent which was discharged, or who caused the discharge of a hazardous
material or infectious agent shall reimburse the Village for actual and
necessary expenses incurred by the Village or its agent to contain, remove
or dispose of the hazardous substance or infectious agent or take any other
appropriate action which is deemed appropriate under the circumstance.
§ 34-93. Recovery of costs. [Code 1993, § 5.21(12); amended
1-14-2013 by Ord. No. 02-2013]
component part, and luminous compounds, when securely packed in
strong containers, provided, the gamma radiation at any surface of the
package is less than 10 milliroentgens in 24 hours.
(b) When not in use, radioactive materials shall be kept in adequately
shielded fire-resistant containers of such design that the gamma
radiation will not exceed 200 milliroentgens per hour, or equivalent, at
any point of readily accessible surface.
(a) Poisonous gases shall be stored in rooms of at least one-hour fireresistant
construction and having natural or mechanical ventilation
adequate to remove leaking gas. Such ventilation shall not discharge to
a point where the gases may endanger any person.
(b) Legible warning signs stating the nature of the hazard shall be
prominently placed at all entrances to locations where poisonous gases
are stored or used.
(a) Recovery of costs from every person using, storing, handling or
transporting flammable or combustible liquids, chemicals, gasses or
other hazardous materials shall comply with the requirements of Wis.
Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 10, as in force and amended from time to time.
§ 34-88 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-93
1:200
§ 34-94. through § 34-120. (Reserved)
(b) Every person using, storing, handling or transporting (whether by rail
or on the highways) flammable or combustible liquids, chemicals,
gasses or other hazardous materials shall be liable to the Village for the
actual cost of labor and materials associated with the use of any
specialized extinguishing agent, chemical, neutralizer or similar
material or equipment employed to extinguish, confine or clean up any
such hazardous material which is involved in any accidental spill or in
the threat of any fire or accidental spill.
(c) There is hereby imposed upon and charged a fire call charge to the
owner or user at the time of the fire call of the property involved in a
fire call response by the Fire Department on any highway within the
Village of Mt. Pleasant. The fire call charge shall be in the sum of $500,
and shall cover the cost of such fire call.
(d) The Fire Chief or his or her designee shall submit statements for such
charges to all such owners or users of the property subject to a fire call
on such highways as soon as practical following the completion of the
fire call. All such charges shall be paid to the Fire Department.
§ 34-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-94
1:201

ARTICLE III
Automatic Sprinkler Systems
§ 34-121. Definitions. [Code 1993, §§ 5.28, 5.31(1)]
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPROVED —
AREA — The maximum horizontal projected area on one floor of a
building or structure within the exterior walls or between approved fire
walls.
AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER EQUIPMENT — A system of piping
connected to an adequate water supply, provided with approved
automatic fire sprinklers and devices arranged and located to discharge
water automatically to the seat of the fire.
BASEMENT — Any story where less than half the height between floor
and ceiling is above the average level of the street, sidewalk or finished
grade.
COMBUSTIBLE — A material or structure which can burn. The term
"combustible" is a relative term. Many materials which will burn under
one set of conditions will not burn under conditions (e.g., structural
steel is noncombustible, but fine steel wool is combustible). The term
"combustible" does not usually indicate ease of ignition, burning
intensity or rate of burning, except when modified by a term such as
"highly," such as in "highly combustible interior finish."
FIRE RESISTIVE — The type of construction in which the structural
members, including walls, partitions, columns, floor and roof
construction, are of noncombustible materials with fire resistive ratings
not less than those specified in the following table. The two
classifications are identified by the required fire resistance of floors as
a matter of convenience.
As applied to automatic fire sprinkler equipment, approval by the
authority charged with the enforcement of this article or their
designated representative.
(1)
As applied to automatic fire sprinklers and devices, approval by a
recognized testing laboratory.
(2)
§ 34-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-121
1:203
Fire Resistance Rating of Structural Members in Hours
Classification
Three-Hour Two-Hour
Bearing walls or bearing
portion of walls, exterior
or interior
4 4
Nonbearing walls or
portions of walls, exterior
or interior (NC —
Noncombustible)
NC NC
Principal supporting
members, including
columns, trusses, girders
and beams for 1 floor or
roof only
3 2
Principal supporting
members, including
columns, trusses, girders
and beams for more than
1 floor or roof
4 3
Secondary floor
construction members,
such as the beams, slabs
and joints not affecting
the stability of the
building
3 2
Secondary roof
construction members,
such as beams, purlins
and slabs not affecting
the stability of the
building
2 1 1/2
Interior partitions
enclosing stairways and
other openings through
floors
2 2
FIRE WALL — A wall which has a fire resistance rating of not less than
four hours and which subdivides a building or separates buildings to
restrict the spread of fire, including a three-foot parapet wall.
INCOMBUSTIBLE — The same as the term "noncombustible," but may
be subject to misunderstanding due to the prefix in-; therefore, the term
"noncombustible" is accordingly preferred.
§ 34-121 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-121
1:204
§ 34-122. Installation and maintenance. [Code 1993, § 5.31(2)]
§ 34-123. Buildings requiring protection. [Code 1993, § 5.31(3)]
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building, or portion thereof, containing
three or more dwelling units, including tenement houses, apartment
houses, condominiums or flats.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE — Not combustible.
NONFLAMMABLE — Not flammable.
STORY — The part of a building comprised between a floor and the floor
or roof next above.
(a) Approved automatic fire sprinkler equipment shall be installed and
maintained in the following types of facilities:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Convalescent facilities;
(3) Dormitories;
(4) Government buildings;
(5) Hotels;
(6) Industrial facilities;
(7) Institutional facilities;
(8) Motels;
(9) Multifamily dwellings;
(10) Nursing homes;
(11) Old age and other similar institutional buildings;
(12) Public buildings;
(13) Roominghouses.
(a) A complete, approved automatic fire sprinkler protection system shall
be provided in all the buildings, except multifamily dwellings, as
follows:
(1) Fire restrictive buildings. Throughout every building which is
either:
a. Ten thousand square feet or more in total area;
b. Over one story in height and exceeds 6,000 square feet in total
area; or
c. Over two stories in height.
§ 34-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-123
1:205
§ 34-124. Accessory buildings requiring protection. [Code 1993,
§ 5.31(4)]
(2) Non-fire-resistive buildings. Throughout every building which is
either:
a. Five thousand square feet or more in total area; or
b. Over two stories in height.
(a) Approved automatic fire sprinkler equipment shall be installed and
maintained in accessory buildings and special principal building areas,
as follows:
(1) Garages. In garages, as follows:
a. Garages within, attached to, above or below other
occupancies.
b. Garages used as passenger terminals.
(2) Basements and subbasements. In the basements and subbasements
of principal and accessory buildings, as follows:
a. All basements having a total floor area of 2,500 square feet or
more;
b. All subbasements, regardless of size.
(3) Multifamily buildings. All multifamily buildings constructed after
April 1, 1997, shall comply with the fire sprinkler section in Wis.
Stats. § 101.14(4m)(d) and (e).
(4) Day care centers, including adult day care centers. All day care
center, including adult day care center, buildings, regardless of
size, shall have complete sprinkler protection throughout as per
NFPA 13.
(5) Community based residential facilities (CBRF). All CBRF buildings,
regardless of size, shall have sprinkler protection throughout as
per NFPA 13.
(6) Theaters and assembly buildings. Theater and assembly buildings
shall have sprinkler protection throughout all buildings as per
NFPA 13.
(7) Hospitals, nursing, convalescent, old age and other similar
institutional buildings. Hospitals, nursing, convalescent, old age
and other similar institutional buildings shall have sprinkler
protection throughout all buildings of non-fire-resistive
construction as per NFPA 13.
§ 34-123 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-124
1:206
§ 34-125. Buildings with high hazard occupancy requiring
protection. [Code 1993, § 5.31(5)]
(8) Schools, colleges and universities. Schools, colleges and
universities shall have sprinkler protection throughout all buildings
of non-fire-resistive construction as per NFPA 13.
(9) Dormitories, fraternities and sorority houses. Dormitories,
fraternities and sorority houses shall have sprinkler protection
throughout all buildings as per NFPA 13.
(10) Hotels, motels and rooming houses. Hotels, motels and rooming
houses shall have sprinkler protection throughout all buildings of
non-fire-resistive construction as per NFPA 13.
(11) Commercial, industrial and institutional garages and service
centers. Any commercial, industrial and institutional garage and
service center building with a total area of 3,000 square feet or
greater shall have sprinkler protection. NFPA 13 shall apply.
(a) When it is expected there will be a high hazard occupancy, approved
automatic fire suppression equipment shall be installed and maintained
in newly constructed buildings, including, but not limited to:
(1) Aircraft hangers;
(2) Chemical works and/or storage facilities;
(3) Dry cleaning establishments using or storing gasoline or other
volatile flammable liquids;
(4) Enameling or Japanning operations;
(5) Explosive and pyrotechnics manufacturing;
(6) Manufacture and storage of pyroxylin products;
(7) Oil refineries;
(8) Paint and varnish manufacturing, storing, handling, spraying and
other related operations;
(9) Paint stripping establishments;
(10) Smokehouses;
(11) Storage of explosive gases under pressure (15 psi and over 5,400
cubic feet), such as acetylene, hydrogen and natural gas;
(12) Storage of materials with a flash point under 200° F., such as
celluloid products, kerosene, etc.;
(13) Sugar, starch, cereal, feed, hay, flour and grist mills;
§ 34-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-125
1:207
§ 34-126. Additions, remodeled buildings and change of use. [Code
1993, § 5.31(6)]
§ 34-127. Plan approval. [Code 1993, § 5.31(7)]
(14)Woodworking and other such establishments with combustible
dust.
(a) All public buildings or places of employment existing on the effective
date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and all
additions shall conform to this article, as follows:
(1) More than 50% remodeled or added. If more than 50% of the gross
area of a building is remodeled and/or added, the entire building
shall be in conformance with the requirements of this article.
(2) Twenty-five percent to 50% remodeled or added. If 25% — 50% of
the gross area of a building is remodeled and/or added, the
requirements in this article need not be conformed with, unless the
remodeling includes dwelling units.
(3) Less than 25% remodeled or added. If less than 25% of the gross
area of a building is remodeled and/or added, the requirements in
this article need not be conformed with, unless the remodeling
includes dwelling units.
(4) Total percentages added together. If percentages remodeled or
added are done from the date of the ordinance from which this
article is derived forward, all percentages are added together every
time to get the total percentages remodeled or added.
(5) Change of use. If the use of a building existing on the date of the
ordinance from which this article is derived is changed to a new
use, the building shall be made to comply with this chapter.
(a) For all structures subject to this article, prior to the issuance of a
building permit being allowed, the Fire Department shall have received
and approved fire protection plans. Such requirement will apply to all
building permits issued after February 1, 2000.
(b) Prior to the installation of any portion of a fire suppression system or
alteration of an existing fire suppression system, plans shall be
submitted to the Fire Chief for review. All fire suppression systems must
comply with all applicable NFPA standards.
(c) Four copies of plans, specifications and calculations shall be submitted
for review. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall stamp "Conditionally
Approved Reviewed Plans" on such copies, and two copies will be
returned to the submitter. One copy with the "Conditionally Approved
by the Fire Prevention Bureau" stamp must remain on the job site at all
times. All copies of the plans submitted shall be signed and sealed by a
state registered architect, fire protection engineer, fire protection
§ 34-125 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-127
1:208
§ 34-128. Method of installation. [Code 1993, § 5.31(8)]
designer or the qualifier for the fire suppression contractor installing
the work. Plans which are not signed and sealed will not be reviewed.
(d) The Fire Department's conditional approval of fire suppression plans
does not affirm the accuracy of any calculations performed by the
contractor. Full responsibility for the accuracy of the system design and
calculations is the responsibility of the fire protection contractor.
(e) No work may begin on the installation of any fire suppression system or
the alteration of an existing system until the plans, specifications and
calculations have been reviewed by the Fire Department and a permit
for installation is obtained.
(a) Approved fire suppression systems shall be installed in accordance with
current National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards and/or
recommended practices which are applicable.
(b) All fire sprinkler systems shall use hydrant water flow test data which is
dated no more than six months prior to the submission of the sprinkler
plans for review. The data shall be obtained during peak water demand
conditions, and conducted in such a manner that it represents true
orientation (direction of flow) of the supply to the system being
designed.
(1) In new construction where no municipal water supply is available,
but the structure requires an automatic fire suppression sprinkler
system as specified in this article or applicable statute or codes, an
approved automatic sprinkler system shall be installed and
connected to an approved water supply (well, pressurized tank or
fire pump), capable of delivering water and pressure as specified in
NFPA 13 (hydraulically calculated), for a period of not less than 15
minutes, to the most hydraulically demanding point. A letter from a
certified fire protection engineer attesting to the ability of the
system to comply with such requirement shall be required prior to
occupancy.
(2) A system of heat and smoke detectors, monitored 24 hours per day,
shall be installed.
(3) Within 90 days after a municipal water supply becomes available,
the sprinkler system shall be connected to the municipal water
supply.
(c) All sprinkler system designs shall be based on no more than 90% of the
available water supply. A minimum safety factor of 10% shall be
maintained.
(d) All fire suppression systems shall be installed in accordance with all
applicable state codes.
§ 34-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-128
1:209
§ 34-129. Equipment maintenance. [Code 1993, § 5.31(9)]
§ 34-130. Inspections. [Code 1993, § 5.31(10)]
§ 34-131. Testing. [Code 1993, § 5.31(11)]
(e) The location of all Fire Department connections shall be approved by
the Fire Chief.
(f) Audible alarm bells are required inside and outside of all buildings.
(a) All fire suppression equipment shall be maintained in proper working
order in accordance with state codes.
(b) The Fire Department shall be notified prior to shutting down any
system for any reason and again when the system has been restored to
service.
(a) All fire sprinkler systems shall be inspected, tested and maintained in
accordance with the current edition of NFPA 25. A copy of all inspection
and testing reports shall be sent to the Fire Department on a yearly
basis and/or if requested by the Fire Chief or fire inspector.
(b) Inspections of fire suppression systems during construction will be
made by the Fire Department or their designated representative.
(c) The fire protection contractor must request an inspection prior to any
fire protection system component being concealed.
(d) The fire protection contractor must request an inspection upon
completion of the installation of the fire protection system.
(e) The fire protection contractor must request an inspection 24 hours in
advance.
(a) The following tests shall be witnessed by the Fire Department or their
representative:
(1) Fire protection water supply hydrostatic tests.
(2) Fire protection water supply flushings.
(3) Sprinkler system hydrostatic tests.
(4) Standpipe hydrostatic tests.
(5) Dry sprinkler air/hydrostatic tests.
(6) Dry pipe valve trip tests.
(7) Deluge system trip tests.
(8) Fire pump acceptance tests.
(9) Carbon dioxide system acceptance tests.
§ 34-128 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-131
1:210
§ 34-132. Fire protection fees. [Ord. No. 1-2009, 1-12-2009]
(10) Dry chemical system acceptance tests.
(11) Foam system acceptance tests.
(12) Special agent acceptance tests.
(13) Standpipe system acceptance tests.
(14) Full flow backflow preventer tests.
(15) Sprinkler system acceptance tests.
(16) Fire hydrant flow tests.
(b) The fire protection contractor must request the Fire Department
witness all testing at least 24 hours in advance of such testing.
(a) Fire protection system review fees shall be as follows:
Table 34-132-1
Area Square
Feet Fire Alarm Fire Suppression
2,500 or Less $385 $385
2,501 — 5,000 $385 $385
5,001 —
10,000
$495 $495
10,001 —
20,000
$495 $495
20,001 —
30,000
$605 $605
30,001 —
40,000
$605 $605
40,001 —
50,000
$1,100 $1,100
50,001 —
75,000
$1,650 $1,650
75,001 —
100,000
$2,750 $2,750
100,001 —
200,000
$3,850 $3,850
200,001 —
300,000
$5,500 $5,500
300,001 —
400,000
$8,800 $8,800
§ 34-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-132
1:211
Table 34-132-1
Area Square
Feet Fire Alarm Fire Suppression
400,001 —
500,000
$13,200 $13,200
500,001 and
over
$16,500 $16,500
(b) Fee for review of plans and/or calculations per unit:
(1) Fire sprinkler, fire control and/or fire suppression system plan
review with one set of hydraulic calculations, per system for each
review. (This fee is charged for each separate system, floor and/or
area of a building), each minimum plus appropriate square footage
fee per Table 34-132-1: $385.
(2) Verification of additional sets of hydraulic calculations. (This fee is
charged for each additional set of hydraulic calculations required
by the AHJ.), each: $195.
(3) Verification of additional sets of hydraulic calculations utilizing the
Darcy-Weisbach calculation method which is required for all
antifreeze systems in addition to the review fees charged above.
(This fee is charged for each additional set of hydraulic calculations
required by the AHJ.), each: $295.
(4) Stand pipe systems, each: $385.
(5) Fire pumps, per review, each: $300.
(6) Modifications to existing sprinkler systems:
a. Minimum fee for a system modification without hydraulic
calculations, each: $200.
b. The fee per sprinkler head up to 19 sprinklers without
hydraulic calculations — Up to 19 sprinklers, each: $20.
c. Modifications of existing systems over 19 sprinklers with
hydraulic calculations, per system: $385.
(7) Fire sprinkler system underground mains, including combination
mains:
a. Zero to 999 feet, per foot: $200 + 0.73.
b. One thousand feet or more, per foot: $400 + 0.73.
(8) Other fire protection, fire control and/or fire suppression systems
including wet chemical, dry chemical or gaseous agent systems,
etc., each: $300.
§ 34-132 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-132
1:212
(9) Fire alarm systems per control panel, per review, each: $250.
(10) Fire alarm system manual pull stations, initiating and annunciating
devices; this includes smoke, heat, flame, ionization, photoelectric
detectors, water flow devices, horns, strobes, bells and all
monitoring devices, per device, up to three: $50 per additional $10.
(11) Fire hose standpipe connections, per outlet: $15.
(12) Fire hydrant, per hydrant: $50.
(13) Various Site Inspection Services, witnessed tests, etc.:
a. Witnessing of all required tests, (two hour minimum), per hour:
$100
b. Witness final acceptance tests of fire protection systems (two
hour minimum), per hour: $100.
c. Hydrant flow test, per hour: $100.
d. Site inspection of all types of fire protection/prevention
systems during installation. NOTE: Fire protection/prevention
systems may not be concealed prior to inspection. Inspections
are required for all installations, (two hour minimum), per
hour: $100.
e. Site inspections/special inspection services for: Spray booths,
dip tanks, liquid spray, hood and duct ventilation, halon, carbon
dioxide, water or foam spray, dry chemical, etc., (two hour
minimum), per hour: $100.
f. Fire protection consulting on systems and/or for occupancies
or permits including fire hydrant site plan review, Fire
Department access review, per hour: $175.
(14) Testing of emergency lighting, per hour: $100.
(15) General fee information.
a. These fees apply to all above listed plan reviews, system
inspections, system testing whether conducted by the Fire
Department or Fire Department consultant or other municipal
representative.
b. All fees shall be rounded up to the next full dollar amount.
c. Tests and inspections must be scheduled with the Fire
Department a minimum of 72 hours in advance.
d. Tests and inspections shall be scheduled when the contractor
can assure the work has been completed. Tests scheduled
before the job is complete will be charged a re-inspection fee.
§ 34-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-132
1:213
§ 34-133. Permits. [Code 1993, § 5.31(13)]
Permits are required for all automatic fire sprinkler system installations
prior to installation of any equipment. Permits will not be issued until the
plans and calculations have been reviewed.
§ 34-134. Alternate means of compliance. [Ord. No. 9-03,
§ 5.31(14), 9-22-2003]
The Fire Chief or designee may allow an alternate means of compliance with
any provision of this chapter upon application, in writing, by the property
owner, lessee or authorized agent, when there are demonstrated practical
difficulties or hardships arising from strict enforcement of this chapter,
provided that the spirit and intent of this chapter is observed, public safety
secured and substantial justice done. Any alternate means of compliance
with this subsection shall be in full compliance with applicable state and
federal law. The particulars of such alternate compliance, when granted or
allowed, and the decision of the Fire Chief or designee thereon shall be
entered upon the records of the Fire Department, and a signed copy shall
be mailed or personally delivered to the applicant.
§ 34-135. through § 34-160. (Reserved)
e. Tests and inspections must begin within 30 minutes after the
arrival of the fire inspector.
f. Other fees charged to the Village of Mount Pleasant from other
governmental entities for reviewing plans or permits, as
indicated by the above indicated code section in their entirety
fees charged are at cost.
g. Except in emergency cases, the standard permit fee shall be
tripled upon failure to obtain a permit before work on a
building has started.
h. Failure to call for a final inspection is a $100 charge.
§ 34-132 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-135
1:214
ARTICLE IV
Fire Hydrants And Lanes
§ 34-161. Compliance. [Code 1993, § 5.31(intro)]
All building construction involving not less than 4,000 square feet of floor
space, except single-family residences only, commenced after the date of
adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall comply
with this article.
§ 34-162. Accessible water mains. [Code 1993, § 5.32(1)]
§ 34-163. Nonaccessible water mains. [Code 1993, § 5.32(2)]
§ 34-164. Access lanes. [Code 1993, § 5.32(4)]
The contractor or person in charge of any construction site, whose
structures, except single-family residences, total more than 4,000 square
feet, shall provide access lanes in conformity with Village specifications
for public roads. Such access lanes shall be complete at the time the
construction has progressed to the first use of combustible materials.
§ 34-165. through § 34-200. (Reserved)
(a) Where water mains are accessible, plans showing the location of
hydrants on both public and private property shall be submitted to, and
approved by, the Fire Chief, Village Board and Plan Commission.
(b) Fire hydrants shall be available to serve the building site prior to the
start of construction of combustible materials.
(c) There shall be sufficient hydrants to concentrate the required fire flow
around buildings, with no hose line exceeding 500 feet in length.
(d) No unauthorized person shall use, operate, conceal or hinder, in any
manner, the accessibility or reduce the effectiveness of any fire hydrant.
Application may be made to the Fire Department for permission to use
fire hydrants.
(a) Where water mains are not accessible, an adequate plan for fire
protection shall be submitted to, and approved by, the Fire Chief,
Village Board and Plan Commission.
(b) The effectiveness of firefighting operations depends in large measure
upon the adequacy of water supply. This means that the prefire plans
must be concerned with sources of water supply and where pumpers
will be located. Each situation must be worked out on its own merits.
(c) Water supply must be of a sufficient volume to meet required fire flow
for buildings.
§ 34-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-165
1:215

ARTICLE V
Storage Tanks
§ 34-201. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 5.33(1)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CLASS I, II AND III LIQUIDS — Have the meanings provided in Wis. Admin.
Code Ch. Comm. 10.
§ 34-202. Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 10 adopted. [Code 1993,
§ 5.33(2)]
Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 10 is adopted by reference and made a part of
this section as if fully set forth in this section.
§ 34-203. Responsibility of owners and operators. [Code 1993,
§ 5.33(3)]
The owner and operator of any aboveground or underground storage tank
for Class I, II or III liquids shall, at all times, be responsible for the integrity
of each storage tank at each location, together with the piping and
dispensing systems connected therein from the time of installation until
termination of use, in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 10.
§ 34-204. Enforcement. [Code 1993, § 5.33(4)]
Under Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 10, and the terms of a professional
services contract between the Village and the state department of
commerce, the Fire Department is authorized to issue permits, charge
fees and take enforcement action authorized thereby. The chief of the
Fire Department and designees thereof shall exercise jurisdiction over this
article and the groundwater protection related provisions of Wis. Admin.
Code Ch. Comm. 10, within the Village.
§ 34-205. Permit required. [Code 1993, § 5.33(5)]
(a) A permit under Wis. Admin. Code Ch. Comm. 10, through the Fire
Department, shall be required for the abandonment, closure, removal
or change in service, or placing temporarily out of service of any
aboveground or underground storage tank for Class I, II or III liquids,
with a capacity of more than 60 gallons. Storage tank systems shall
include piping, vents, leak detection systems, cathodic protection and
spill/overfill protection systems. The owner and operator of any such
storage tank shall file an application for such storage tank with the Fire
Department, on designated forms, with the applicable fee. The
application shall include:
§ 34-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-205
1:217
§ 34-206. Fee schedule. [Code 1993, § 5.33(6)]
(1) Three copies of a site assessment plan in accordance with Wis.
Admin. Code § Comm. 10.734; and
(2) Three site plot plans, drawn to scale, showing the following:
a. Property lines.
b. All buildings and structures.
c. All tanks and piping.
d. Adjacent streets.
e. Overhead and underground utilities.
f. Limits of the excavation.
g. Temporary location of excavated dirt and backfill.
(a) Storage tank fees shall be as follows:
(1) Bulk storage permit, under 5,000 gallon tanks, as set by the Village
Board.
(2) Plan examination, flammable and combustible liquids:
a. First tank, as set by the Village Board.
b. Two — 10 tanks, as set by the Village Board.
c. Maximum fee, as set by the Village Board.
(3) Revisions to previous plans, as set by the Village Board.
(4) Tank installation, inspection service fee, per tank, as set by the
Village Board.
(5) Tank abandonment or removal, inspection service fee, per tank, as
set by the Village Board.
Note: An inspection fee will be charged for each tank at bulk plants,
service stations or other locations. The fee shall be paid at the time
the plans are submitted. Reinspection fees shall be paid before a
reinspection will be performed.
(6) Reinspection fee, per tank, as set by the Village Board.
(7) Second reinspection, per tank, as set by the Village Board.
(8) Short notice inspection (eight through 14 days), as set by the
Village Board.
(9) Short notice inspection (one — seven days), as set by the Village
Board.
§ 34-205 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-206
1:218
§ 34-207. through § 34-240. (Reserved)
Note: A short notice fee shall be charged when a tank inspection
must be made without the required 15 days' notice.
§ 34-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-207
1:219

ARTICLE VI
Fire Alarms
§ 34-241. Purposes. [Code 1993, § 5.34(1)]
The purposes of this article are to establish regulations, standards and
controls relating to the type, use and installation of fire alarm devices,
whether such fire alarm devices are monitored by the Fire Department,
a private alarm company or any other person, and to establish a Fire
Department central alarm station and policies and procedures for the
development and use of a central monitoring station.
§ 34-242. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 5.34(2)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FALSE ALARM — A signal from an alarm system, resulting in a response by
the Fire Department, when an emergency situation does not exist.
FIRE ALARM — Any device which, when activated by a fire or other
emergency requiring Fire Department response, transmits a signal to a
central alarm system or directly to the Fire Department, or produces an
audible or visible signal designed to notify persons within audible or visual
range of the signal.
§ 34-243. Maintenance of central alarm station. [Code 1993,
§ 5.34(3)]
A central alarm station shall be maintained in the safety building at such
location as the chief of the Fire Department may designate.
§ 34-244. Connection to central alarm station. [Code 1993,
§ 5.34(4)]
The chief of the Fire Department shall determine the number and type
of alarm owners or alarm lessees which may be connected to the Fire
Department central alarm station. No person shall cause a private alarm
system to be connected to the Fire Department central alarm station unless
such proposed connection receives prior approval, in writing, by the chief
of the Fire Department. Any person denied permission to connect to the
central alarm station may appeal such denial by filing a written notice to
with the Clerk-Treasurer within 10 days of the date of denial. Such appeal
shall be heard by the Village Board within 30 days after filing such notice of
appeal. The determination of the Village Board shall be final.
§ 34-241 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-245
1:221
§ 34-245. Prior of consideration for connection to central alarm
system. [Code 1993, § 5.34(5)]
The chief of the Fire Department shall give priority for connection to the
Fire Department central alarm station to persons required by state or
federal law or regulation to maintain a fire alarm system on their premises.
§ 34-246. Conditions upon approval for connection to central alarm
system; false alarms. [Code 1993, § 5.34(6)]
(a) All persons whose application for connection to the Fire Department
central alarm station is approved by the chief of the Fire Department
shall comply with the following conditions:
(1) Pay all costs of installation and connection to the Fire Department
central alarm station.
(2) Pay to the Village an annual monitoring fee as set by the Village
Board.
(3) Use alarm equipment that meets minimum UL and NFPA 72 alarm
device standards.
(4) Pay all costs of disconnection or termination of service, whether
such disconnection or termination is initiated by the chief of the
Fire Department or the alarm user.
(5) Perform testing of the alarm system in accordance with rules and
procedures promulgated by the chief of the Fire Department or his
designee per NFPA 72.
(6) Pay all expenses of termination and reconnection whenever the
location of the Fire Department central alarm station is changed.
(7) Sign an agreement holding the Village and the Fire Department
harmless for any and all damages or losses resulting, directly or
indirectly, from an alarm connection terminating at the Fire
Department.
(8) In accordance with this article, cause such system to be
periodically inspected and maintained in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations.
(b) For various reasons, false alarms frequently occur. Each false alarm
requires response by public safety personnel involves unnecessary
expense to the Village, increases the risk of injury to persons or damage
to property and dilutes the overall public safety protection to the
Village. Such false alarms constitute a public nuisance and must be
abated. Persons connecting to central alarms systems in accordance
with this article shall pay to the Village a charge for false alarms
responded to by the Fire Department according to the following
schedule for each calendar year, for each premises connected:
§ 34-245 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-246
1:222
§ 34-247. Audible or visual alarm systems. [Code 1993, § 5.34(7)]
Any person maintaining an audible or visual alarm system on his premises
shall be subject to the provisions of § 34-246(b) under the same conditions
as central alarm systems. Warnings or penalties issued under § 34-246(b)
for audible or visual alarm systems may be appealed to the Village Board in
accordance with the procedures under § 34-248.
§ 34-248. Disconnections and appeals. [Code 1993, § 5.34(8)]
Failure to comply with any provision of this article, including the
nonpayment of the charges for false alarms or repeated false alarms (more
than five false alarms within a twelve-month period), shall be cause for
an alarm system to be disconnected from the Fire Department central
alarm station upon 30 days' prior written notice by the chief of the Fire
Department. Such disconnection shall be made at the alarm holder's
expense. An order of disconnection may be appealed by filing a written
notice of appeal with the Clerk-Treasurer within 10 days of the date of
the disconnection order. Such appeal shall be heard by the Village Board
within 30 days of the date of filing the appeal. The Village Board may affirm,
reverse or modify the order of the chief of the Fire Department. An appeal
which is timely filed suspends the disconnection until the Village Board
renders its decision. Not later than 24 hours prior to the hearing, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall give written notice to the applicant of the time and place
of the hearing. The chief of the Fire Department may, at his discretion,
require the immediate disconnection of any alarm system connected to the
Fire Department central alarm station if technical failure or defects of the
system result in a continual or sporadic alarm.
§ 34-249. Intentional false alarms. [Code 1993, § 5.34(9)]
No person shall intentionally cause the activation of a fire alarm device
knowing that no emergency exists.
(1) First two false alarms Written notice
(2) Third false alarm As set by the Village Board
(3) Fourth false alarm As set by the Village Board
(4) Fifth and subsequent false
alarms
As set by the Village Board
(c) This section is intended to impose a strict liability on the person
responsible for alarm connection to the Fire Department central alarm
station and applies regardless of the cause of the false alarm.
§ 34-246 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-250
1:223
§ 34-250. Alarms emitting sounds similar to emergency vehicle or
civil defense sirens. [Code 1993, § 5.34(10)]
No person shall sell, use or install a fire alarm which, upon activation, emits
a sound the same as, or similar to, emergency vehicle sirens or civil defense
sirens.
§ 34-251. Private fire alarm companies. [Code 1993, § 5.34(11)]
Private fire alarm companies shall be responsible for the monitoring,
maintenance and use of private central alarm stations and shall pay to the
Village the false alarm charge prescribed in § 34-246(b) for false alarms
responded to by the Fire Department if such response was the result of
the actions of a private alarm company. The amount of such false alarm
charge shall be based on the number of such Village fire responses to each
business, commercial or residential premises. Any person owning, leasing
or operating a private alarm system programmed to a central office shall
also maintain a maintenance system during the hours that such system is
in operation and shall dispatch a company representative to the location of
any alarm transmitted upon request of the Fire Department so that such
representative arrives within one hour of such request. Each premises shall
be considered a separate entity for purposes of determining the number of
false alarms under this section. Private alarm companies shall provide the
chief of the Fire Department with a list of premises within the Village which
are monitored by the alarm company, including the name of the subscriber
and the address of each such premises. The private alarm company shall
submit revisions to such list within 30 days following such changes of
premises covered and the company shall also provide the chief of the Fire
Department with a telephone number at which the maintenance service
may be contacted at any time.
§ 34-250 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 34-251
1:224
Chapter 38
MINIMUM BUILDING AND PREMISES STANDARDS
§ 34-251 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-251
1:225

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 38-1. Violations; penalties. [Code 1993, § 11.25]
Except as otherwise provided, any person found to be in violation of any
provision of this article shall be subject to § 1-15.
§ 38-2. through § 38-30. (Reserved)
§ 38-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-2
1:227

ARTICLE II
Building And Premises Maintenance And Use Standards
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 38-31. Purpose. [Code 1993, § 11.06(1)]
§ 38-32. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 11.06(3)]
(a) This article is adopted for the purpose of preserving and promoting the
public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, prosperity and
general welfare of the people of the Village and its environs, including,
but not limited to, physical, aesthetic, spiritual and monetary values.
(b) It is recognized that there may be residential and nonresidential
buildings, structures, yards or vacant areas, and combinations thereof,
which are so dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unhygienic, overcrowded,
inadequately maintained or lacking in basic equipment or facilities,
light, ventilation and heating as to constitute a menace to the health,
safety and general welfare of the people. The establishment and
enforcement of minimum standards of habitation and property
conservation is necessary to preserve and promote the private and
public interest.
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground, but
having less than half its clear height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground, but having half or more than half of its required clear
floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used, or intended
to be used, for living or sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used, or intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by
one family.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used, or intended
to be used, for living, sleeping, laundries, pantries, foyers,
communication corridors, closets and storage spaces.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Village or his authorized
representative.
LODGING ROOM — A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but
without cooking facilities, and with or without an individual bathroom.
§ 38-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-32
1:229
§ 38-33. Applicability. [Code 1993, § 11.06(2)]
The provisions of this article shall apply to all dwellings within the Village
and its police jurisdiction.
§ 38-34. Modification of existing dwellings to comply with article.
[Code 1993, § 11.06(10)]
If any existing dwelling is not required under any other ordinance of the
Village, including, but not limited to, the plumbing, electrical and building
codes, to be modified so as to comply with the provisions of any such
ordinance, then modification of a dwelling solely for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this article shall not require further
modification under any other ordinance of the Village.
§ 38-35. Healthful maintenance of premises. [Ord. No. 14-2009, § 3,
10-26-2009]
See § 39-1.
Such term includes a room so rented in a single family dwelling or
dwelling unit.
LODGING HOUSE — A residential building, or portion thereof,
containing lodging rooms which accommodate, in the aggregate, three
or more persons who are not members of the keeper's family, for
which lodging or meals, or both, or lodging and kitchen privileges are
provided for compensation.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A building containing two or more living
units for families living independently of each other.
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age, living or sleeping in,
or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit, including the owner
thereof.
OWNER — Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others
shall be the legal recorded holder of the title, with or without actual
possession thereof, or one who has charge, care or control of any
dwelling as the agent or representative of the owner, or as executor,
administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Whenever
the term "owner" covers two or more persons, each person shall have
the obligations of an owner under this article.
PERSON — Includes owners, their agents, tenants and any individual,
firm, corporation, partnership or association.
VENTILATION — The following:
MECHANICAL — The supply and removal of air by power driven
devices.
(1)
NATURAL — Ventilation by an opening to outside air through
windows, doors or other openings.
(2)
§ 38-32 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 38-36
1:230
§ 38-36. Control of weeds, grasses and accumulation of debris on
property. [Ord. No. 14-2008, 9-22-2008; Ord. No. 14-2009, §§ 4, 5,
10-26-2009; amended 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 5-2016]
(a) Destruction of noxious weeds per State Statute § 66.0907 and mowing
of grasses required on all properties — Weed commissioner.
(1) Mowing required. No person owning property within the Village
shall permit any weeds to grow or pollinate upon his premises
which cause or produce hay fever in human beings, exhale
unpleasant or noxious odors or conceal filthy deposits. In order to
prevent such growth and pollination, every property owner shall
mow, or cause to be mowed, all weeds upon the premises which
exceed nine inches in height, but this section shall not apply to
normal agricultural crops.
(2) Lawns in residential areas. Grasses shall be kept trimmed/mowed
to conform to the general appearance of the surrounding
residential area.
(3) Destroy for purposes of this section only, means the complete
killing of weeds or the killing of weed plants above the surface of
the ground by the use of chemicals, cutting, tillage, cropping
system, pasturing livestock, or any or all of these in effective
combination, at a time and in a manner as will effectually prevent
the weed plants from maturing to the bloom or flower stage. A
person owning, occupying, or controlling land located within the
Village shall mow and/or destroy noxious weeds on such lands.
(4) Destruction of noxious weeds by means of cutting shall be
accomplished before the weeds exceed nine inches in height and as
often subsequently as is necessary during the year. This section
shall not apply to normal agricultural crops.
(5) No person within the Village shall transport, transfer, or introduce
any prohibited or restricted non-native invasive species as defined
and controlled in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 40.
(b) Accumulation of debris on property — Health Officer. See § 39-1.
(c) Village enforcement, noxious weeds and grasses — Weed commissioner.
(1) If the property owner in control fails to comply within five days'
written notice by mail, the weed commissioner or his designee shall
destroy or cause to be destroyed such noxious weeds and mow
them in the manner deemed to be the most economical method.
Subsequent mowings/weed destruction will be made automatically
as necessary.
(2) The expense thereof, including the cost staff time and billing, any
applicable taxes and other necessary administrative expenses, as
well as the cost of sufficiently clearing the property of any debris so
§ 38-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-36
1:231
§ 38-37. Keeping of animals and fowl. [Ord. No. 14-2009, § 6,
10-26-2009]
See §§ 10-16 and 39-2.
§ 38-38. Covering and displaying of food and dairy products. [Ord.
No. 14-2009, § 7, 10-26-2009]
See § 39-2.
§ 38-39. Sale of unwholesome and tainted food and drinks. [Ord.
No. 14-2009, § 8, 10-26-2009]
See § 39-2.
§ 38-40. Discharge of hazardous wastes. [Code 1993, § 11.17(1) —
(4)]
that it can be safely mowed, shall be charged against such property
and shall be collected as a special charge thereon. In destroying
noxious weeds and mowing grasses, the Weed Commissioner may,
but need not, utilize appropriate Village personnel and equipment,
the expense of which Village involvement shall be billed to the
property's owner. Only one written notification to the property
owner per year is required.
(3) The cost incurred by the Village and any associated penalties and
administrative fees will be assessed as a special charge/tax upon
the lands upon which such grasses and weeds are located under
the provision of Wis. Stats. § 66.0517. Billings invoiced to property
owners will be due and payable upon receipt. If the charge for
cleanup remains unpaid by October 1st of each year the unpaid
billings will be placed on the property owner's tax bill as a special
charge.
(d) Accumulation of debris on property — Health Officer. See § 39-1.
(e) Penalty. In addition to any other charges assessed under this section, a
citation for the violation of this section may be issued pursuant to the
procedures set forth in this Code. Any person convicted of violating
§ 38-36 shall forfeit not less than $25 or more than $100, together with
the costs of prosecution. Any person convicted of violating § 38-36 who
has been convicted of violating this section within the prior year shall
forfeit not less than $50 nor more than $200, together with the costs of
prosecution. In default of payment of such forfeitures and costs, such
person shall be subject to further order of the court pursuant to Wis.
Stats. Ch. 800.
(a) Prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge, or cause to be
discharged, leaked, leached or spilled upon any public street, alley or
public property, or onto the ground, surface waters, subsurface waters
§ 38-36 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 38-40
1:232
§ 38-41. Violations; penalties; civil liability. [Code 1993, § 11.17(6),
(7)]
§ 38-42. through § 38-60. (Reserved)
or aquifers, or on any private property, except areas specifically
licensed for waste disposal or landfill activities within the Village, any
explosive, flammable or combustible solid, liquid or gas, any radioactive
material at or above nuclear regulatory restriction levels, etiologic
agents or any solid, liquid or gas creating a hazard, potential hazard,
public nuisance or having a deleterious effect on the environment.
(b) Containment, cleanup and restoration. Any person in violation of
Subsection (a) of this section shall, upon direction of any emergency
government officer or staff, begin immediate action to contain, clean up
and remove the offending material to an approved repository and
restore the site to its original condition. Should any person fail to
engage or complete the requirements of this subsection, the office of
emergency government may order the required action to be taken by
public or private resources and allow the recovery of any and all costs
incurred by the Village under § 38-41(b).
(c) Site access. Access to any site, public or private, where a prohibited
discharge is indicated or suspected will be provided to emergency
government staff or officers for the purpose of evaluating the threat to
the public and monitoring containment, cleanup and restoration
activities.
(d) Public protection. Should any prohibited discharge occur that threatens
the life, safety or health of the public at, near or around the site of a
prohibited discharge, and the situation is so critical that immediate
steps must be taken to protect life and limb, the coordinator of
emergency government or, in his absence, the deputy coordinator of
emergency government or the senior police or fire official on the scene
of the emergency, may order an evacuation of the area or take other
appropriate protective steps for a period of time until the Village chair
or Village Board can act.
(a) Upon conviction in court, any person found to be in violation of this
article shall forfeit not less than $200 for the first offense, $750 for the
second offense and $1,500 for the third offense and, in default of
payment thereof, may be imprisoned not more than 90 days. Each and
every day a violation shall occur shall be considered a separate offense.
(b) Any person in violation of this article shall be liable to the Village for
any expense incurred by the Village, or loss or damage sustained by the
Village by reason of such violation.
§ 38-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-42
1:233

DIVISION 2
Administration and Enforcement
§ 38-61. Right to enter and inspect premises and vehicles. [Ord. No.
14-2009, § 9, 10-26-2009]
See § 39-2.
§ 38-62. Abatement of health nuisances. [Ord. No. 14-2009, § 10,
10-26-2009]
See § 39-1.
§ 38-63. Authority to issue citations and complaints. [Code 1993,
§ 11.17(5); Ord. No. 14-2009, § 11, 10-26-2009]
The coordinator of emergency government, the Building Inspector or the
Police Chief, or their respective deputies or designees, shall have authority
to issue citations or complaints under this article.
§ 38-64. Duties of Building Inspector. [Code 1993, § 11.06(8); Ord.
No. 14-2009, § 12, 10-26-2009]
(a) Termination of occupancy. This article shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector and it shall be his duty to prohibit or terminate the occupancy
of any dwelling or dwelling unit unfit for human occupancy under the
provisions of this article until the necessary corrections have been
made.
(b) Inspections. The Building Inspector shall, on his own motion or upon
written complaint made to him, inspect any dwelling or dwelling unit
within the scope of this article to determine its condition in order that
he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and welfare of the
occupants of such dwelling and the general public.
(c) Access to dwellings. Upon proper identification, the Building Inspector
shall be permitted to enter any dwelling unit within the Village or its
police jurisdiction at any reasonable time for the purpose of making
inspections to determine compliance with this article.
(d) Notice of permissible occupancy. In every dwelling or dwelling unit in
which an inspection has been made by the Building Inspector, there
shall be posted a notice of "permissible occupancy," which shall specify
the habitable room area and the maximum number of persons which
may safely occupy such dwelling unit in accordance with the space
requirements. Forms for such notice shall be provided by, and secured
from, the Building Inspector of the Village. No person shall omit, falsify,
mutilate, remove or fail to comply with such notice.
(e) Notice of violations. Upon inspection, whenever the Building Inspector
finds any violation of this article, he shall notify the occupant and owner
or agent responsible for such violation by means of a written notice of
§ 38-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-64
1:235
inspection. In such notification, the Building Inspector shall set forth
the specific condition found, the correction necessary to bring about
compliance and a specific and reasonable time for such correction and
compliance. Each condition which is continued or repeated after the
time specified in such notification shall constitute a separate violation
of this article.
(f) Service of notice. Each notice or order provided under this section shall
be deemed to have been properly served when it has been personally
delivered or regular mailed postage to the occupant and owner or his
agent responsible for the dwelling or dwelling unit which is the subject
of such notice or order.
(g) Occupancy after notification. Upon the failure of the owner or occupant,
or both, or other person responsible for compliance with this article,
after due notice as set forth in this section to comply with the provisions
of this article within the time prescribed by the Building Inspector, the
subject dwelling or dwelling unit shall be considered unfit for human
habitation, occupancy and use and shall be so designated and
placarded by the Building Inspector in accordance with Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0413. Any dwelling or dwelling unit designated as unfit for human
habitation shall be vacated within 60 days after due notice by the
Building Inspector, and shall not again be used for human habitation
until the facilities prescribed by this article have been provided.
(h) Appeal. Any person affected by any notice or order which has been
issued in connection with the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this article may, within 30 days after service of the notice or order,
request and shall thereafter be granted a hearing before the health and
sanitation appeal board. Enforcement of any order issued by the
Building Inspector shall be stayed, pending the decision of any appeal
therefrom.
(i) Records. All complaints, communications and other documents
addressed to the Building Inspector, and all inspection reports, notices
or orders issued by him, shall be filed in the office of the Building
Inspector and shall be a public record.
(j) Emergency enforcement procedure. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this section, if the Building Inspector determines that any
dwelling is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, dangerous, unsanitary,
unsafe or vermin infested so that it creates a serious hazard to the
health or safety of the occupants of such dwelling or the public, the
Building Inspector may placard such dwelling and, within 24 hours
after such placarding, serve notice to the occupant and owner or his
agent responsible for such dwelling, as the case may be, in accordance
with Subsection (f) of this section, that the dwelling is unfit for human
habitation and that it shall be vacated within a reasonable time as
ordered by the Building Inspector. The appeal procedure referred to in
Subsection (h) of this section shall apply to any order for vacation made
by the Building Inspector under this subsection.
§ 38-64 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 38-65
1:236
§ 38-65. Building and Premises Maintenance Appeal Board. [Code
1993, § 11.06(9); Ord. No. 14-2009, § 13, 10-26-2009]
(a) Created. There is created the Building and Premises Maintenance
Appeal Board, consisting of five residents of the Village, including at
least one Village supervisor, property owner and renter. Whenever any
member of the appeal board shall lose the status which was a
prerequisite to his appointment to such appeal board, and such loss of
status has the effect of loss of the minimum requirement of the class of
representation on the appeal board as provided for in this subsection,
his term of office shall thereupon expire and his position shall be
deemed vacant.
(b) Appointment, terms, compensation. The members of the appeal board
shall be appointed by the Village Board, and vacancies on the appeal
board shall be filled in the same manner. All appointments shall be
made for staggered terms of three years, except the Village supervisor
member of the appeal board shall be a member only as long as he
continues to hold his office as Village supervisor. Appeal board
members shall receive no compensation for their services.
(c) Meetings. Meetings of the appeal board shall be held at the call of the
chair and at such other times as the appeal board may determine. The
chair may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. In
the absence of the chair, the members of the appeal board shall elect
one of its members to preside and exercise the functions of the chair. All
meetings of the appeal board shall be open to the public. The appeal
board shall keep minutes of its meetings and records of its hearings and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office
of the appeal board and shall be a public record.
(d) Quorum. The presence of at least three members of the appeal board
shall constitute a quorum at any meeting duly called.
(e) Office. The office of the appeal board shall be in the office of the
Building Inspector in the Village hall. All documents and
communications addressed to, or required to be filed with, the appeal
board shall be filed in the office of the appeal board. The secretary shall
have charge of all of the records and files of the appeal board.
(f) Functions. The appeal board shall conduct a hearing on any appeal filed
by any person affected by any notice or order issued in connection with
the enforcement of the provisions of this article. After such hearing, the
appeal board shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice or order,
depending upon its findings, as to whether the provisions of this article
have been complied with. The appeal board may also modify any notice
so as to authorize a variance from the provisions of this article when,
because of special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of
this article will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship,
provided that the spirit of this article will be observed, public health
and welfare secured and substantial justice done. If the appeal board
§ 38-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-65
1:237
§ 38-66. through § 38-90. (Reserved)
sustains or modifies such notice or order, it shall be deemed an order,
and the owner, operator or occupant, as the case may require, shall
comply with all provisions of such order, within a reasonable period of
time, as determined by the appeal board. After a hearing in the case of
any notice suspending any permit required by this article, when such
notice has been sustained by the appeal board, the permit shall be
deemed to have been revoked. The concurring vote of a majority of a
properly convened appeal board shall be required to reverse or modify
any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building
Inspector or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon
which it is required to pass under this article.
§ 38-65 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 38-66
1:238
DIVISION 3
Basic Equipment and Facilities
§ 38-91. Habitable living quarter standards. [Code 1993, § 11.06(4);
Ord. No. 14-2009, § 14, 10-26-2009]
(a) No person shall occupy as owner, or let to another for occupancy, any
dwelling or dwelling unit within the scope of this article for the purpose
of living or sleeping therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Toilets and lavatories. Every dwelling unit shall contain a water
flush toilet within a room which affords privacy to a person in such
room. Artificial light shall be provided. Toilet and lavatory rooms
shall be provided with reasonably adequate ventilation by
mechanical or natural means, and if by natural means, then the
openings shall not be less than 5% of the floor area, but they shall
in no event be less than 1 1/2 square feet in area. Every dwelling
unit shall also contain a lavatory basin, preferably, but not
exclusively, in the same room as the toilet. Such toilet and lavatory
basins shall be in good sanitary working order and connected to
public water and sewer systems where available at the lot line or
property line; provided, however, that a reasonably adequate and
properly operating well and/or septic system may be used if not
prohibited by other ordinances or other applicable governmental
laws, statutes, regulations or orders.
(2) Bathing facilities. Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room
which affords privacy to a person in such room, a bathtub or
shower, in good sanitary working condition and connected to public
water and sewer systems, where available.
(3) Lighting. Artificial light shall be provided in all common or public
spaces within a dwelling.
(4) Kitchen facilities. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall have a
specific kitchen space, which contains a sink with a counter, work
space, hot and cold running water, adequate space for installing
cooking and refrigeration equipment and for storing cooking
utensils.
(5) Water supply. Every lavatory basin, bathtub and shower shall be
connected with both hot and cold water lines.
(6) Water heating facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have water
heating facilities supplied, which are properly installed, maintained
in a safe and good working condition, properly connected to the hot
water lines required under the provisions of Subsection (a)(4) and
(5) of this section and are capable of heating water to a
temperature so as to permit an adequate amount of water to be
§ 38-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-91
1:239
drawn at every required lavatory basin, bathtub, shower or sink at
a temperature of not less than 110° F.
(7) Insect protection. When flies are prevalent, at least one window or
door per habitable room and in each bathroom of a dwelling unit
opening into the outer air shall be effectively screened, and screen
doors, where used, shall be self-closing.
(8) Rodent protection. Every opening to a basement or cellar which
might provide an entry for rodents shall be constructed or supplied
with a device so as to effectively prevent the entrance of rodents.
(9) Space. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of
floor space for the first occupant thereof and 100 square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, provided that:
a. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of total habitable
room area.
b. At least half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have
a ceiling height of at least seven feet, and the floor area of that
part of any room where the ceiling height is less than four feet
shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing
the total floor area of the dwelling unit for determining the
maximum permissible occupancy.
c. Each child over the age of one year shall count as one person in
the maximum permissible occupancy.
(10) Bedroom space. A suitably private space used for sleeping shall be
provided in each dwelling unit. A bedroom shall not be used as the
only means of access to another habitable room, other than another
bedroom.
(11) Egress. Every dwelling unit and lodging room shall have access to
at least two accessible, unobstructed means of egress leading to a
safe and open public street, alley or court.
(12) Heating. Every dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to
be used, or actually used, for dwelling purposes, shall be equipped,
maintained and operated with a heating system which, at all times,
is capable of maintaining minimum temperatures of 68° F., in all
habitable rooms and 75° F., in all bathrooms and toilet
compartments with an outside temperature of - 20° F.
(13) Electric service. Every habitable room shall contain at least two
separate floor or wall type electric convenience outlets, or one such
convenience outlet and one supplied ceiling type or wall type
electric fixture; and every water closet compartment, bathroom,
laundry room, furnace room and public hall shall contain at least
one supplied ceiling or wall type electric fixture. Every such outlet
and fixture shall be properly installed and shall be maintained in a
§ 38-91 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 38-91
1:240
§ 38-92. Maintenance requirements. [Code 1993, § 11.06(5)]
good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the
source of electric power in a safe manner as required by the
electrical code of the Village. Each lodging room shall be provided
with lamps or fixtures with incandescent or equivalent bulbs having
a total capacity of at least 150 watts.
(14) Garbage disposal. Every dwelling shall have on the premises a
means of disposal or removal of trash and garbage. Where disposal
will not take place promptly, there shall be a convenient and
appropriate temporary and sanitary storage provided for trash and
garbage, which shall be inaccessible to rodents.
(15) Light and ventilation. Every habitable room shall have outside
windows having a total area enclosed by the sash of at least onetenth
of the floor area of the room, but not less than 12 square feet.
The top of at least one such window shall be not less than six feet
above the floor and at least 50% of the required window area must
be openable. One window in each habitable room and bathroom,
and all doors opening to the exterior of the dwelling shall be
provided with a screen of not less than no. 16 mesh, which will
effectively prevent the entrance of flies and mosquitoes. Every
dwelling or dwelling unit having basement windows or exterior
basement doors shall have screens of not less than no. 16 mesh on
all doors and windows when open.
(16) Basement and cellar space. No basement or cellar space may be
used as a habitable room or dwelling unit, except as provided in
this subsection. In one-family and two-family dwellings, kitchens
and dining rooms may be located in a basement area having its
floor level not more than three feet, six inches below the outside
finish grade. A basement space may be used as a living or sleeping
room or dwelling unit, provided its floor level is not more than
three feet, six inches below the outside finish grade, at any point,
and the ceiling is four feet or more above grade, at any point.
Family or recreation rooms may be located in basements or cellars,
provided adequate ventilation is provided.
(a) All dwellings and dwelling units shall comply with the following
requirements for maintenance:
(1) Floors, walls, ceilings, foundations and roofs. Every floor, wall,
ceiling, foundation and roof shall be:
a. Reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodentproof;
b. Capable of affording privacy; and
c. Kept in good repair.
§ 38-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-92
1:241
§ 38-93. Maintenance responsibilities of owners and occupants.
[Code 1993, § 11.06(6); Ord. No. 14-2009, §§ 15, 16, 10-26-2009]
(2) Windows, doors and basement hatchways. Every window, exterior
door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight,
waterproof and rodentproof and shall be kept in a sound working
condition and good repair.
(3) Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stair,
porch and appurtenance thereto shall be constructed so as to be
safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use
would cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in a sound
condition and good repair.
(4) Plumbing fixtures. Every plumbing fixture and water pipe required
under this article shall be maintained in a good and sanitary
working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstructions.
(5) Toilet and bathroom floors. The floors of all toilet rooms and
bathrooms shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
reasonably impervious to water and easily cleaned.
(6) Discontinuance of service. No owner, occupant or operator shall
cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required
under this article to be removed or shut off from, or discontinued
for, any occupied dwelling which is let or occupied by such person,
except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while
actual repairs or alterations are in progress, or during a temporary
emergency when discontinuance of service is approved by the
enforcing officer.
(a) Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep
that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof, including
the surrounding land and any accessory structures which he occupies
or controls, in a clean and sanitary condition and, prior to moving,
vacating or relinquishing occupancy or control, every occupant of a
dwelling or dwelling unit shall properly dispose of all garbage and
rubbish.
(b) Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
dispose of all of his rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it
in rubbish containers of a type prescribed by the Village.
(c) Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
dispose of all his garbage, and any other organic waste which might
provide food for rodents, in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in
garbage containers of a type approved by the Village.
(d) Screens, storm windows and storm doors. Every owner shall furnish,
and every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible
for hanging, all screens and double or storm doors and windows
whenever such screens, doors and windows are required under the
§ 38-92 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 38-93
1:242
§ 38-94. Lodging houses and lodging rooms. [Code 1993, § 11.06(7);
Ord. No. 14-2009, §§ 17 — 22, 10-26-2009]
provisions of this article, except where the owner has agreed to supply
such service. Screens shall be hung not later than June 1 of each year.
(e) Extermination of pests. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a
single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rodents or other pests in or on the premises; and every
occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one
dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination within the unit
occupied by him whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding such provisions, whenever infestation is caused by the
failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonably ratproof or
insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Extermination of any infestation in an unoccupied dwelling unit
shall be the responsibility of the owner even though the condition may
have been caused by a previous occupant.
(f) Use and operation of supplied fixtures and facilities.
(1) Every occupant of a dwelling unit within the scope of this article
shall keep all plumbing fixtures supplied by the owner in a clean
and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
(2) Every occupant of a dwelling unit which is within the scope of this
article shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care and
proper use and operation of all heating facilities supplied by the
owner.
(3) No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface
any part of the residential real estate or fixtures, furnishings or
equipment supplied by the owner of any dwelling unit within the
scope of this article.
(g) Definition. For the purposes of this section only, the term "occupant"
shall mean an occupant who is an adult or emancipated person.
(a) No person shall operate a lodging house, or occupy or let to another for
occupancy any lodging room in any lodging house, except in compliance
with the following requirements:
(1) Permit required. No person shall operate a lodging house unless
such person holds a valid lodging house permit issued by the
Village Clerk in the name of the operator and for the specific
dwelling or dwelling unit within which the lodging house is
contained.
(2) Permit application. The operator shall file, in duplicate, an
application for a lodging house permit in the office of the Village
Clerk upon application forms prepared by such office.
§ 38-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-94
1:243
(3) Application to and inspection by Building Inspector. Whenever an
application for a lodging house permit is filed for a lodging house
which does not have a valid permit, the Building Inspector shall
inspect the lodging house within 30 days of such filing to determine
the maximum number of persons which may occupy the lodging
house in accordance with the provisions of applicable zoning laws,
and to ensure that the lodging house conforms to the requirements
of this article.
(4) Permit issuance, display and transferability; fees; notice of
disposal. When all applicable provisions of this article have been
complied with by the operator, the building inspector shall issue a
lodging house permit upon the payment of the fee imposed under
§ 46-431(a)(9), but the permit shall list the maximum number of
persons that may reside in the total of all lodging rooms and shall at
all times be displayed in a conspicuous place within the lodging
house. No such permit shall be transferable. Every person holding
such a permit shall give notice, in writing, to the building inspector
within 30 days after having sold, transferred, given away or
otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in or control of any
lodging house. Such notice shall include the name and address of
the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such lodging
house.
(5) Hearing on permit denial. Any person whose application for a
permit to operate a lodging house has been denied may request
and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the health and
sanitation appeal board under the procedure provided by
§ 38-64(h).
(6) Relationship of permit to building and zoning codes. The issuance
of a lodging house permit shall not in any way signify or imply that
a lodging house conforms with the applicable state building code or
the building and zoning codes of the Village and county. The
issuance of a lodging house permit shall not relieve the owner or
operator of the responsibility for compliance with such building
and zoning codes.
(7) Permit suspension. Whenever, upon inspection of any lodging
house, the building inpsector finds that conditions or practices
exist which are in violation of any provision of this article, the
building inspector shall give notice, in writing, to the operator of
such lodging house that unless such conditions or practices are
corrected within a reasonable period, to be determined by the
building inspector, the operator's lodging house permit will be
suspended. At the end of such period, the building inspector shall
reinspect such lodging house and, if he finds that such conditions
or practices have not been corrected, he shall give notice, in
writing, to the operator that the operator's permit has been
suspended. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such operator
shall immediately cease operation of such lodging house and no
§ 38-94 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 38-94
1:244
person shall occupy, for sleeping or living purposes, any lodging
room in such lodging house.
(8) Hearing after suspension. Any person whose permit to operate a
lodging house has been suspended, or who has received notice
from the building inspector that his permit is to be suspended,
unless existing conditions or practices at his lodging house are
corrected, may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the
matter before the health and sanitation appeal board, under the
procedure provided by § 38-64(h), provided that, if no petition for
such hearing is filed within 30 days following the day on which such
permit was suspended, such permit shall be deemed to have been
automatically revoked.
(9) Toilets and lavatories. At least one flush toilet, lavatory basin and
bathtub or shower, properly connected to a municipal water and
sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied
within a lodging house for each eight persons, including the
operator's quarters or family whenever they share the use of such
facilities; provided, however, that a reasonably adequate and
properly operating well and/or septic system may be used, if not
prohibited by other ordinances or applicable governmental laws,
statutes, regulations or orders. All such facilities shall be located
within the dwelling so as to be reasonably accessible from a
common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities.
Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be adequately
supplied at all times with hot water. No such facilities shall be
located in a basement.
(10) Linens. The operator of every lodging house shall change supplied
bed linens and towels therein at least once each week and prior to
the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean
and sanitary manner.
(11) Area of sleeping rooms. Every room occupied by one person for
sleeping purposes shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor
space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more
than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space
for each occupant thereof.
(12) Exits. Every lodging room shall have at least two safe,
unobstructed means of exit. The requirements of § 38-91(a)(11)
shall be applicable to lodging houses.
(13) Sanitary maintenance. The operator of every lodging house shall be
responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and
ceilings and the maintenance of a sanitary condition in every part
of the lodging house, and he shall further be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of the entire structure or building leased or
occupied by the operator.
§ 38-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-94
1:245
§ 38-95. through § 38-120. (Reserved)
(14) Rubbish storage. Adequate rubbish storage containers, the type
and location of which are approved by the Village, shall be supplied
by the lodging house operator. The operator shall be responsible
for the disposal of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by
placing such rubbish in the required containers.
(15) Garbage disposal or storage. Adequate garbage disposal facilities
or garbage containers, the type and location of which are approved
by the Village, shall be supplied by the lodging house operator. The
operator shall be responsible for the disposal of all garbage in a
clean and sanitary manner through the use of approved mechanical
equipment or by placing such garbage in the required containers.
(16) Definition. As used in this section, the term "operator" shall include
the term "owner," as defined in § 38-32.
(17) Other applicable requirements. All other requirements of this
article not expressly inconsistent with the provisions of this section
shall also apply to lodging houses and lodging rooms.
§ 38-94 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 38-95
1:246
DIVISION 4
(Reserved)4
§ 38-121. through § 38-160. (Reserved)
4. Editor's Note: Former Div. 4, Restaurants, Grocers and Meat Markets, was repealed
10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 14-2009. See now § 39-2.
§ 38-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-121
1:247

ARTICLE III
Environmental Sanitation
§ 38-161. through § 38-172. (Reserved)5
5. Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Environmental Sanitation, was repealed 10-26-2009 by Ord.
No. 14-2009. See now § 39-2 and, with respect to pet shop/store licensing, Ch. 46, Art. XIV.
§ 38-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-161
1:249
Chapter 39
HEALTH DEPARTMENT
§ 38-161 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 38-161
1:250
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 39-1. Local Board of Health, Local Health Department and Local
Health Officer.
(a) Intermunicipal agreement providing for Joint Local Board of Health,
Joint Local Health Department and Joint Local Health Officer. By
intermunicipal agreement the Villages of Caledonia, Mt. Pleasant,
Sturtevant and North Bay have created a Joint Local Board of Health,
established a Joint Local Health Department and appointed a Joint
Local Health Officer to serve the above Villages, as well as other
municipalities that are added as members to the intermunicipal
agreement ("Member Municipalities"), or otherwise contract for the
provision of public health services ("Contract Municipalities"). This
Agreement is entered into pursuant to the authority set forth in Wis.
Stats. §§ 66.0301, 251.09 and 251.02(3r).
(b) Designation of Local Board of Health, Local Health Department and
Local Health Officer. The Joint Local Board of Health created by the
intermunicipal agreement is hereby designated the "Central Racine
County Board of Health" and is established as the joint local board of
health of the Member Municipalities and Contract Municipalities
pursuant to § 251.02(3r), Wisconsin Statutes. The Central Racine
County Health Department established pursuant to the intermunicipal
agreement is hereby designated and established as the local health
department of the Member Municipalities and Contract Municipalities
pursuant to § 251.02(3r), Wisconsin Statutes. The local Health Officer,
designated as the Health Officer/Director of Public Health, and
provided for in the intermunicipal agreement is hereby designated as
the local Health Officer for the Member Municipalities and Contract
Municipalities.
(c) Local Board of Health. The local Board of Health shall be designated as
the Central Racine County Board of Health and pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 251.03(4r), the parties determine that the membership of the Board of
Health shall be comprised as set forth in the intergovernmental
agreement.
(d) Powers and duties of Local Board of Health. The Central Racine County
Board of Health shall constitute the policy-making body for the Central
Racine County Health Department, and shall exercise authority over
financial and personnel matters, as set forth in the intermunicipal
agreement. The Board of Health shall be responsible for operating and
maintaining at least a Level II Health Department to jointly serve the
Member Municipalities and Contract Municipalities. The Board of
Health shall have the powers and perform such duties as are prescribed
in Wis. Stats. §§ 251.04 and 251.05, except as otherwise specifically
provided in the intermunicipal agreement or in joint ordinances
adopted by Member Municipalities and Contract Municipalities.
§ 39-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1
1:251
§ 39-2. Human health hazards.
(e) Effect of intermunicipal agreement. In all other respects such
intermunicipal agreement executed by the Member Municipalities shall
govern the administration of the Central Racine County Board of
Health, Health Department and Joint Local Health Officer.
(f) Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. The provisions of this Chapter shall
supersede any inconsistent provisions of this Code of Ordinances,
which inconsistent provisions shall be, and hereby are, repealed as of
the effective date of this ordinance.
(a) Purpose and general provisions.
(1) This section is adopted for the purpose of preserving and
promoting the public health of residents and preventing the
continuance of Human Health Hazards.
(2) No Person shall erect, construe, cause, continue, maintain or
permit any Human Health Hazards. Any Person who shall cause,
create or maintain a Human Health Hazard or who shall in any way
aid or contribute to the creation or maintenance thereof shall be
guilty of a violation of this section, and shall be liable for all costs
and expenses attendant upon the abatement or removal of such
hazards and subject to penalties provided in this section.
(3) It shall be the joint responsibility of the Owner and Occupant of a
Dwelling or Dwelling Unit to maintain their property in a manner
which complies with this Code and any applicable state and federal
laws.
(4) This section does not prohibit the following activities so long as
they are conducted in accordance with the applicable ordinance or
State Statute: the sanitary operation of licensed junkyards; or the
storage and accumulation of ashes and effuse by industrial
establishments which maintain adequate and sanitary facilities and
the space for the accumulation and storage of such materials.
(b) Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by
Chapters 251 and 254, Wis. Stats., as amended from time-to-time,
which regulations are hereby adopted, and incorporated by reference
as though fully set forth herein. The Health Officer or Code Official shall
have the power to abate human health hazards in accordance with this
section and Wis. Stats. § 254.59, which statute is adopted by reference
and made part of this section as if fully set forth in this section.
(c) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of this chapter, unless a different meaning is plainly
intended:
(1) BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground.
§ 39-1 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 39-2
1:252
(2) BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the
Municipality or his or her authorized representative.
(3) CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR — A device that detects the
presence of carbon monoxide gas.
(4) CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground, but having 1/2 or more of its clear floor to ceiling
heights below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
(5) CODE OFFICIAL — Building Inspector, municipal law enforcement
officer, Fire Chief, and/or the Health Officer, or their respective
authorized representatives.
(6) DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
(7) DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
Dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which
are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and
eating by one family.
(8) EXTERIOR PREMISES — The open space on the premises or the
portion of the premises upon which there is not a structure.
(9) EXTERMINATION — The control or elimination of insects, rodents
or other Vermin by eliminating their harborage places, by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by
blocking their access to a Dwelling, by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating or trapping, or by any other legal pest elimination
method approved by the Code Official.
(10)HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Central Racine
County Health Department or his/her authorized representative.
(11)HUMAN HEALTH HAZARD — A substance, activity or condition
that is known to have the potential to cause acute or chronic
illness, to endanger life, to generate or spread infectious diseases,
or otherwise injuriously to affect the health of the public.
(12) IMMEDIATE HUMAN HEALTH HAZARD — A condition which
exists or has the potential to exist which should, in the opinion of
the Health Officer, be abated or corrected immediately, or at least
within a twenty-four-hour period, to prevent imminent and severe
damage to human health.
(13) MUNICIPALITY — A city, town, or Village within the jurisdiction of
the Central Racine County Health Department.
(14)OCCUPANT — Any person living, sleeping or eating or having
actual possession of a Dwelling Unit.
§ 39-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-2
1:253
(15)OWNER — Any Person who, alone or jointly or severally with others
shall be the record holder of the title of any Dwelling or Dwelling
Unit, with or without actual possession thereof, or who has charge,
care or control of any Dwelling as agent of the owner or as
executor, administrator, trustee or Guardian of the estate of the
owner.
(16)PERSON — Includes Owners, Occupants, their agents, tenants and
any individual, firm, corporation, partnership or association.
(17)SMOKE DETECTOR — A device that detects the visible or invisible
particles of combustion.
(18)VERMIN — Rats, mice, cockroaches or similar animals or insects
that are known to be vectors of human pathogens.
(19)WORKMANLIKE — Work of such character so as to meet
manufacturer's specifications, accepted national standards or
recognized trade practices, and to provide a durable result as
intended to ensure public safety, health and welfare insofar as they
are affected by building construction, use and occupancy.
(d) Health standards for basic facilities and maintenance of habitable living
quarters. No Person shall occupy or allow another Person to occupy any
Dwelling or Dwelling Unit for the purpose of living or sleeping therein,
which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) Toilet and lavatory. Every Dwelling Unit shall contain a water flush
toilet within a room which affords privacy to a Person in such room.
Every Dwelling Unit shall contain a lavatory basin, preferably but
not exclusively in the same room as the toilet. Such toilet and
lavatory basins shall be connected and maintained in compliance
with the Municipality's plumbing code.
(2) Bathing facilities. Every Dwelling Unit shall contain, within a room
which affords privacy to a Person in such room, a bathtub or
shower connected and maintained in compliance with the
Municipality's plumbing code.
(3) Egress. Every Dwelling Unit shall have access to at least two
accessible, unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe and
open public street, alley or court.
(4) Heating facilities. Every Dwelling or Dwelling Unit shall be
equipped with heating facilities which are properly installed, and
maintained in a safe and good working condition and are capable of
maintaining minimum temperatures of 68° F., in all rooms with an
outside temperature of 10° F.
(5) Electric service. Every outlet and fixture shall be properly installed
and shall be maintained in a good and safe working condition, and
§ 39-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 39-2
1:254
shall be connected and maintained in compliance with the
Municipality's Electric Code.
(6) Smoke detectors. Smoke Detectors shall be installed outside of
each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the
bedrooms and on each additional story of the Dwelling Unit,
including Basements and Cellars excluding crawl spaces and
unfinished attics.
(7) Carbon monoxide detectors. The owner of a dwelling shall install a
functional carbon monoxide detector in the basement of the
dwelling and on each floor level except the attic, garage, or storage
area of each dwelling unit. This paragraph does not apply to the
owner of a dwelling that has no attached garage, no fireplace, and
no fuel-burning appliance.
(8) Extermination of vermin. Every Occupant of a Dwelling containing
a single Dwelling Unit shall be responsible for the Extermination of
any Vermin in or on the premises; and every Occupant of a Dwelling
Unit in a Dwelling containing more than one Dwelling Unit shall be
responsible for such Extermination within the unit occupied by
them whenever their Dwelling Unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding such provisions, whenever an infestation is
caused by the failure of the Owner to maintain a Dwelling in a
reasonably rodent-proof or insect-proof condition, Extermination
shall be the responsibility of the Owner. Extermination of any
infestation in an unoccupied Dwelling Unit shall be the
responsibility of the Owner even though the condition may have
been caused by a previous Occupant. All Extermination services
shall be performed by a licensed exterminator. Effective
Extermination shall continue until all Vermin are eliminated. The
responsible person shall submit completed Extermination reports
from the licensed exterminator to the appropriate Code Official
upon request.
(9) Hazardous conditions. Every Dwelling Unit shall be structurally
sound and shall be free of conditions that constitute a Human
Health Hazard, an Immediate Human Health Hazard to the health
and safety of the Occupant(s) or which create an unreasonable risk
of personal injury resulting from any reasonably foreseeable use of
the Dwelling.
(10) Discontinuance of service. No Owner or Occupant shall cause any
service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this
section to be removed or shut off from, or discontinued for, any
occupied Dwelling which is let or occupied by such Person, except
for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual
repairs or alterations are in progress, or during a temporary
emergency when discontinuance of service is approved by a Code
Official.
§ 39-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-2
1:255
(e) Enforcement. Upon request of an Owner or Occupant, or upon receipt
of a credible complaint, a Code Official shall inspect or cause to be
inspected the Dwelling, Dwelling Unit or Exterior Premises which is the
subject of the complaint or upon which there exists evidence of a
violation of this section. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of
determining whether or not the condition of the Dwelling or Dwelling
Unit complies with the standards set forth in this section.
(f) Access to property. After presenting proper identification a Code
Official shall be permitted to enter upon any property at any reasonable
time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance
with this section and related ordinances. If denied access, the Code
Official may acquire a special inspection warrant for such access,
pursuant to § 66.0119, Wis. Stats., as amended from time-to-time.
(g) Declaration of dwelling as human health hazard. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this section, if a Code Official determines that any
Dwelling or Dwelling Unit is a Human Health Hazard or Immediate
Human Health Hazard, the Code Official shall placard such Dwelling
and within 24 hours thereafter serve notice either, by registered mail,
return receipt requested, or by personally served notice in the manner
provided for in the State Statutes for service of process to the Occupant
and Owner that the Dwelling is unfit for human habitation and that it
shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the Code
Official. A Dwelling may be declared a Human Health Hazard or
Immediate Human Health Hazard for any of, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
(1) A Dwelling is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, dangerous,
unsanitary, unsafe or Vermin-infested that it creates a hazard to the
health or safety of the Occupants or the public.
(2) A Dwelling lacks a potable water supply, a properly functioning
public or private sanitary sewer system, or a functioning heating
system adequate to protect the health and safety of the Occupants.
(3) A Dwelling, because of its condition, has been implicated as the
potential source of a severe poisoning by a toxic substance
including but not limited to lead-bearing paint.
(h) Workmanship. All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are required directly or indirectly by the
enforcement of this section shall be executed and installed in a
Workmanlike manner.
(i) Notice of violation and orders for corrective actions. Whenever a Code
Official determines that there has been a violation of this section, notice
shall be given to the property Owner, and Occupant as appropriate.
Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
§ 39-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 39-2
1:256
§ 39-3. Lodging, recreation and food protection.
(2) Include a statement of the violation with reference to the
applicable provision(s) of this section.
(3) Include the correction(s) necessary to bring about compliance.
(4) Contain an order to correct said violation by a date certain.
(j) Service of notice. Each notice or order, other than as provided in
Subsection (g), provided under this section shall be deemed to be
properly served if a copy thereof is:
(1) Personally served in the manner provided for in the State Statutes
for service of process or,
(2) Sent by U.S. first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the last
known address or,
(3) Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the main entrance to the
structure located at the last known address, where there is a
structure.
(k) Appeal. Any Person affected by any notice or order which has been
issued in connection with the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this section may request in writing a review by the Health Officer or
other Code Official issuing such notice or order. Such request shall be
submitted before the date for the violation is to be corrected.
Subsequent appeal shall be pursuant to the Administrative Review
section of this Code or Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(l) Noncompliance with order.
(1) Citation. A citation for any violation of this section may be issued by
the Police, Sheriff's Department or by an appropriate Code Official.
(2) Abatement of human health hazards/emergency action. In extreme
cases where a violation poses an Immediate Human Health Hazard
as determined by the Health Officer or other implicated Code
Official,, the Health Officer or Code Official may immediately
commence the actions authorized by this Chapter, or any other
statutory or ordinance authority, to abate or removed the hazard.
(m) Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall
upon conviction be subjected to a forfeiture of not less than $300 or
more than $1,000 for each violation, and in addition, shall pay the costs
and expenses of prosecution. Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
(a) Purpose and general provisions. The purpose of this section is to
preserve and promote the public health of the residents. The Health
Department is granted agent status under §§ 97.41 and 463.16, Wis.
Stats., and accordingly provides all licenses and inspections for retail
§ 39-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-3
1:257
food establishments, restaurants, public swimming pools, and water
attractions, tattoo and body piercing establishments, recreational and
educational camps, campgrounds, hotels, motels, tourist rooming
houses, bed and breakfast establishments and food vending operations
in accordance with the applicable Wisconsin Statutes and/or
Administrative Code Chapter.
(b) Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by
Chapters 251, 252, 254, and §§ 97.41 and 463.16 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, as amended from time-to-time, which regulations are hereby
adopted, and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein.
The Health Officer, or his or her designee, shall have the power to
enforce the regulations of this section, including by the issuance of
citations.
(c) Adoption of state code; applications, permits, and licenses required.
Except as otherwise provided in this section and pursuant to the
authority granted by Wisconsin Statutes Chapters 251, 252, 254 and
§§ 66.0417 and 97.41, the Village adopts Wisconsin Administrative
Code Chapters ATCP 75, SPS 390, SPS 221, ATCP 76, ATCP 78, ATCP
79, DHS192, ATCP 72, ATCP 73, as amended from time-to-time, which
are incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein. All
applications, permits and licenses required by such regulations are
required by the Municipality and shall be processed in accordance with
the applicable Statute or Code section.
(d) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of this section, unless a different meaning is plainly
intended:
(1) BODY PIERCER — A person who performs body piercing on
another person at that person's request.
(2) FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An operation that stores, prepares,
serves, vends, sells or otherwise provides food for human
consumption. The term "Food Establishment" includes a
"restaurant" as defined in 97.01, Wis. Stats.; a "retail food
establishment" as defined in § 97.30, Wis. Stats.
(3) TATTOOIST — A person who tattoos another person at that
person's request.
(e) Mobile food establishments. A valid Food Establishment permit issued
by the State of Wisconsin or any other competent Health Department
for any mobile restaurant or mobile retail Food Establishment which
chooses to operate within the jurisdiction of the Central Racine County
Health Department will be honored by the Central Racine County
Health Department. The mobile Food Establishment will be required to
be inspected by the health department and to satisfy the relevant
provisions of Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter ATCP 75. In
addition, the mobile food establishment shall pay an inspection fee for
this inspection.
§ 39-3 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 39-3
1:258
§ 39-4. Rabies control.
(f) Body piercers and tattooists. All body piercers and tattooists shall
annually complete a bloodborne pathogen training course that is
approved by the Health Department. Any tattoo or body piercing
establishment allowing a tattooist or body piercer to practice in the
establishment without proof of bloodborne pathogen training with be
assessed a fee. This fee shall be established by Board of Health as part
of the annual budget process.
(g) Application; permit. Any license or permit required under this section
shall make application on a form provided by the Health Department.
The Health Department shall determine the contents of the application
and may use a form provided by the State. Applications for permits shall
be submitted to the Health Department along with the appropriate fee.
Applications will be reviewed for compliance with this section. Permits
and licenses issued hereunder shall be conspicuously displayed on the
premises of the establishment.
(h) Inspection by Department. Authorized employees of the Department,
upon presenting proper identification, shall have the authority to
perform inspections prior to issuance of any permit or license and from
time-to-time of any establishment for compliance with this Code,
including the state laws incorporated in this Code by reference.
(i) Fees. All fees associated with the operation of any establishment
governed by this section shall be established as part of the annual
budget process or by resolution of the Board of Health.
(j) Penalties. Any Person who violates any provision of this section shall
upon conviction be subjected to a forfeiture of not less than $300 or
more than $1,000 for each violation, and in addition, shall pay the costs
and expenses of prosecution. Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
(k) Appeal. Any person aggrieved by any temporary order issued by the
Health Officer pursuant to Sec. 66.0417(2)(a), Wis. Stats., shall be
granted a hearing before the Board of Health in accordance with the
provisions of such section. Appeal from any order, notice or
determination made by the Health Officer other than one controlled by
Sec. 66.0417 shall be to the Board of Health pursuant to the applicable
ordinance or Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes in the absence of an
administrative review ordinance. The Board of Health may affirm, set
aside, or modify the subject order by majority vote. The Board of
Health's decision shall be final but may be appealed to the Racine
County Circuit Court.
(a) Purpose and general provisions. The purpose of this section is to
preserve and promote the public health of the residents. Pursuant to
§ 254.51, Wis. Stats., the Health Department shall establish measures
§ 39-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-4
1:259
for the prevention, surveillance and control of human disease that is
associated with animal-borne disease transmission.
(b) Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by
Chapters 250, 251, and 254 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The law
enforcement officer, Humane Officer, Health Officer or their designees
shall have the power to enforce the regulations of this section,
including by the issuance of one or more citations, as warranted.
(c) Adoption of Wisconsin State Statute. In addition to the provisions of this
section and pursuant to the authority granted by Chapters 250, 251 and
254 of the Wisconsin Statutes, the Municipality adopts § 95.21, Wis.
Stats., which is incorporated by reference as though set forth herein. To
the extent any provision conflicts with another provision in this section,
the more restrictive provision applies.
(d) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of this section, unless a different meaning is plainly
intended:
(1) BITE — To seize with teeth or jaws, so as to enter, wound, or pierce
the skin.
(2) CAT — Any member of the species felis catus (the domestic cat).
(3) CODE OFFICER — The Municipality's law enforcement officer,
Humane Officer, Health Officer or their designees.
(4) DOG — Any member of the species canis familiaris (the domestic
dog).
(5) FERRET — Any member of the species mustela putorius (the
domestic ferret).
(e) Rabies vaccination required for dogs. The owner of a Dog shall have the
animal vaccinated against rabies. An owner who fails to obtain a rabies
vaccination for a Dog shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50
and not more than $100, plus the costs of prosecution.
(f) Duty to report bite. Any person having knowledge or reason to believe
that any Dog, Cat or Ferret has bitten a person, shall immediately
report, so far as is known, the name and address of the owner of the
animal and circumstances of such Bite. Such report shall be made to
the Village/Town Police Department or Sheriff's Department.
(g) Quarantine. Any Dog, Cat or Ferret within the Municipality which is
believed to have bitten a person, to have been infected with rabies, or to
have been in contact with a rabid animal shall be subject to the
quarantine requirements and procedures set forth in Sec. 95.21, Wis.
Stats. If the Code Official, Chief of Police, the Health Officer, or the
Humane Officer determines that a Dog, Cat, Ferret or other
domestically-owned animal found in the Municipality has rabies, the
§ 39-4 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 39-4
1:260
Health Officer may order a district quarantine, as provided by
§ 95.21(3).
(h) Noncompliance with quarantine order. If after a Dog, Cat or Ferret
Bites a person, the animal's owner fails to quarantine the animal and/or
fails to have the animal examined by a licensed veterinarian, the animal
may be seized by the Code Official, Health Officer, Police Officer,
Deputy Sheriff, Humane Officer or their designees and held at a
designated facility until the quarantine time expires. The owner or
custodian of the animal shall pay all applicable fees associated with the
quarantine, veterinarian's examinations, vaccination and license prior
to releasing the animal from the quarantine facility.
(i) Appeal. Any person affected by any notice or order which has been
issued in connection with the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this section may request in writing a review by the Health Officer or
other Code Official issuing such notice or order. Such request shall be
submitted before the date for the violation is to be corrected.
Subsequent appeal shall be to the Village/Town Board pursuant to the
applicable ordinance or Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes in the
absence of an administrative review ordinance.
(j) Penalties. Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates
any provision of this section shall upon conviction be subjected to a
forfeiture of not less than $300 or more than $1,000 for each violation,
and in addition, shall pay the costs and expenses of prosecution. Each
day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense."
§ 39-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-4
1:261
Chapter 42
LAW ENFORCEMENT
§ 39-4 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 39-4
1:262
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 42-1. Official Police Department. [Code 1993, § 4.01]
The Mount Pleasant Police Department shall be the official Police
Department of the Village. The primary duty of the Police Department is
to protect life and property, and enforce such laws as may be within its
jurisdiction.
§ 42-2. Police Department organization and personnel. [Code 1993,
§ 4.02]
§ 42-3. Emergency services outside Village. [Code 1993, § 4.03]
The Chief of Police, Fire Chief and Health Officer are authorized to give aid
through their respective departments, whenever an emergency requires, to
any municipality in the county.
(a) The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such
other officers as may be authorized by the Village Board.
(b) The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Village Board and his
salary shall be determined by the Village Board. The Chief of Police
shall execute and file an official bond in the amount set by the Village
Board.
(c) The Village Board may appoint temporary or part-time police officers,
as may be required.
(d) The Chief of Police shall supervise all police officers and may establish
rules and regulations for the performance of their duties and for the
conduct of police activities of the Police Department, subject to
approval by the Village Board.
(e) The Chief of Police, and any police officer authorized, in writing, by the
Chief of Police, may accept from any person arrested and charged with
a violation of any ordinance a bond or bail in a sufficient amount to
assure the appearance of the person at the court having jurisdiction
over the offense.
(f) The Chief of Police shall have control and be responsible for all vehicles
and the condition of all property and equipment used in connection with
activities of the Police Department.
(g) The Chief of Police shall make an annual report of the activities of the
Police Department and such other reports as the Village Board may
require.
(h) Police officers shall not perform police services outside of the Village,
except in behalf of the Village.
§ 42-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-4
1:263
§ 42-4. Work week of full-time Police Department members. [Code
1993, § 4.04]
The work week for full-time members of the Police Department shall be 40
hours.
§ 42-5. Compensation of Police Department members. [Code 1993,
§ 4.05]
Members of the Police Department shall receive such compensation from
the Village as may be fixed by the Village Board from time to time.
§ 42-6. Powers and duties of Chief of Police. [Code 1993, § 4.06]
§ 42-7. Control of Police Department property. [Code 1993, § 4.07]
(a) The Chief of Police shall have general supervision of the Police
Department and shall be responsible for Police Department personnel
and the general efficiency of the Police Department.
(b) The Chief of Police shall preside at all meetings and special meetings of
the Police Department, and preserve order and discipline.
(c) The Chief of Police shall preside in serious internal investigations, have
complete command of police responsibility and police operations, and
plan and control special programs.
(d) The Chief of Police shall have the power to suspend or terminate any
police officer, police dispatcher or any member of the Police
Department for neglect or refusal to perform departmental duties. Such
suspension or termination shall be subject to the provisions Wis. Stats.
§ 63.10.
(e) The Chief of Police shall have the power to issue oral or written
reprimands to any member of the Police Department for minor
infractions of departmental rules and regulations.
(f) The Chief of Police shall report to the Village Board on in-service
training, together with other pertinent information and data. He shall
submit recommendations and improvements as he deems proper and
necessary for the efficient operation of police services.
(g) The Chief of Police shall keep an inventory of Police Department
equipment.
(h) The Chief of Police shall appoint the humane officer of the county to
enforce all ordinances relating to animals normally enforced by such
officer and to issue citations for any violation of such ordinances, which
authority shall be exercised with other Village police officers as
required by law.
§ 42-4 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 42-7
1:264
§ 42-8. Disposal of abandoned and unclaimed property. [Code 1993,
§ 4.08]
§ 42-9. through § 42-40. (Reserved)
(a) No equipment, vehicle or any other property belonging to the Police
Department shall be used for any purpose, except police work, unless
approved by the Village Board.
(b) No member of the Police Department shall willfully damage, in any
manner, any equipment, vehicle or any other Police Department
property.
(a) Personal property which has been abandoned or remains unclaimed for
a period of 30 days after the taking of possession of such property by
the Village shall be disposed of as follows:
(1) Whenever, in the judgement of the Chief of Police, there exists
sufficient items of abandoned property of value to justify a public
sale, the Chief of Police shall cause notice of a public sale of such
property to be given to the public at least 10 days prior to such sale
and in a manner as he shall direct.
(2) The Chief of Police shall keep an accurate inventory of all such
abandoned property and the manner in which such property is
disposed of, however, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to
destroy any items of abandoned property with no value. Such
inventory shall be kept as a public record for a period of not less
than two years from the date of disposal of the property.
(3) All receipts from such public sale, after deducting the necessary
expenses of keeping the property and conducting the sale, shall be
paid into the Village treasury.
§ 42-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-9
1:265

ARTICLE II
Police Alarms
§ 42-41. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 4.09(2)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FALSE ALARM — A signal from an alarm system resulting in a response by
the Police Department when an emergency situation did not exist.
POLICE ALARM — Any device which, when activated by a criminal act or
other emergency requiring police response, transmits a signal to a central
alarm system or directly to the Police Department, or produces an audible
or visible signal designed to notify persons within audible or visual range of
the signal.
§ 42-42. Purpose. [Code 1993, § 4.09(1)]
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations, standards and
controls relating to the type, use and installation of police alarm devices,
whether such alarm devices are monitored by the Police Department, a
private alarm company or any other person, and to establish a Police
Department central alarm station and policies and procedures for the
development and use of a central monitoring station.
§ 42-43. Location of central alarm station. [Code 1993, § 4.09(4)]
A central alarm station shall be maintained in the safety building at such
location as the Chief of Police may designate.
§ 42-44. Connection limitations. [Code 1993, § 4.09(5)]
The Chief of Police shall determine the number and type of alarm owners or
alarm lessees which may be connected to the police central alarm station.
No person shall cause a private alarm system to be connected to the
police central alarm station unless such proposed connection receives prior
approval, in writing, by the Chief of Police. Any person denied permission
to connect to the police central alarm station may appeal by filing a written
notice with the Clerk-Treasurer within 10 days of the date of denial. Such
appeal shall be heard by the Village Board within 30 days thereafter. The
determination of the Village Board shall be final.
§ 42-45. Priority for connection. [Code 1993, § 4.09(6)]
The Chief of Police shall give priority for connection to the police central
alarm station to persons required by state or federal law or regulation to
maintain a police alarm system on their premises.
§ 42-46. Alarm requirements. [Code 1993, § 4.09(7)]
§ 42-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-46
1:267
(a) All persons whose application for connection to the police central alarm
station is approved by the Chief of Police shall:
(1) Pay all costs of installation and connection to the police central
alarm station.
(2) Pay to the Village an annual monitoring fee as set by the Village
Board.
(3) Use alarm equipment that meets minimum UL alarm device
standards.
(4) Pay all costs of disconnection or termination of service, whether
such disconnection or termination is initiated by the Chief of Police
or the alarm user.
(5) Perform testing of the alarm system in accordance with rules and
procedures promulgated by the Chief of Police or his designee.
(6) Pay all expenses of termination and reconnection whenever the
location of
(7) Sign an agreement holding the Village and Police Department
harmless for any and all damages or losses resulting, directly or
indirectly, from an alarm connection terminating at the Police
Department.
(b) Each person connected to the police central alarm station in
accordance with this article shall cause such system to be periodically
inspected and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations.
(c) For various reasons, false alarm systems frequently occur. Each false
alarm requires a response by public safety personnel, involves
unnecessary expense to the Village, increases the risk or injury to
persons or damage to property and dilutes the overall public safety
protection to the Village. Such false alarms constitute a public nuisance
and must be abated. Persons connecting to the police central alarm
station in accordance with this article shall pay to the Village a charge
for false alarms responded to by the police, for each calendar year, for
each premises connected, in accordance with the following:
Fee
(1) First two false alarms No charge
(2) Third false alarm As set by the Village Board
(3) Fourth false alarm As set by the Village Board
(4) Fifth and subsequent
alarms
As set by the Village Board
§ 42-46 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 42-46
1:268
§ 42-47. Audible or visual alarm systems. [Code 1993, § 4.09(8)]
Any person maintaining an audible or visual alarm system on his premises
shall be subject to the provisions of § 46-46(c) under the same conditions
as central alarm systems. Warnings or penalties issued under § 46-46(c) for
audible or visual alarm systems may be appealed to the Village Board in
accordance with the procedures set forth in § 46-48.
§ 42-48. Disconnections and appeals. [Code 1993, § 4.09(9)]
Failure to comply with any provision of this article or repeated false alarms
shall be cause for an alarm system to be disconnected from the Police
Department upon 30 days' prior written notice by the Chief of Police. Such
disconnection shall be made at the alarm holder's expense. An order of
disconnection may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the
Clerk-Treasurer within 10 days of the date of the order. Such appeal shall
be heard by the Village Board within 30 days of the date of filing of the
appeal. The Village Board may affirm, reverse or modify the order of the
Chief of Police. An appeal which is timely filed suspends the disconnection
until the Village Board renders its decision. Not later than 24 hours prior to
the hearing, the Clerk-Treasurer shall give written notice to the applicant of
the time and place of the hearing. The Chief of Police may, at his discretion,
require the immediate disconnection of any alarm system connected to the
police central alarm station if technical failure or defects of the system
result in a continual or sporadic alarm.
§ 42-49. Intentional false alarms. [Code 1993, § 4.09(10)]
No person shall intentionally cause the activation of a police alarm device
knowing that no crime or emergency exists.
§ 42-50. Alarms similar to emergency vehicle or civil defense sirens.
[Code 1993, § 4.09(11)]
No person shall sell, use or install a police alarm which, upon activation,
emits a sound the same as, or similar to, emergency vehicle sirens or civil
defense sirens.
§ 42-51. Private alarm companies. [Code 1993, § 4.09(12)]
Private alarm companies shall be responsible for the monitoring,
maintenance and use of private central alarm stations and shall pay to
the Village the false alarm charge prescribed in § 46-46(c) for false alarms
responded to by Village police, if such response was the result of the
actions of a private alarm company. The amount of such false alarm charge
shall be based on the number of such Village police responses to each
business, commercial or residential premises. Any person owning, leasing
(d) This section is intended to impose a strict liability on the person
responsible for alarm connection to the police central alarm station and
applies regardless of the cause of the false alarm.
§ 42-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-51
1:269
or operating a private alarm system programmed to a central office shall
also maintain a maintenance system during the hours that such system is in
operation and shall dispatch a company representative to the location of any
alarm transmitted, upon the request of the Police Department, so that such
representative arrives within one-hour of such request. Each premises shall
be considered a separate entity for purposes of determining the number of
false alarms under this article. Private alarm companies shall provide the
Chief of Police with a list of premises within the Village which are monitored
by the alarm company, including the name of the subscriber and the address
of each such premises. The private alarm company shall submit revisions to
such list within 30 days following such change of premises covered, and the
company shall also provide the Chief of Police with a telephone number at
which the maintenance service may be contacted at any time.
§ 42-52. Automatic dialing alarms. [Code 1993, § 4.10]
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish regulations,
performance standards and controls relating to the use of alarm
systems used by private residences which automatically select a public
primary telephone trunkline of the Police Department and produces any
prerecorded message to notify the Village of a burglary or other
emergency.
(b) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FALSE ALARM — A signal from an alarm system resulting in a response
by the Police Department when an emergency situation did not
apparently exist.
(c) Police Department notification. All owners of automatic dialing alarm
systems shall, in person and in writing, notify the Police Department
that they installed such a device. Failure to notify the Police
Department is a violation of this section.
(d) False alarms. For various reasons, false alarms frequently occur. Each
false alarm requires a response by public safety personnel, involves
unnecessary expense to the Village, increases the risk of injury to
persons or damage to property and dilutes the overall public safety
protection to the Village. Persons having automatic dialing systems in
accordance with this section shall pay to the Village a charge for false
alarms responded to by the police, for each calendar year, for each
premises connected, in accordance with the following:
Fee
(1) First two false alarms No charge/written warning
(2) Third false alarm As set by the Village Board
(3) Fourth false alarm As set by the Village Board
§ 42-51 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 42-52
1:270
Fee
(4) Fifth and subsequent
alarms
As set by the Village Board
(e) Disconnection and appeals. Failure to comply with any provision of this
section or more than six false alarms in one-year shall be cause for an
alarm system to be immediately disconnected from the Police
Department upon written notice by the Chief of Police. An order of
disconnection may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with
the Clerk-Treasurer within 10 days of the date of the order. Such appeal
shall be heard by the Village Board within 30 days of the date of filing
the appeal. The Village Board may affirm, reverse or modify the order of
the Chief of Police. An appeal which is timely filed suspends the
disconnection until the Village Board renders its decision. Not later
than 24 hours prior to the hearing, the Clerk-Treasurer shall give
written notice to the applicant of the time and place of the hearing. The
Chief of Police may, at his discretion, require the immediate
disconnection of any alarm system if technical failure or defects of the
system result in a continual or sporadic alarm.
(f) Violations; penalties. Any person found to be in violation of this section
shall be subject to § 1-15.
§ 42-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-52
1:271
Chapter 46
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 42-52 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 42-52
1:272
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 46-1. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 12.02(1)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
LICENSE and PERMIT — Are interchangeable.
§ 46-2. Licenses. [Code 1993, § 12.02(2) — (14); Ord. No. 8-2004,
7-26-2004]
(a) Required. No person shall engage in any business or activity
enumerated in § 46-431 without a license for such business or activity
as provided by this chapter.
(b) Application. Application for a license required by this chapter shall be
made to the Clerk-Treasurer on a form furnished by the Village, and
shall contain such information as may be required by the provisions of
this chapter or as may be otherwise required by the Village Board.
(c) Fees.
(1) To accompany application; receipt. License fees imposed under
§ 46-431 shall accompany the license application. If a license is
granted, the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the applicant a receipt for
his license fee.
(2) Refunds. No fee paid shall be refunded unless the license is denied.
Denial of any license shall result in a refund of the license fee, less
a $25 service charge or the actual license fee, whichever is less.
(d) Issuance. Unless otherwise designated, licenses required by this
chapter shall be issued by the Village Clerk-Treasurer only with the
approval of the Village Board, or its designee. Any person denied
issuance of a license may appeal the denial through the appeal
procedure provide by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board or, if
none has been adopted, under the provisions of Wis. Stats § 68.001 et
seq.
(e) Terms. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on June 30 in
the year of issuance unless issued for a shorter term, when they shall
expire at 12:00 midnight of the last effective day of the license or unless
otherwise provided by this chapter or law.
(f) Form. All licenses issued under this chapter shall show the dates of
issue and expiration, and the activity licensed, and shall be signed by
the Clerk-Treasurer.
(g) Records. The Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a record of all licenses issued.
§ 46-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-2
1:273
(h) Display. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be displayed upon
the premises or vehicle for which the license was issued or, if carried on
the person, shall be displayed to any officer of the Village, upon request.
(i) Compliance required. Any person holding a license under this chapter
shall comply with all portions of this Code. Failure to do so shall be
cause for suspension or revocation of the license.
(j) Transferability. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be personal
to the persons issued such licenses, and no license shall be transferred
without the consent of the Village Board.
(k) Exemptions. No license shall be required under this chapter for any
nonprofit, educational, charitable, civic, military or religious
organizations, if the activity which would otherwise be licensed is
conducted for the benefit of the members of such organization or the
public generally.
(l) Inspections.
(1) Consent. An applicant for a license under this chapter thereby
consents to the entry of police or authorized representatives of the
Village upon the licensed premises at all reasonable hours for the
purposes of inspection and search, and consents to removal from
the premises and introduction into evidence in prosecutions for
violations of this chapter all things found therein in violation of this
chapter or law.
(2) Reinspections. License fees cover the costs of an initial inspection
and one reinspection. Second and subsequent reinspections
require a reinspection fee as set by the Village Board.
(m) Revocation and suspension.
(1) Except as otherwise provided, any license issued under this
chapter may be revoked by the Village Board for cause. No license
shall be revoked, except upon written, verified complaint filed with
the Village Board by the president, a member of the Village Board,
the Chief of Police, chair of the License Committee or a resident of
the Village. The licensee shall be served with a written copy of the
charges and shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the
Village Board. The licensee shall be given notice of such hearing,
which shall not be more than 20, nor less than five days after such
notice, except as otherwise agreed between the parties.
(2) At such hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to be represented by
counsel, have the right to present and cross examine witnesses
and, upon request, have subpoenas issued by the president or
presiding officer of the Village Board to compel the attendance of
witnesses.
§ 46-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-2
1:274
§ 46-3. Violations; penalties. [Code 1993, § 12.20)]
§ 46-4. through § 46-30. (Reserved)
(3) After hearing the evidence, the Village Board may revoke such
license or impose a limited period of suspension. The determination
of the Village Board shall be final, subject to review under Wis.
Stats. Ch. 68, provided, the licensee shall not be entitled to a
further hearing unless granted by the Village Board.
(4) The Police Department shall repossess any license revoked under
this Subsection (m).
(5) If the licensee does not apply for a hearing within the time
provided, the license may be revoked by the Village Board.
(a) In addition to the revocation or suspension of any license or permit
issued under the provisions of this chapter, any person found to be in
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture
as provided in § 1-15, except that, if any person is found to be in
violation of the provisions contained in § 6-13(r), the penalty shall be as
follows:
(1) First offense. Any person who shall violate the provisions of
§ 6-13(r) shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $250, nor more
than $500, together with the cost of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such forfeiture and cost of prosecution, shall be
imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs are
paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating § 6-13(r), who
has previously been convicted of a violation of the same subsection
within one-year, shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $500,
nor more than $1,000 for each such offense, together with the cost
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and
costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture
and costs are paid, but not exceeding six months.
§ 46-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-4
1:275

ARTICLE II
Direct Sellers
§ 46-31. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 12.04(2)]
§ 46-32. Registration required. [Code 1993, § 12.04(1)]
No direct seller shall engage in direct sales within the Village without being
registered for such purpose as provided in this article.
§ 46-33. Exemptions. [Code 1993, § 12.04(3)]
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Includes any benevolent,
philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership,
association or corporation.
DIRECT SELLER — Any individual who, for himself or for a partnership,
association or corporation, sells goods or takes sales orders for the later
delivery of goods at any location other than the permanent business
place or residence of such individual, partnership, association or
corporation, and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors
and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required
by the direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective
customer.
GOODS — Includes personal property of any kind and goods provided
incidental to services offered or sold.
PERMANENT MERCHANT — A direct seller who, for at least oneyear
prior to the consideration of the application of this article to such
merchant, has:
Continuously operated an established place of business in the
Village.
(1)
Continuously resided in the Village and now does business from his
residence.
(2)
(a) The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this article:
(1) Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery
goods to regular customers on established routes.
(2) Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods.
(3) Any person selling agricultural products which he has grown.
(4) Any permanent merchant, or employee thereof, who takes orders
away from the established place of business for goods regularly
§ 46-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-33
1:277
§ 46-34. Registration requirements. [Code 1993, § 12.04(4)]
offered for sale by such merchant within the county and who
delivers such goods in his regular course of business.
(5) Any person who has an established place of business where the
goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis and in
which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically
requested a home visit by, such person.
(6) Any person who has had, or who represents a company which has
had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer.
(7) Any person selling, or offering for sale, a service unconnected with
the sale, or offering for sale, of goods.
(8) Any person holding a sale required by statute or order of any court
and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
(9) Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for, or on behalf of, such organization,
provided that proof is submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer that such
charitable organization is registered under Wis. Stats. § 440.42.
Any charitable organization not registered under Wis. Stats.
§ 440.42, or which is exempt from such statute's registration
requirements, shall be required to register under this article.
(10) Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against
whom complaint has been made to the Clerk-Treasurer that such
person is a transient merchant, provided that proof is submitted to
the Clerk-Treasurer that such person has leased for at least oneyear
or purchased the premises from which he is conducting
business, or proof that such person has conducted such business in
the Village for at least one-year prior to the date the complaint was
made.
(11) Any person who is the agent, officer or employee of a registrant
under this section only if the person is not engaged in door-to-door
solicitation and the Clerk-Treasurer determines that the provisions
of this section are not offended by granting an exemption. [Added
11-11-2019 by Ord. No. 28-2019]
(a) Applicants for registration must complete and return to the Clerk-
Treasurer a registration form furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer, which
shall require the following information:
(1) Applicant's name, permanent address, telephone number and
temporary address, if any.
(2) Applicant's age, height, weight, and color of hair and eyes.
§ 46-33 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-34
1:278
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person that the direct
seller represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being
sold.
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will
be conducted, if any.
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the
goods and any services offered.
(6) Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable.
(7) Name, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by the
applicant in the conduct of his business.
(8) Last cities, Villages, towns, not to exceed three, where the
applicant conducted a similar business.
(9) Place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving the Village.
(10) Statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted, within
the last five years, of any crime or ordinance violation related to the
applicant's transient merchant business; the nature of the offense;
and the place of conviction.
(b) The applicant shall present the following to the Clerk-Treasurer for
examination:
(1) A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required.
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of
weights and measures when the applicant's business requires the
use of weighing and measuring devices approved by state
authorities.
(3) A state Health Officer's certificate when applicant's business
involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be
certified under law, and such certificate shall state that the
applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious
disease, and dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the
application for license is made.
(c) At the time the registration is returned, the fee prescribed in § 46-431
shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer to cover the cost of processing such
registration.
(d) The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the Clerk-Treasurer as
his agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against
the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the
applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant,
if the applicant cannot be served personally, after reasonable effort.
§ 46-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-34
1:279
§ 46-35. Investigation. [Code 1993, § 12.04(5)]
§ 46-36. Appeals. [Code 1993, § 12.04(6)]
Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal
procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board or,
if none has been adopted, under the provisions of Wis. Stats.
§§ 68.07 — 68.16.
§ 46-37. Regulations. [Code 1993, § 12.04(7)]
(e) Upon payment of the fee as required in Subsection (c) of this section,
and the signing of the statement as set forth in Subsection (d) of this
section, the Clerk-Treasurer shall register the applicant as a direct
seller and date the entry. Such registration shall be valid for a period of
one year from the date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal as
provided in § 46-35(b).
(a) Upon receipt of each application, the Clerk-Treasurer may immediately
refer the application to the Chief of Police, who may make and complete
an investigation of the statements made in such application.
(b) The Clerk-Treasurer shall refuse to register the applicant if it is
determined, pursuant to the investigation as set forth in Subsection (a)
of this section, that:
(1) The application contains any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement;
(2) Complaints of a material nature have been received against the
applicant by authorities in the last cities, Villages and towns, not
exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted a similar
business;
(3) The applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or
ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is
directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling;
or
(4) The applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of
§ 46-34(b).
(a) Prohibited practices.
(1) A direct seller shall be prohibited from calling at:
a. Any dwelling or other place between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m., except by appointment.
b. Any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing
the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of a similar
meaning.
§ 46-34 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-37
1:280
c. The rear door of any dwelling place or remaining on any
premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or
other person having authority over such premises.
(2) A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or
misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or
character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his visit, his
identity or the identity of the organization he represents. A
charitable organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what
portion of the sale price of goods being offered will actually be used
for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting.
Such portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of
the goods.
(3) No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets
by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles,
all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
(4) No direct seller shall make any loud noise or use any sound
amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is
capable of being plainly heard outside an 100-foot radius of the
source.
(5) No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or
around the area in which he is conducting business.
(b) Disclosure requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to
a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his
name, the name of the company or organization he is affiliated
with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he offers to sell.
(2) If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales order for
the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall
have the right to cancel such transaction if it involves the extension
of credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25, in accordance
with the procedure as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 423.203(1)(a), (b),
(c), (2) and (3).
(3) If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of
goods, at the time the order is taken, he shall provide the buyer
with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement,
the amount paid in advance, whether full, partial or no advance
payment is made, the name, address and telephone number of the
seller, the delivery or performance date, whether a guarantee or
warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof.
§ 46-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-38
1:281
§ 46-38. Records of convictions of violations. [Code 1993,
§ 12.04(8)]
The Chief of Police shall report to the Clerk-Treasurer all convictions for
violations of this article, and the Clerk-Treasurer shall note any such
violations on the records of the registrants convicted.
§ 46-39. Revocation of registration. [Code 1993, § 12.04(9)].
§ 46-40. through § 46-70. (Reserved)
(a) A registration may be revoked by the Village Board, after notice and
hearing, if the registrant made any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement in the application for registration, made any
fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation
in the course of engaging in direct sales, violated any provision of this
article, or was convicted of any crime, or ordinance or statutory
violation which is directly related to the registrant's fitness to engage in
direct selling.
(b) Written notice of the hearing shall be personally served on the
registrant at least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing. Such
notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and a statement
of the acts upon which the hearing will be based.
§ 46-38 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-40
1:282
ARTICLE III
Amusements
§ 46-71. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 12.05(1); amended 6-22-2015 by
Ord. No. 05-2015]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Any business, excluding one for which the
Village has issued a "Class B" fermented malt beverage and intoxicating
liquor license, that has on its premises five or more amusement devices as
defined in this section and available for use by the public. If the application
for an operator's license as required by § 46-72(a) reveals that five or more
of such amusement devices shall be in operation, upon approval of such
application by the Village Board, the applicant shall pay to the Village the
fee in § 46-431 for each such amusement center, together with the fee per
each device as required by § 46-72(b).
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or similar item, may be operated
as a game, entertainment, contest of skill or amusement, whether or not
registering a score. Such term shall include, but not be limited to, such
devices as electronic or mechanical game machines, pinball machines,
bowling machines, pool tables, jukeboxes and any other mechanical or
electronic games or operations similar thereto, except such term shall not
include coin-operated merchandise vending machines.
OPERATOR — Any owner, lessee, manager or employee of an amusement
center who manages or operates an amusement center or business at which
one or more coin-operated amusement devices are operable.
OWNER — The person, firm, partnership or association which owns an
amusement center or which owns a business at which one or more coinoperated
amusement devices are operable.
§ 46-72. Amusement device license. [Code 1993, § 12.05(2)]
(a) Operator's license. No person shall set up for operation, maintain, keep
or permit on a premises owned, leased or controlled by him any
amusement device without having obtained an operator's license as
provided in this article. Every applicant for an operator's license shall
make application to the Village Board on a form furnished by the Clerk-
Treasurer. Such application shall state the applicant's name, residence
address, address at which the amusement devices are to be located and
the number of amusement devices. All applicants shall have been
residents of the state continuously for at least one year prior to the date
of filing the application and shall be 18 years of age or older. Licenses
may be granted by the Village Board for a period not to exceed one year.
Applications shall be filed for renewal of the license in the same manner
as for an original license. If a license is issued after the beginning of the
§ 46-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-72
1:283
§ 46-73. Regulations. [Code 1993, § 12.05(3); Ord. No. 4-04,
§ 12.05(3)(g), 4-26-2004]
license year, the fee shall be 1/12 of the annual fee for each month,
or fraction thereof, remaining in the license year. Such license shall
not be transferable. The licensee may replace an amusement device
any number of times by another amusement device, but at no time
shall such amusement devices on any one premises exceed the number
permitted by the license relating to the premises.
(b) Amusement center license. If the application for an operator's license
reveals that five or more amusement devices shall be in operation, upon
approval of such application by the Village Board, the applicant shall
pay the amusement center license fee set forth in § 46-431, plus the fee
for each amusement device.
(c) Distance requirement. No amusement center license or coin-operated
amusement device license shall be granted for any place of business
located within 300 feet of any church building, school building, hospital
building or nursing home building unless a license granted under this
article was in effect prior to the occupation of real property within 300
feet thereof by such institution or facility. Such distance shall be
measured along the shortest route, by sidewalk or street, from the main
entrance of the proposed licensed premises to the main entrance of any
such institution or facility.
(a) Use by minors during school hours. No owner, operator or person in
charge of an amusement center shall permit any person under the age
of 18 years to play or use a coin-operated amusement device during the
normal academic school year for Racine Unified School District
between 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on any day in which regular classes
are in session, except if such minor is present with his parent, guardian
or adult spouse.
(b) Use by minors during certain hours. No owner, operator or person in
charge of an amusement center or business holding one or more coinoperated
amusement device licenses shall permit any person under the
age of 18 years to play or use any coin-operated amusement device
between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. unless such minor is accompanied by
his parent, guardian or other adult person having legal custody or
control of the minor.
(c) Locking entrance; inspections. The entrance to any amusement center
licensed under this article shall not be locked during any time that the
amusement center is open for business. Each licensee of an amusement
center agrees that Village officers and employees charged with law
enforcement or inspection functions may enter the licensed premises at
any time during normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting
the premises and enforcing the laws and ordinances relating to the
operation thereof.
§ 46-72 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-73
1:284
§ 46-74. Violations; penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of the following provisions shall be
punished as follows:
Section Violation Penalty
6-13(r) Gambling or use of games of chance
which are prohibited
$50
46-72(b) Failure to obtain amusement center
license
$50
46-73(c) Failure to comply with inspection
requests
$100
Any other ordinance 20
§ 46-75. through § 46-100. (Reserved)
(d) Lighting. At all times that an amusement center licensed under this
article is open for business, lighting shall be provided throughout the
amusement center in the amount of not less than 25 footcandles,
measured at the playing surface level of each amusement device.
(e) Excessive noise. No operator or owner of an amusement center or
business to which one or more coin-operated amusement device
licenses are in effect shall permit the level of sound resulting from
operation of the amusement center or coin-operated amusement
devices to exceed the limitations in the zoning ordinance (Chapter 90 of
this Code).
(f) Hours of operation. No operator or owner shall permit an amusement
center licensed under this article to be open between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day, except upon application and consent of
the Village Board and except that this subsection shall not apply to any
premises which is licensed to dispense alcohol beverages.
§ 46-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-75
1:285

ARTICLE IV
Pool, Billiards and Bowling
§ 46-101. License required. [Code 1993, § 12.06(1)]
No person shall set up for operation, maintain, keep or permit on premises
owned, leased or controlled by him, any public pool room, billiard hall,
bowling alley or any place in which billiards, pool tables or bowling alleys
shall be kept for public use within the Village without having obtained a
license as provided in this article.
§ 46-102. License application. [Code 1993, § 12.06(2)]
§ 46-103. Requirements and restrictions. [Code 1993, § 12.06(3)]
All applicants shall have been continuous residents of the state for at least
one year prior to the date of filing the application and shall be 18 years of
age or older. Applications shall be filed for renewal of a license in the same
manner as for an original license. Such license shall not be transferable.
The licensee may replace any such table with another table or may replace
any such alley with another alley any number of times, but at no time
shall the number of such tables or alleys on any one premises exceed the
number permitted by the license relating to the premises. Each such table
or alley shall a plate have securely attached to it, bearing the name of
the licensee thereof. Every such licensee shall operate and maintain the
licensed premises so as to comply with the applicable provisions of this
Code.
§ 46-104. through § 46-130. (Reserved)
(a) The license application shall state:
(1) The name of the applicant;
(2) The applicant's residence address;
(3) The address at which the pool room, billiard hall, bowling alley or
such other place is to be located; and
(4) The number of pool tables, billiard tables or bowling alleys to be
located thereat.
§ 46-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-104
1:287

ARTICLE V
Massage
§ 46-131. Purpose and intent. [Code 1993, § 12.07(1); Ord. No.
5-2007, 6-11-2007]
It is the purpose and intent of the Village that the operation of massage
establishments as defined in § 46-132 shall be regulated so as to further
the public interest, safety and welfare by providing minimum building,
sanitation and health standards for massage establishments.
§ 46-132. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 12.07(2)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Village or his authorized
representative.
MASSAGE — The manipulation of the soft tissue of the body for therapeutic
purposes and may include, but is not limited to, effleurage, petrissage,
tapotement, compression, vibration, friction, stroking or kneading, either
by hand or with a mechanical or electrical apparatus, for the purpose of
body massage. This may include the use of oil, salt glows, hot and cold
packs and other recognized forms of massage therapy. The term does not
include diagnosis or any service or procedure for which a license to practice
medicine is required by law.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — A place where the primary or secondary
function is to offer massage by a massage therapist.
MASSAGE THERAPIST — A person who holds a permit issued under this
article to administer massages.
§ 46-133. Massage establishment permits. [Code 1993, § 12.07(3)]
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in,
conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the Village, as the
owner or operator of a massage establishment, without having procured a
permit as provided in this article, nor without complying with all statutes,
ordinances and regulations applicable to such establishment and unless
such permit is in effect at the time of such operation.
§ 46-134. Exemptions. [Code 1993, § 12.07(6)]
The permits required by this article shall not apply to hospitals, nursing
homes and sanitariums (see § 46-142(c)).
§ 46-135. Massage establishment permit application. [Code 1993,
§ 12.07(4)]
§ 46-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-135
1:289
§ 46-136. Investigation. [Code 1993, § 12.07(5); Ord. No. 5-2007,
6-11-2007]
Applications for massage establishment licenses under this article shall
be referred to the Chief of Police, who shall cause an investigation to
be made and report his findings to the Health Officer. Applicants shall
cooperate with any investigation conducted under this article and permit
access to the proposed place of business and facilities in conjunction with
any investigation.
(a) The application for a massage establishment permit shall be upon a
form provided by the Clerk-Treasurer and shall set forth the exact
nature of the services to be provided, the proposed place of business
and facilities therefor, and the name and address of each applicant. If
the applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of
each of the officers and directors of the corporation and each
stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock of the corporation shall
be set forth. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence
addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners, shall be
set forth. In addition, any applicant for such a permit shall furnish the
following information:
(1) The two previous addresses, if any, for the three years immediately
prior to the present address of the applicant.
(2) Written proof that the individual or partnership applicant is over
the age of 18 years.
(3) The individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color of
eyes, hair and sex.
(4) Two portrait photographs, at least two inches by two inches, taken
within six months of the date of the initial application and every five
years thereafter.
(5) The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the
three years immediately preceding the date of the application.
(6) The history of the applicant in the operation of a massage
establishment or similar business or occupation, including, but not
limited to, whether or not such person, in previously operating in
this or another city or state under a permit, has had such permit
revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business
activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or
revocation.
(7) All criminal convictions, other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
and the reasons therefor.
(8) Such other identification and information necessary to discover the
truth of the matters as required in Subsection (a)(1) - (7) of this
section to be set forth in the application.
§ 46-135 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-137
1:290
§ 46-137. Issuance or denial of massage establishment permit;
insurance required. [Code 1993, § 12.07(7)]
§ 46-138. Temporary massage establishment permit. [Code 1993,
§ 12.07(8)]
Upon application for a massage establishment permit, the Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall be authorized to issue a temporary massage establishment
permit to any applicant who is currently the owner or operator of such
an establishment, pending review and investigation of the application
submitted pursuant to this article. Such temporary permit shall remain in
effect for a period of 30 days or until the issuance of the permit applied for,
unless the permit is denied for any of the reasons set forth in § 46-137, in
which event, the temporary permit shall be of no further force and effect.
§ 46-139. Sanitation requirements. [Code 1993, § 12.07(9)]
(a) Issuance. The Village Board shall issue a massage establishment permit
if, upon investigation and the reports filed, it is found that the:
(1) Operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would
comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the
Village's building, plumbing, electrical, zoning and health
regulations and the provisions of this article.
(2) Applicant has not been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of an offense involving lewd conduct, nor an offense
involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another.
(3) Applicant has not knowingly, and with the intent to deceive, made
any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit
application or any other document required by the Village in
conjunction therewith.
(4) Applicant, if a corporation, is licensed to do business and is in good
standing in the state.
(b) Insurance. No person may carry on the business of operating a massage
establishment at any place within the Village without a premises and
professional liability insurance.
(c) Notice of denial. If the permit is denied, notification and reasons for
denial shall be set forth in writing and sent to the applicant by
registered or certified mail or hand delivered to the address given in the
application.
(a) All premises used by massage establishment permittees shall be subject
to periodic inspection by the Village for safety of the structure and the
propriety of plumbing, electrical wiring, ventilation, heating and
sanitation. The massage room shall have a minimum of 40 watts of
lighting for the purpose of observing possible contraindications of
massage. The walls shall be clean and painted with an approved
§ 46-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-139
1:291
§ 46-140. Transferability of massage establishment permit. [Code
1993, § 12.07(10)]
No massage establishment permit shall be transferable, except with the
written approval of the Village Board. An application for such a transfer
shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a filing and investigation
fee as set by the Village Board, no part of which shall be refundable. The
application for such transfer shall contain the same information as required
in this article for an initial application for such a permit. In the event of a
denial of such transfer application, notification and reasons for such denial
shall be set forth in writing and shall be sent to the applicant by means of
registered or certified mail or hand delivered.
§ 46-141. Hours of operation. [Code 1993, § 12.07(12)]
Massage establishments shall commence operations no earlier than 6:00
a.m. and end no later than 9:00 p.m.
§ 46-142. Massage therapist permit. [Code 1993, § 12.07(11); Ord.
No. 5-2007, 6-11-2007]
washable, mold resistant paint in all rooms where water or steam
baths are given. Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust,
dirt or refuse. All equipment used in the massage operation shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(b) Towels, sheets and linens of all types and items for the personal use of
operators and patrons shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels,
clothes and sheets shall not be used for more than one person. Reuse of
such linens is prohibited unless the linens have first been laundered.
Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets, provided that such
paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary
receptacle.
(c) Every massage establishment shall have a minimum of one wash basin.
(a) (Reserved)
(b) On-site massages. On-site massages shall include home visits and
massage in public buildings. This privilege shall be available only to
massage therapists who qualify for a general massage permit pursuant
to this article. The permit must accompany the massage therapist on all
site visits. When doing on-site massage at hotels, motels and resorts,
massage therapists shall register at the desk or office. A massage shall
not be given unless a client's genitals are fully covered at all times by
linens or towels. Massage therapists shall be attired in clean clothing.
(c) Exemptions. This section does not apply to:
(1) Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, nurses or physical
therapists licensed or registered to practice their respective
professions under law.
§ 46-139 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-142
1:292
§ 46-143. through § 46-144. (Reserved)6
§ 46-145. Display of permits. [Code 1993, § 12.07(15)]
The owner or operator shall display the massage establishment permit
issued by the Village and the permit of each and every massage therapist
employed in the establishment in an open and conspicuous place on the
premises.
§ 46-146. Notification of changes. [Code 1993, § 12.07(16); Ord. No.
5-2007, 6-11-2007]
Every massage establishment owner or operator shall immediately report
to the Clerk-Treasurer any and all changes of address or ownership of the
massage establishment.
§ 46-147. Injunctive relief. [Code 1993, § 12.07(17)]
In addition to the legal remedies provided for in this article, the operation
of any massage establishment in violation of the terms of this article shall
be deemed a public nuisance and may be enjoined by the Village.
§ 46-148. Fee. [Code 1993, § 12.07(18)]
The fee for all licenses and permits provided for by this article shall be as
stated in § 46-431.
§ 46-149. through § 46-180. (Reserved)
(2) Barbers and cosmetologists licensed under law, provided that such
massage practiced is limited to the head and scalp.
(3) Accredited high schools and colleges, and coaches and trainers
therein while acting within the scope of their employment.
(4) Trainers of any amateur, semiprofessional athlete or athletic team.
6. Editor's Note: Former §§ 46-143 and 46-144, which pertained to investigation of
applicants, fees, and issuance or denial of permits, were repealed 6-11-2007 by Ord. No.
5-2007.
§ 46-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-149
1:293

ARTICLE VI
Junk and Salvage
§ 46-181. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 12.09(1)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
JUNK — Waste paper, rags, old metal and other material commonly known
as junk.
JUNK DEALER — A person who engages in the business of operating a
junkyard in the Village.
JUNKYARD and SALVAGE YARD — Any open or enclosed yard, or any
building or other structure, or any combination thereof, where junk is
collected, stored or processed or where the business of dealing in, breaking
up or storing dismantled or salvaged motor vehicles is conducted.
SALVAGE DEALER — A person licensed by the state department of
transportation under the provisions of Wis. Stats., Subch. VII of Ch. 218
(Wis. Stats. § 218.20 et seq.), to carry on or conduct the business of
wrecking, processing, scrapping, recycling or dismantling of motor
vehicles, or selling parts thereof, or to purchase motor vehicles for resale
for such purposes.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is, or
may be, transported or drawn, except a cart propelled by human energy.
§ 46-182. Licenses. [Code 1993, § 12.09(2)]
(a) Application. No person shall engage in the business of junk dealer or
salvage dealer in the Village without obtaining a license from the
Village Board. Application for such license shall be made, in writing, to
the Village Board, and shall include the name under which the applicant
is transacting business within the Village; the place where the business
is to be conducted, which must be an established place of business; if
the applicant is a sole proprietorship, the personal name and address of
the applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of
each partner; if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses
of the corporation's principal officers; and such other pertinent
information as may be required by the Village Board for the purpose of
determining the eligibility of the applicant to be licensed. Applications
for renewal of licenses shall be filed in the same manner as applications
for an original license.
(b) Transferability. No license issued under the provisions of this article
shall be transferable either as to person or location.
(c) Denial. The Village Board may deny any application for a junk dealer's
or salvage dealer's license when, in the discretion of the Village Board,
the location or operation, or both, of such business or yard will be
§ 46-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-182
1:295
§ 46-183. Posting of license; license plates. [Code 1993, § 12.09(3)]
§ 46-184. Purchases from minors; records; inspections. [Code 1993,
§ 12.09(4)]
§ 46-185. Conditions for operation. [Code 1993, § 12.09(5)]
detrimental to the public health, sanitation or welfare, or if such
application is not accompanied by a petition requesting the issuance
of such license and signed by the owners of at least two-thirds of all
land, exclusive of streets, alleys, highways and public lands, within a
distance of 1,000 feet from any point on any exterior boundary line of
such proposed junkyard or salvage yard.
(a) Every license issued under this article shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at the business or yard designated in such license, and the license
shall not be removed or defaced in any manner as long as it is in force.
(b) At the time of issuing a license under the provisions of this article, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall issue an appropriate license plate for each vehicle
operated by such licensee covered by such license, and such license
plate shall be securely fastened on the outside of each such vehicle and
remain thereon while the license covering the vehicle is in force. No
person shall remove or deface any such license plate.
(a) No purchase of any junk shall be made by any person to whom a license
is issued under this article from any minor, without the written consent
of the parent or guardian of such minor, which written consent shall be
kept on file with the records of such licensee.
(b) Every person to whom a license is issued under the provisions of this
article shall keep and maintain complete and accurate records of all
purchases of junk.
(c) By acceptance of any such license, the holder thereof agrees that any
official of the Village may inspect any junkyard or vehicle owned or
operated by such license holder for the collection of junk and may
inspect all records of purchases of junk made by him.
(a) Hours of collections. No junk shall be collected by any person to whom
a license is issued under this article between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. of the following day or at any hour on Sunday.
(b) Operation of machinery. No junk or salvage dealer shall operate, cause
to be operated, or permit to be operated any machinery in any junkyard
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day or at
any hour on Sunday unless written permission to do so has been
obtained from the Village Board.
(c) Enclosures. Every junkyard or salvage yard shall be enclosed in such
manner as the Village Board may order, in writing, at any time before or
after the issuance of a license under this article for such junkyard or
§ 46-182 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-185
1:296
§ 46-186. through § 46-220. (Reserved)
salvage yard, and which enclosure, in the discretion of the Village
Board, is necessary to preserve the surrounding property from
depreciation or for other sufficient reason.
§ 46-185 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-186
1:297

ARTICLE VII
Tents and Temporary Structures
§ 46-221. Permit required; exception. [Ord. No. 3-01,
§ 12.01(10)(1), 9-24-2001]
No person shall erect a tent or other temporary structure for the conduct
of business, entertainment or other activity to which the public is invited
without first obtaining a permit from the Clerk-Treasurer for such tent or
temporary structure, except a tent or canopy may be used for a private
gathering on residential property without a permit.
§ 46-222. Inspection required. [Ord. No. 3-01, § 12.01(10)(2),
9-24-2001]
No permit shall be issued under this article until the tent or temporary
structure has been inspected by the fire inspector and/or such other officials
of the Village as are necessary to ensure the safety and welfare of the public
using such tent or temporary structure.
§ 46-223. through § 46-250. (Reserved)
§ 46-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-223
1:299

ARTICLE VIII
Dance Halls
§ 46-251. Permit required. [Code 1993, § 12.12(10)]
No dancing shall be permitted in any building for which a retail Class
B alcohol beverage license has been granted, nor shall any dancing be
permitted in any room or building which is in direct connection or
communication, or contiguous to the room for which a Class B alcohol
beverage license has been granted unless the licensee first has obtained
from the Clerk-Treasurer, after approval of the Village Board, a permit
specifically authorizing such dancing.
§ 46-252. Permit application and revocation. [Code 1993,
§ 12.12(2)]
Application for a dance permit shall be made, in writing, to the Village
Board through the Clerk-Treasurer, on such form as the Clerk-Treasurer
shall provide. The application shall disclose the location of the premises for
which the permit is desired, the size of the area on which dancing is to
be permitted and such other information as the Village Board may require
from time to time by resolution. The application shall contain a provision
indicating that the applicant understands and agrees that the permit sought
may be revoked by the Village Board at any time upon 10 days' notice to the
permittee of the reason for the proposed cancellation and an opportunity to
be heard under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be further specified
and agreed that the violation of any guidelines relating to operation of the
premises upon which dancing is permitted and the conduct of dancers,
adopted by the Village Board by resolution, shall be grounds for revocation
of any permit issued.
§ 46-253. through § 46-280. (Reserved)
§ 46-251 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-253
1:301

ARTICLE IX
Security Guards
§ 46-281. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 12.14(1)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ARMED GUARD — A person whose principal duty is that of a uniformed
security guard and who carries or has access to a firearm in the
performance of such duties.
PERMIT — A watchman and guard permit issued by the Police Department
in compliance with Wis. Stats. § 440.26(5m).
WATCHMAN and GUARD — Any person who is an employee of a private
licensed agency that supplies uniformed security guards and whose duties
are to exclusively patrol the private property of industrial plants, business
establishments, schools, hospitals, sports stadiums, exhibits and similar
activities, and who guards or patrols in uniform for the purpose of
protecting persons or property, but does not include a person not required
by Wis. Stats. § 440.26(5) to obtain a watchman or guard permit.
§ 46-282. Permit required. [Code 1993, § 12.14(2)]
No person shall be employed by a private licensed agency to act or perform
as a guard or watchman without a permit from the Police Department.
The permit shall be carried on the guard's or watchman's person while
performing the duties of watchman or guard. Such permit shall be issued,
maintained and annually renewed.
§ 46-283. Permit application form. [Code 1993, § 12.14(3)]
The application form for a uniformed guard or watchman permit shall be
furnished to the employing agency by the Police Department. The form shall
contain an accurate description of the applicant, the employing agency's
name and the applicant's present and past addresses. The application for
a watchman or guard permit shall be made by the licensed agency that
employs the watchman or guard.
§ 46-284. Fees. [Code 1993, § 12.14(4)]
The employing agency shall pay a fee, as stated in § 46-431, to the Police
Department when the employee's application for a watchman and guard
permit is filed. The individual applicant shall pay a fee, as stated in § 46-431,
to the Village for the issuance and annual renewal of a guard and watchman
permit.
§ 46-281 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-285
1:303
§ 46-285. Photographs and fingerprint cards. [Code 1993,
§ 12.14(5)]
The applicant shall furnish two fingerprint cards and one recent photograph
with the application form.
§ 46-286. Age limitation. [Code 1993, § 12.14(6)]
No permit shall be issued under this article to any person under the age of
18 years.
§ 46-287. Carrying firearms and other dangerous weapons while on
duty. [Code 1993, § 12.14(7)]
§ 46-288. Firearms certification of proficiency. [Code 1993,
§ 12.14(8)]
(a) No principal or employee of any agency shall carry on, about or near his
person any firearm or other dangerous weapon while on duty unless the
person is:
(1) Certified as being proficient in the care, handling and use of such
weapon.
(2) A peace officer as defined in Wis. Stats. § 939.22(22).
(a) Proficiency in the care, handling and use of a weapon shall be certified
as to any principal or employee of an agency before assignment with a
weapon and annually thereafter.
(1) Certification may be made by any person competent to attest to the
proficiency of the principal or employee in question. Such
certification shall be notarized and include:
a. A full and complete description of each type of weapon with
which the principal or employee is proficient in the care,
handling and use.
b. Statements to the effect that the principal or employee
understands safety rules, range rules and the procedures for
the care and cleaning of each type of weapon with which he is
proficient, and that he understands the legal limits on the use
of such weapon.
c. Proof that the principal or employee has met the minimum
marksmanship standards set forth in the most recent
Wisconsin Law Enforcement Firearms Manual, published by
the Training and Standards Bureau, Division of Law
Enforcement Services, Wisconsin Department of Justice, State
Capitol, Madison, Wisconsin, 53702, which is incorporated by
reference in this section as if fully set forth in this section.
§ 46-285 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-288
1:304
§ 46-289. Notification of termination. [Code 1993, § 12.14(9)]
A licensed agency under this article shall immediately inform the issuing
officer at the Police Department of all terminations of guards or watchmen
who have been issued permits.
§ 46-290. Return of permit. [Code 1993, § 12.14(10)]
In the event of termination of watchmen or guards possessing permits
under this article, the employing agency shall obtain and return such
permits to the Police Department within 72 hours of such termination.
§ 46-291. Reporting use of weapons. [Code 1993, § 12.14(11)]
If any principal or employee of any agency is responsible for the accidental
or intentional discharge of any firearm (other than in target practice,
competition or licensed hunting), or the accidental or intentional use of
deadly force by any means while on duty, he shall, within one hour, notify
the appropriate law enforcement agencies and inform his supervisor of the
incident. The supervisor or another person assigned by the agency shall
investigate and make a signed, written report; identify all persons involved,
the investigator and agency; and fully describe the circumstances of such
incident. One copy of the report shall be filed with the state department
of regulation and licensing, and another copy shall be filed with the Police
Department within seven days. A negligent or reckless discharge of a
weapon may be cause for revocation of a firearms permit.
§ 46-292. Denial and revocation of permit. [Code 1993, § 12.14(12)]
§ 46-293. through § 46-320. (Reserved)
(2) A copy of the certification shall be presented to the Police
Department upon original application for a permit under this
article and annually thereafter.
(a) A watchman and guard permit may be denied or revoked by the Police
Department if the:
(1) Application contains false information.
(2) Applicant is subject to a pending criminal charge and the
circumstances of the charge substantially relate to the activities of
a watchman or guard.
(3) Applicant has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or other
offense, the circumstances of which substantially relate to the
activities of a watchman or guard.
(4) Applicant fails to comply with the requirements of § 46-288 and is
employed as an armed guard or watchman.
§ 46-288 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-293
1:305

ARTICLE X
Closing Out Sales
§ 46-321. License required. [Code 1993, § 12.15(1)]
No person shall conduct, within the Village, a closing out sale of
merchandise, except as provided in this article. Every person shall obtain
a Village license before retailing or advertising for retail any merchandise
represented to be merchandise of a bankrupt, insolvent, assignee,
liquidator, adjuster, administrator, trustee, executor, receiver, wholesaler,
jobber, manufacturer or any business that is in liquidation that is closing
out, closing or disposing of its stock, or a particular part or department
thereof, that has lost its lease, or has been, or is being, forced out of
business, that is disposing of stock on hand because of damage by fire,
water, smoke or other cause, or that, for any reason, is forced to dispose of
stock on hand. Such license is denominated as a closing out sale license, and
such sale as a closing out sale. Such license shall be obtained in advance if
such advertisement or representation, expressed or implied, tends to lead
people to believe that such sale is a selling out or closing out sale.
§ 46-322. License application. [Code 1993, § 12.15(2)]
Every person requiring a closing out sale license shall make an application,
in writing, to the Clerk-Treasurer, on the form provided by the Clerk-
Treasurer, and shall attach thereto an inventory containing a complete and
accurate list of the stock of merchandise on hand to be sold at such sale,
and shall have attached thereto an affidavit by the applicant or his duly
authorized agent that the inventory is true and correct to the knowledge
of the person making such affidavit. Such affidavit shall include the names
and addresses of the principals, such as the partners, officers and directors
and the principal stockholders and owners of the business, and of the
inventoried merchandise. Such inventory shall contain the cost price of the
respective articles enumerated on such inventory, together with the date of
purchases and the identity of the seller. If the merchandise was purchased
for a lump sum or other circumstances make the listing of the cost price
for each article impracticable, such inventory shall state the lump sum
paid for such merchandise and the circumstances of the purchase. Such
application shall further specify the name and address of the applicant, and,
if an agent, the person for whom he is acting as an agent, the place at
which such sale is to be conducted and the time during which the proposed
sale is to continue. Upon receipt of such application, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall ascertain whether any personal property taxes are unpaid relating
to applicant's place of business and before such application is granted,
the personal property taxes shall be paid or arrangements made for such
payment which are agreeable to the Clerk-Treasurer. The license shall
specify the period for which it is granted, which time shall not exceed 60
successive days, except Sundays and legal holidays.
§ 46-321 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-323
1:307
§ 46-323. Extension of time of sale. [Code 1993, § 12.15(3)]
The time during which the sale may be conducted may be extended by the
Clerk-Treasurer if, at any time during the term of the license, a written
application for such extension, duly verified by an affidavit of the applicant,
is filed by such licensee with the Clerk-Treasurer. Such application shall
state the amount of merchandise listed in the original inventory which has
been sold, the amount which still remains for sale, and the time for which
an extension is requested. No extension shall be granted if any merchandise
has been added to the stock listed in the inventory since the date of the
license, and the applicant shall satisfy the Clerk-Treasurer by affidavit or
otherwise, as directed by him, that no merchandise has been added to the
stock since the date of issuance of the license. The Clerk-Treasurer may
grant or deny the application and, if granted, the period of the extension
shall be determined by the Clerk-Treasurer, but shall not exceed 30 days
from the expiration of the original license. If such extension is granted, the
extension shall be issued by the Clerk-Treasurer upon the payment of an
additional license fee per day for the time during which it is granted, as
stated in § 46-431.
§ 46-324. Merchandise for sale. [Code 1993, § 12.15(4)]
No person shall sell or offer to expose for sale at any sale for which
a license is required by this article any merchandise not listed in the
inventory as required by § 46-322, except that any merchant may, in the
regular course of business, conduct a closing out sale of merchandise and,
at the same time, sell other merchandise, if the merchandise for the sale of
which a license is required shall be distinguished by a tag or otherwise so
that the merchandise of such class is readily ascertainable to prospective
purchasers, and shall not label or tag other merchandise in a manner to
indicate or lead a prospective purchaser to believe that such merchandise
is of the class for which a license is required. Each article sold in violation
of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense, and any
false or misleading statement in such inventory, application or extension
application shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 46-325. Inventory verification. [Code 1993, § 12.15(5)]
The Clerk-Treasurer shall verify the details of the inventory as filed in
connection with an application for a license under this article and shall also
verify the items of merchandise sold during any sale under such license,
and no licensee shall refuse to furnish, on demand to the Clerk-Treasurer, or
any person designated by him for such purpose, all the facts connected with
the stock on hand or any other information that the Clerk-Treasurer or his
designee may reasonably require in order to make a thorough investigation
of all phases of such sale, as far as they relate to the rights of the public.
§ 46-326. License fees. [Code 1993, § 12.15(6)]
The fees for a license under this article shall be as stated in § 46-431.
§ 46-323 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-327
1:308
§ 46-327. Exemptions. [Code 1993, § 12.15(7)]
This article shall not apply to sales by public officers or sales under judicial
process.
§ 46-328. through § 46-360. (Reserved)
§ 46-327 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-328
1:309

ARTICLE XI
Razing Buildings
§ 46-361. Permit required; exceptions; violations; penalties. [Code
1993, § 12.16]
§ 46-362. through § 46-390. (Reserved)
(a) No person shall cause a building in the Village to be wrecked, razed or
otherwise destroyed without first obtaining a permit from the Building
Inspector, except under the following conditions:
(1) The building is under 800 square feet or is a farm accessory
building.
(2) The building is not hooked up to a natural gas service line, a public
or community water line and/or a sanitary sewer line.
(b) Each building wrecked, razed or otherwise destroyed without a permit
shall constitute a separate violation of this section. The forfeiture to be
imposed upon conviction of a violation of this section shall not be less
than $100, nor more than $500, together with the costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution,
such person shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture
and costs are paid, but not exceeding 90 days.
§ 46-361 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-362
1:311

ARTICLE XII
Festivals
§ 46-391. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 12.19(1)]
§ 46-392. Intent. [Code 1993, § 12.19(2)]
It is the intent of the Village Board to regulate festivals to provide for the
health, safety and welfare of all persons, residents and visitors alike, who
attend festivals in the Village.
§ 46-393. License required; application; fees. [Code 1993,
§ 12.19(3)]
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FESTIVAL — Includes any exhibition, parade, museum, carnival, circus,
or any indoor or outdoor music concert or other entertainment, or any
celebration or commemoration of any day or event which is:
(1) Open to the public.
Temporary in nature (i.e., not lasting more than 15 days in one
calendar year).
(2)
Intended or is reasonably anticipated that 1,000 or more people in
total will attend.
(3)
(b) Events lasting more than 15 days shall be considered permanent in
nature and, while not subject to licensing under this article, shall be
subject to all other applicable ordinances, laws and regulations.
(a) No person shall promote, operate, conduct or maintain a festival in the
Village without a license for such festival or in a manner contrary to the
terms of this article or any other applicable ordinance, law or
regulation. A minimum nonrefundable fee as provided in § 46-431 shall
be charged for the license and shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Clerk-Treasurer with a written application. The application shall be
submitted not less than 60 days before the proposed festival.
(b) If it is determined the Village will incur administrative costs or costs
associated with providing fire, police, utility and emergency services as
a result of the festival, which costs exceed the minimum license fee, the
Village Board may require additional licensing fees in an amount
sufficient to pay all or a portion of the expenses which will be incurred
by the Village.
(c) Approval, conditional approval or denial of applications shall be made
by the Village Board following review and recommendations by the
Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Health Officer, Public Works Director,
§ 46-391 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-393
1:313
Highway Superintendent, License Committee and Plan Commission of
the Village.
(d) The applicant shall include the following information in the application:
(1) Name, address and date of birth of the applicant and, if such
application is made in a representative capacity, the name, address
and place of business of the applicant, and references, if required
by the Village.
(2) Address, telephone number and description of the proposed
festival site.
(3) A description of the uses, activities, business or operations to occur
on the festival site as part of the festival, the festival events
scheduled, the hours and dates of operation of the festival,
projected attendance in total and the projected largest attendance
at any one time.
(4) Name, address and place of business of any vendor that will sell or
distribute any food, drink or other product or who will operate any
ride, carnival or other entertainment at the festival.
(5) A description of any proposed construction plans for the site to
accommodate the festival, including descriptions of temporary
structures, such as bleachers, if any.
(6) A description of the parking facilities and parking supervision, with
access roads for vehicular traffic designated, and projected largest
number of vehicles anticipated at any one time.
(7) A proposed security plan for maintaining order and preserving the
safety of the persons attending the festival, as well as for the
security and safety of property and persons near the proposed
festival site, which shall include a description of any proposed
private security guards, police and fire protection, rescue and
emergency squad protection and the communication system to be
utilized to ensure proper communication in the event of an
emergency.
(8) A description of the utility and sanitary services necessary to
operate the festival, which shall include a description of the
electrical and water services to be utilized, as well as toilet
facilities.
(9) A description of proposed disabled facilities, which shall include a
description of disabled parking and access.
(10) If alcohol beverages are to be sold or consumed, a description of
the proposed vending site, the hours of operation for selling or
serving of alcohol beverages and the proposed means of preventing
minors from frequenting or loitering near the areas where alcohol
beverages are served or consumed.
§ 46-393 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-393
1:314
§ 46-394. Additional information. [Code 1993, § 12.19(4)]
The Police Chief, Fire Chief, Health Officer, Highway Superintendent, Public
Works Director, License Committee, Plan Commission and Village Board
may require the applicant to supplement the application or provide
additional information which is necessary to fulfill the intent of this article.
§ 46-395. License transferability and limitations. [Code 1993,
§ 12.19(5)]
Any license obtained by an applicant for a festival is not transferable from
one person to another and is limited to events, days and hours specified by
the Village Board.
§ 46-396. Separate permits; liability for violations; vendor
contracts. [Code 1993, § 12.19(6)]
(11) The applicant's agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the
Village, its agents, officers and employees from any and all liability
which may arise from occurrences at the festival, including any
claims or damages arising out of conduct or violation of law by
vendors.
(12) A certificate of insurance or an insurance commitment naming the
Village, its agents, officers and employees as named insureds on
the applicant's policy of applicable liability insurance for the
festival, with limits of liability not less than $1,000,000 per
occurrence and $1,000,000 in the aggregate. Insurance covering
liquor liability shall be required if alcohol beverages are sold or
consumed on the site.
(13) Proof of required state licenses and inspections, if amusement
rides are on the site.
(a) No separate Village direct seller's permit, food permit or amusement
license is required of any vendor named in the application and under
contract with the festival license holder, except permits and licenses
necessary to sell and serve alcohol beverages.
(b) The festival license holder shall be directly liable to the Village for
violation of any law or any damage arising out of any violation of any
law by any vendor under contract with the permit license holder.
(c) All contracts pertaining to vendors at the festival must be on file with
the Clerk-Treasurer before the commencement of the festival. No
vendor shall be permitted to operate at the festival who has not been
named by the applicant and who does not have a written contract with
the festival license holder.
§ 46-393 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-397
1:315
§ 46-397. Security bond. [Code 1993, § 12.19(7)]
As a condition of the issuance of a license under this article, the Village
Board may require the applicant to deposit cash or a surety bond in an
amount sufficient to secure the full and complete performance of all
obligations of the applicant and all conditions upon which the license was
issued.
§ 46-398. Applicability of other laws, regulations and ordinances.
[Code 1993, § 12.19(8)]
Except as set forth in § 46-396, the applicant and any vendor under contract
with the applicant shall comply with all other applicable laws and
regulations, including the zoning ordinance of the Village (Chapter 90 of
this Code).
§ 46-399. Approval, disapproval, suspension and revocation of
license. [Code 1993, § 12.19(9)]
§ 46-400. Inspection prior to opening. [Code 1993, § 12.19(10)]
Before any festival may be opened, inspections shall be conducted to assure
the health, safety and welfare of all persons in the Village and adherence
to the license issued under this article. Such inspections shall be conducted
by the Village Health Officer, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Building Inspector,
Highway Superintendent and Public Works Director. Proof of required state
inspections shall be required.
§ 46-401. through § 46-430. (Reserved)
(a) The Village Board may deny any license application which does not
comply with this article or when the proposed festival poses a threat to
the health, safety or welfare of any person in the Village. The Village
Board may approve the application and grant the license on such
conditions it imposes for purposes of protecting the health, safety and
welfare of persons in the Village.
(b) A license may be suspended or revoked by the Village Board upon a
determination that the applicant has failed to comply with this article,
any condition imposed under this article or violation of any other
applicable law or regulation. The Police Chief, Fire Chief or Health
Officer may suspend the operation of any festival, or any part thereof,
upon a determination that it is operating in violation of this article or
any other law or regulation and such violation poses a threat to the
health, safety or welfare of persons in the Village. Such suspension shall
remain in effect until the Village Board can meet and consider the
matter.
§ 46-397 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-401
1:316
ARTICLE XIII
Fees
§ 46-431. Established. [Code 1993, § 12.01; Ord. No. 3-01,
§ 12.01(10), 9-24-2001; Ord. No. 3-02, § 12.01, 3-25-2002; Ord. No.
15-2005, § I, 8-8-2005; amended 6-22-2015 by Ord. No. 05-2015]
(a) Unless otherwise indicated, a license and annual fee shall be required
as follows:
(1) Amusement centers: $500.
Plus, per device: $40.
(2) Amusement devices: $40.
(3) Cabarets:
a. Per day: $25.
b. Per year: $150.
(4) Closing out sales:
a. Not to exceed 15 days: $25.
b. Not to exceed 30 days: $50.
c. Not to exceed 60 days: $75.
d. Additional days shall be $1 per $1,000 of the price set forth on
the inventory.
e. Extension: $25.
(5) Dance halls: $100.
(6) Direct sellers: $50.
Four days or less: $25.
(7) Festival licenses: $100.
Plus, per day: $50.
(8) Junk and salvage dealers: $250.
(9) Lodging houses:
a. Each lodging room: $25.
b. Permit: $100.
(10) Massage therapy establishments: $100.
(11) Pool halls, billiard halls and bowling alleys, per table or bowling
alley: $25.
§ 46-431 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-431
1:317
(12) Tents and temporary structures: $50.
(13)Watchman and guard permits:
a. Applicant, issuance and annual renewal: $5.
b. Employing agent, upon filing application: $10.
(14)Wrecking permits: $50.
(15)Weights and measures program.
a. Application of state codes. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this section, the statutory provisions provided in
this section, the statutory provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 98,
Weights and Measures, and Admin. Code, ATCP 92, Weighing
and Measuring Devices, are hereby adopted and by reference
made part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act
required to be performed or prohibited by any statute or code
incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by
this section. Any future amendments, revisions or
modifications of the statutes incorporated herein or Wisconsin
Administrative Code provisions incorporated herein are
intended to be made part of this section. This section is
adopted pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 98.
b. Appointment of inspectors. In order to assure compliance with
this section, the Village hereby grants the authority and duties
of sealers and inspectors required by this section to the State
of Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer
Protection.
c. Definitions.
1. COMMERCIAL WEIGHING OR MEASURING DEVICES —
Devices used or employed in establishing the size,
quantity, extent, area or measurement of quantities,
things, produce or articles for sale, hire or award, or in
computing any basic charge or payment for services
rendered on the basis of weight and measure.
2. WEIGHTS AND MEASURES PROGRAM — The program
that includes administration and enforcement of this
section, Wis. Stats. Ch. 98, and applicable Wisconsin
Administrative Code provisions, and any related actions.
d. Weights and measures license required.
1. License requirements. Except as provided in Subsection
(a)(15)d2, no person shall operate or maintain any
commercial weighing or measuring devices, or any other
weights and measures systems and accessories related
thereto which are used commercially within the Village for
§ 46-431 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-431
1:318
determining the weight, measure or count unless each
such device is licensed by an annual weights and measures
license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.
2. Exemptions. Sales permitted at a farmers market or sales
permitted by direct sellers, transient merchants, and
solicitors are exempt from licensing under this section.
e. Application for license. An application for a weights and
measures license shall be made in writing on a form provided
for such purpose by the Village Clerk and shall be signed by the
owner of the commercial business or by its authorized agent.
Such applications shall state the type and number of weighing
and measuring devices to be licensed, location of the devices,
the applicant's full name and post office address, and whether
such applicant is an individual, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation or other entity. If the applicant is a
partnership, the application shall state the names and
addresses of each partner. If the applicant is a corporation or
limited liability company, the application shall state the name
and address of all officers and agents of the applicant,
including the registered agent thereof.
f. Issuance of license and fees. Upon compliance with this
section, the Village Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant
upon payment of an annual license fee set by the Village Board.
Each store or other business shall require a separate license.
The license fee shall not be prorated for a partial year.
g. License term. A license issued under this section shall expire
on June 30 of each year.
h. Enforcement for nonrenewal. It shall be the duty of the Village
Clerk to notify the appropriate Village officials and to order the
immediate enforcement of the provisions of this section in
cases involving a failure to renew weights and measures
license. A licensee shall be prohibited from operating or
maintaining a weighing or measuring device until such time as
a valid license has been obtained under the provisions of this
section.
i. Fees assessment.
1. Annual assessment. The Village Board shall annually
assess fees to each licensee based on the number and
types of weighing and measuring devices licenses as of
July 1 of each year. The total of the fees assessed and the
fees collected shall not exceed the actual costs of the
weights and measures program.
2. Clerk to prepare assessment schedule. The Village Clerk
shall at least annually prepare a proposed schedule of
§ 46-431 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-431
1:319
assessments to be submitted to the Village Board. A copy
of the proposed schedule together with notice of the date
and time at which the Village Board will consider the
assessments shall be mailed to each licensee.
3. Village Board determines assessment. At least 10 days
after such mailing the Village Board shall consider the
Clerk's proposed schedule of assessments and determine
the schedule of assessments on a reasonable basis. The
Village Clerk shall mail to each licensee an invoice for the
amount of the fee assessment to the licensee as
determined by the Village Board and each licensee shall
pay the fee assessed within 30 days after the date the
invoice is mailed.
4. Failure to pay assessment. If the assessed fee is not paid
within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the invoice, an
additional administrative collection charge of 10% of the
total fee shall be added to the amount due, plus interest
shall accrue thereon at the rate of one point 5% per month
or fraction thereof until paid. To the extent permitted by
law, if the licensee is the owner of the real estate premises
where the licensed weights and measures devices are
located, any delinquent assessment shall be extended
upon the current or the next tax roll as a special charge
against the real estate premises for current services. No
licensee shall be issued or renewed under this section if
the licensee is delinquent in the payment of a fee assessed
under this section.
5. Mailing of notices. Schedules, notices and invoices shall be
considered mailed to the licensee when mailed by first
class mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the
licensee's address as shown on the application form.
6. Change of ownership. If the ownership of a commercial
business licensed under this section is transferred during
a license year, the owner of the business as of July 1 of the
license year shall be liable and responsible for the
payment of the fees assessed under this section.
j. Penalty. In addition to any other remedy, any person who fails
to comply with the provisions of this Subsection (a)(15) shall,
upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $250 no more
than $500. Each day a violation exists or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
k. Contract with State of Wisconsin. In lieu of enforcing the
weights and measures ordinance, the Village Board of Mt.
Pleasant may contract with the State of Wisconsin Department
of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection to furnish the
§ 46-431 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-431
1:320
§ 46-432. through § 46-499. (Reserved)
services and perform the duties of sealers of weights and
measures required in Wis. Stats. § 98.04(1), as amended. In
the event the Village contracts with the state or renews any
existing contract the Village may collect fees not to exceed the
costs pursuant to statute.
§ 46-431 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-432
1:321

ARTICLE XIV
Pet Shops
§ 46-500. Permit required. [Ord. No. 14-2009, § 31, 10-26-2009]
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) ANIMAL — Any living vertebrate, domestic or wild, except a human
being.
(2) DISINFECTANT — An agent, usually a chemical, that kills growing
forms, but not necessarily resistant spore forms, of diseaseproducing
microorganisms.
(3) DISINFECTING — The act of destroying infectious agents.
(4) HUMANE OFFICER — Any person appointed by the Village as a
humane enforcement officer who is qualified to perform duties of
animal control as provided by the laws of the state and the Village.
(5) PET — Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
(6) PET SHOP — Any person, partnership or corporation, whether
operated separately or in connection with another business
enterprise that sells, offers to sell, exchanges, or offers for adoption
with or without charge or donation dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles,
or other animals customarily obtained as pets. However, a person
who sells only such animals that he has produced and raised shall
not be considered a pet shop under this section and a veterinary
hospital or clinic operated by a licensed veterinarian or
veterinarians shall not be considered a pet shop under this section.
(7) PET SHOP OPERATOR — Any person who sells, offers to sell,
exchanges, or offers for adoption with or without charge or
donation dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles, or other animals
customarily obtained as pets. However, a person who sells only
such animals that he has produced and raised shall not be
considered a pet shop operator under this section and a veterinary
hospital or clinic operated by a licensed veterinarian or
veterinarians shall not be considered a pet shop operator under
this article.
(b) Sale or release of certain animals restricted.
(1) Animal unfit for sale or release. The following shall deem an animal
unfit for sale or release:
a. Obvious signs of infectious disease such as distemper,
hepatitis, leptospirosis, rabies, para influenza (kennel cough)
or other similar diseases.
§ 46-500 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-500
1:323
b. Obvious signs of nutritional deficiencies, which may include
rickets, emaciation, etc.
c. Obvious signs of severe parasitism.
d. Obvious fractures or congenital abnormalities affecting the
general health of the animal.
e. Skin diseases such as ringworm or fungus.
(2) Restriction of sale. The Humane officer or other appropriate Village
official may restrict the sale of any animal suspected of being
diseased or otherwise unfit for sale. An examination by a
veterinarian, at the expense of the enforcement agency, may be
requested.
(c) Purchase, keeping or sale of endangered or dangerous species. No pet
shop shall engage in the purchase, keeping or sale of any species of
primates, bats, foxes, raccoons, skunks, turtles, turtle eggs, poisonous
snakes, or any species of animal considered "endangered" or
considered a public health hazard by the U.S.D.A. or the Food and Drug
Administration, unless licensed by federal permit issued for the sale of
endangered species.
(d) Pet shop permit.
(1) Required. No person, party, firm or corporation shall operate a pet
shop without first applying for and obtaining a permit in
compliance with the Village code. Application for any permit
required under this section shall be made on a form provided by the
Village Clerk. The Village Clerk, in conjunction with the humane
officer, shall determine the contents of the application. Applications
for permits shall be submitted to the Village Clerk along with the
appropriate fee. Applications will be reviewed for compliance with
this section.
(2) Issuance. When all applicable provisions of this section have been
complied with by the applicant and a valid occupancy permit for
this type of business has been issued by the Village Building
Inspector, the Village's finance/legal/License Committee shall
review the application and shall approve the permit if this section's
requirements are met, the Village Clerk shall issue any approved
permit to operate.
(e) Term. The permit period for a pet shop shall be from July 1 until June 30
of the following year. Renewal applications for pet shop permits shall be
made not later than May 30th of each year. Application for a permit to
establish a new pet shop under the provisions of this section may be
made at any time.
(f) Permit and inspection fees; examination fees. The initial annual permit
and the renewal fees for each pet shop shall be set by resolution of the
§ 46-500 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-500
1:324
Village Board from time-to-time. Application for a renewal permit made
after June 30 for the following calendar year shall be assessed a late
fee of $15. If there is a change in ownership of a pet shop, the new
owner may request that the current permit be transferred to the new
name upon payment of a transfer fee of $10 and review by the finance/
legal/License Committee. Inspection and Examination Fees shall be set
by resolution of the Village Board from time-to-time.
(g) Display of permit. The current permit issued under this section must be
prominently displayed at the permitted premises.
(h) Enforcement.
(1) Notice of violation. Whenever the humane officer or other
appropriate Village official, upon inspection, is aware of any
violation of this section, the permittee shall be notified by means of
a written notice of inspection. This notice of inspection shall
contain references to the specific conditions found, the corrections
necessary, and a specific and reasonable time for compliance.
(2) Service of notice. Each notice or order provided under this section
will be considered to have been properly served when it has been
delivered personally, or when it has been mailed, postage prepaid,
by first-class mail with return receipt requested, to the permit
holder.
(3) Suspension/revocation of permit. If, at the end of the period
specified in the notice served under Subsection (h)(2) of this
section, a reinspection by the humane officer or other appropriate
Village official reveals that corrections have not been made, the
humane officer or other appropriate Village official shall give the
permit holder notice in writing that it intends to suspend or revoke
the permit.
(4) Appeal of suspension/revocation order. Any permit holder who has
received a notice of intention to suspend or revoke the pet shop
permit may, within 30 days after service of this notice, demand a
hearing before the Village's finance/legal/License Committee.
Enforcement of any order issued by the humane officer or other
appropriate Village official, and any proceedings to suspend the
permit, shall be stayed pending decision of the committee.
(5) Hearing. The finance/legal/License Committee shall conduct the
hearing on any appeal filed by a permit holder under this section.
At the conclusion of such a hearing, the committee may sustain,
modify or withdraw the notice or order, depending upon its findings
as to whether the provisions of this section have been complied
with. The finance/legal/License Committee may also modify any
order so as to authorize a variance from the provisions of this
section if a literal enforcement of these provisions will result in
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship because of special
conditions. If the committee sustains or modifies a notice or order,
§ 46-500 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-500
1:325
the permit holder shall comply with all provisions of the order
within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the
committee. If the committee upholds a notice of intention to
suspend or revoke any permit required by this section, then that
permit shall be suspended or revoked as of the date of the hearing,
until all provisions of the order are fulfilled. Any subsequent appeal
shall be pursuant to Title 4 of this Code.
(i) Inspections. Inspection of the premises and animals of a permit holder
under this section to determine compliance with this section may be
made by the humane officer or other appropriate Village official or
authorized agents during normal business hours or with reasonable
notice during nonbusiness hours. Any applicant for a permit under this
section consents to such inspections. The right of entry, inspection and
examination shall include the right to take photographs, obtain
biological samples and remove ill or injured animals from the premises
for treatment and evidence. The permit holder shall be responsible for
the costs of all inspections and examinations and shall pay any fees for
such inspections and examinations within 10 days of notice of the costs
and fees. A failure to pay shall be a reason to suspend or revoke the
permit. The Village may pursue all remedies available at law and equity
for collection of such costs and fees owed to it.
(j) Operator requirements.
(1) Record of sale. Each permit holder under this section shall keep
accurate records of each dog, cat or bird sale for a minimum period
of 12 months after the date of sale or transfer of such animal, and
shall include the source of such animal, date of sale, description,
approximate age, sex of animal sold, and the name and address of
purchaser. Records of sales of small mammals and fish are not
required.
(2) Record of prophylactic medication and immunization. A record of
prophylactic medication and immunization, the type, amount and
date of each, shall be kept by the permit holder under this section
and shall become a part of the retail sales record.
(3) Dogs, cats and ferrets to be immunized against rabies. No pet shop
operator shall sell or offer for sale any dog, cat or ferret five or
more months old unless the animal has been vaccinated against
rabies by use of an approved live, attenuated rabies virus vaccine
administered by a licensed veterinarian.
(4) Reasonable care. Each permit holder under this section shall take
reasonable care to release for sale, trade or adoption only those
animals which are free of disease, injuries or abnormalities. A
health certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian for any such
animal within 30 days before such sale, trade or adoption is prima
facie evidence that the permit holder has taken reasonable care as
required by this section.
§ 46-500 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-500
1:326
(5) Statutory compliance. Full compliance with the provisions of Wis.
Stats. Ch. 951, shall be mandatory.
(k) Written statement required for purchase. The permit holder under this
section shall furnish the purchaser with a written statement at the time
of sale. The statement shall show:
(1) Date of sale.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of both permit holder and
purchaser.
(3) Breed, description and approximate age, if dog or cat.
(4) Prophylactic medication and immunizations and dates
administered; if none, so state.
(5) Internal parasite medication and date administered; if none, so
state.
(6) Guarantee, if offered; if none, so state.
(l) Standards. All pet shops selling animals, birds and fish as pets shall, in
addition to the other requirements of this section, comply with the
following standards. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds
for denial, suspension or revocation of a permit:
(1) All animals, birds or fish shall be displayed in a healthy condition,
or, if ill, removed from display and shall be given appropriate
treatment immediately.
(2) All the animals shall be quartered, and the quarters in which the
animals are kept shall be maintained in a clean condition and in a
good state of repair.
(3) The room temperature of the pet shop shall be maintained at a level
that does not present a health hazard to any species of animal kept
in the shop.
(4) There shall be sufficient, clean, dry bedding to meet the needs of
each individual animal. Litter and/or bedding material shall be
changed at least daily and there shall be adequate ventilation to
prevent an odor nuisance.
(5) Feces shall be removed from pens and enclosures at least daily, or
more frequently if necessary to prevent unsanitary conditions and
odor nuisance, and stored in tightly covered containers until final
disposal.
(6) All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for
cleaning and disinfecting and shall have secure latches in good
repair. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the animal will
have room to stand, turn and stretch out to its full length. Cages
will be cleaned every day, including Sundays and holidays.
§ 46-500 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-500
1:327
(7) The floor and walls of any room in which animals are kept shall be
covered with impervious, smooth, cleanable surfaces. The floors
and walls shall be cleaned and disinfected as often as necessary to
prevent an odor nuisance.
(8) The premises shall be kept free of insect and rodent infestations.
Food supplies shall be stored in rodentproof containers.
(9) There shall be available hot water for washing cages. Fresh
drinking water shall be available to all species at all times. All
water containers shall be mounted so that the animal cannot easily
turn them over and shall be removable for cleaning.
(10) Food for all dogs and cats shall be served in a clean dish, so
mounted that the animal cannot readily tip it over or defecate or
urinate in such dish.
(11) Adult dogs and cats shall be fed at least once a day. In the case of
young dogs and cats, they shall be fed more than once daily. All
other animals and birds must be fed and watered according to the
accepted procedure for that species.
(12) The permittee or its representative shall be present for general
care and maintenance of animals at least once daily.
(13) Shade is required. Shade from the direct rays of the sun shall be
provided for all animals.
(14) Each bird must have sufficient room to sit on a perch. Perches shall
be placed horizontally to each other in the same cage. Cages must
be cleaned every day and cages must be disinfected when birds are
sold. Parrots and other large birds shall have separate cages from
smaller birds.
(15) Cats shall be provided with litter pans at all times. The pans shall
be cleaned and sanitized at least once daily, or more often if
necessary.
(16) Any permit holder offering medication with the sale of an Animal
shall take steps to ensure that such medication is properly labeled
for ease of identification, should it be accidentally ingested.
(m) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subjected to a forfeiture of not less than $300 or more
than $1,000 for each violation, and in addition, shall pay the costs and
expenses of prosecution. Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
§ 46-500 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 46-500
1:328
Chapter 50
MOBILE HOMES
§ 50-1. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 12.10(1)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
LICENSEE — Any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home
park.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Village.
MOBILE HOME — That which is, or was as originally constructed, designed
to be transported by any motor vehicle upon a public highway and designed,
equipped and used primarily for sleeping, eating and living quarters or
is intended to be so used, and includes any addition, attachment, annex,
foundation and appurtenance, except a house trailer is not deemed a mobile
home if the assessable value of such addition, attachment, annex,
foundation and appurtenance equals or exceeds 50% of the assessable value
of the house trailer.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot of ground upon which two or more units,
occupied for dwelling and sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of
whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
MOBILE HOME, DEPENDENT — A mobile home which does not have
complete bathroom facilities.
MOBILE HOME, NONDEPENDENT — A mobile home equipped with
complete bath and toilet facilities, all furniture, cooking and heating
appliances, and complete year-round facilities.
PARK — A mobile home park.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY — The highest degree of protection against
infection, contagion, disease and fire that a trailer camp or mobile home
park will reasonably permit.
SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park which is designed for
the accommodation of one mobile home unit.
TRAILER — Any vehicle, house car, camp car, or portable or mobile vehicle
on wheels, skids, rollers or blocks, either self-propelled or propelled by any
other means, which is used or designed to be used for residential, living or
sleeping purposes.
TRAILER CAMP — Any area or premises on which space available for two
or more trailers is rented or held for rent, or on which free occupancy or
camping for such number of trailers is permitted to trailer owners, but not
§ 46-500 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-1
1:329
including automobile or trailer sales lots on which only unoccupied trailers
are parked for purposes of inspection or sale.
TRAILER SITE — A tract or parcel of land on which one or more trailers are
usually kept or parked.
UNIT — A mobile home unit.
§ 50-2. Permanent residence. [Code 1993, § 12.10(2)]
No person shall establish a permanent residence in a trailer or mobile home
located in the Village unless the trailer or mobile home shall be located
in a trailer camp or mobile home park or is wholly located at least 1,000
feet from the near side of any other structure, whether or not such other
structure is used for human habitation. A person shall be deemed to be
using a trailer or mobile home as a permanent residence within the meaning
of this chapter if such person has used the trailer or mobile home for human
habitation for a period of 60 days within a period of six continuous months.
§ 50-3. Trailer camp and mobile home park licenses. [Code 1993,
§ 12.01(8), 12.10(3); Ord. No. 14-2009, § 25, 10-26, 2009]
(a) Required. No person shall construct, establish, place, operate, maintain
or offer for public use, with or without compensation, any trailer camp
or mobile home park in the Village without first obtaining a license to do
so from the Village Board. The total number of units, trailers or mobile
homes that may be parked or kept in any one trailer camp or mobile
home park pursuant to such license is limited to 100 units, trailers or
mobile homes.
(b) Application; fees. Application for such license shall be filed with the
Clerk-Treasurer on a form prescribed by the Village Board and shall
contain a statement of the name and address of the applicant; the
location and legal description of the trailer camp or mobile home park,
giving the address, exterior dimensions, maximum number of trailers or
mobile homes to be accommodated, the actual or proposed sanitary
facilities and fire prevention to be maintained and such other pertinent
information as the Village Board may require. Such application shall be
accompanied by a plat or plan of the trailer camp or mobile home park
showing the actual or proposed location of all trailers or mobile homes,
the location of streets, the location of toilets, showers or baths and all
other sanitary facilities, the location of fire prevention apparatus, the
location of lighting facilities and such other information as the Village
Board may require. Such application shall be accompanied by a license
fee computed according to the number of trailers or mobile homes
located in such trailer camp or mobile home park on the date such
application is filed with the Clerk-Treasurer, as follows:
(1) Fifty or less mobile homes, as set by the Village Board. (Also see
Wis. Stats. § 66.0435.)
§ 50-1 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 50-3
1:330
§ 50-4. Trailer camp and mobile home park requirements. [Code
1993, § 12.10(4); Ord. No. 14-2009, § 26, 10-26, 2009]
(2) Each additional 50 trailers or mobile homes, or fraction thereof, as
set by the Village Board.
(c) Determination of fees in excess of $100. In determining the amount of
such license fee in excess of $100, trailers or mobile homes located in
any trailer camp or mobile home park solely for storage purposes or
sale, or both, and which are not used or offered for use for residential,
living or sleeping purposes, shall not be counted in determining the
number of trailers or mobile homes located in any such trailer camp or
mobile home park.
(d) Consent to inspections. By filing such application, the applicant shall be
deemed to have consented to an inspection, prior to the issuance of the
license, by the Village Board and any appropriate Village official for the
purpose of determining whether or not such license should be granted.
(e) Issuance or denial. The Village Board may issue or deny a license in the
exercise of its discretion, having due regard to the effect of the
establishment of such trailer camp or mobile home park upon the public
health, safety and welfare. Not more than one license shall be issued for
the location of a trailer camp or mobile home park in any one common
school district of the Village as such common school district is defined
by statute, if such development would cause the school costs to
increase above the state average or if an exceedingly difficult or
impossible situation exists with regard to providing adequate and
proper sewage disposal therein, provided that such prohibition as to the
number of licenses that may be issued for trailer camps or mobile home
parks located in a common school district shall not apply to trailer
camps or mobile home parks located in the Village on the date the
ordinance from which this subsection is derived becomes effective.
(f) Applications for renewal; transferability; posting. Application for a
license renewal shall be filed in the same manner as an application for
an original license and upon payment of the applicable fee as provided
in Subsection (b) of this section. Such license shall not be transferable
either as to the applicant or as to the licensed premises. Such license,
when issued, shall be and remain posted in a conspicuous place at the
licensed premises at all times that the license remains in force.
(a) Conditions of license. Every trailer camp or mobile home park for which
a license is issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
established, maintained and operated in strict conformity with the
provisions of this chapter and, by acceptance of such license, the
licensee shall be deemed to have agreed with the Village Board to
comply with all of the provisions of this chapter and to consent to the
entry on the licensed premises by any Village official at all reasonable
times for the purpose of inspecting the premises.
§ 50-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-4
1:331
(b) Drainage and sewage. Every trailer camp or mobile home park shall be
located on a well drained site and shall be graded or adequately drained
to eliminate the collection of surface waters at any point therein.
Adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of all sewage by
means of duly constructed and maintained septic tanks or other lawful
sewage disposal equipment. All provisions for sewage disposal shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions
of the Village and state plumbing codes.
(c) Water supply. A supply of pure water for drinking and domestic
purposes shall be provided in an amount sufficient to care for the needs
of the maximum number of persons capable of being accommodated
therein. All wells supplying water for such camp shall be constructed
and maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
state well construction code.
(d) Toilets, showers, baths and laundry tubs. There shall be established and
maintained in every trailer camp or mobile home park a separate toilet
and shower or bath for each sex per each 10 trailers or mobile homes,
and a two-compartment laundry tub, with running water, for each of 10
units. All such toilets, showers, baths, laundry tubs and water facilities
shall be connected to the sewage disposal system or have separate and
adequate disposal facilities therein for each waste product, as the
circumstances require, and all of the facilities shall be maintained in
good working order. All toilets, showers, baths and laundry tubs shall
have concrete floors and every room in which a toilet is located shall
have at least one window. Toilets shall be water flushed.
(e) Garbage and refuse receptacles. Every trailer camp or mobile home
park shall be provided with a sufficient number of light metal
receptacles, with close-fitting metal covers, for garbage and refuse, and
such receptacles shall be emptied at least once each week.
(f) Spacing. Every trailer or mobile home in a trailer camp or mobile home
park shall be located on a space not less than 1,000 square feet in area,
and all such spaces shall be arranged in rows, facing on a continuous
driveway which is at least 25 feet in width, and each space shall have a
frontage on such driveway of at least 30 feet. No structure shall be
located closer than 10 feet to the exterior boundary line of any space.
No lean-to, shack, tent, room or similar structure of a detachable nature
shall be attached to any trailer or mobile home located in a trailer camp
or mobile home park, other than as may be required for the housing of
equipment for the furnishing of power, light, water, gas or similar
service to such trailer or mobile home. Any and all extensions in the
area of a trailer camp or mobile home park existing on the date the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived takes effect, made after
such date, as well as all trailer camps or mobile home parks constructed
after such date, shall be laid out and maintained with regard to the
spacing of trailers or mobile homes located, or to be located, therein, so
as to meet the requirements of this subsection or the requirements of
§ 50-4 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 50-4
1:332
the county zoning ordinance, as applicable thereto, whichever requires
the greater area of such spacing.
(g) Lighting. Every trailer camp or mobile home park and every toilet,
shower, bath and laundry shall be provided with adequate lighting
facilities to make them safe for use at all times. All lights for the lighting
of the trailer camp or mobile home park, in general, and the driveways
therein, shall be kept lighted from one-half hour after sunset until
sunrise of the following day.
(h) Foundations. All trailer sites and mobile home spaces shall be of
concrete or an equivalent material.
(i) Registration. A person to whom a license is granted for the operation of
any trailer camp or mobile home park shall maintain a register in which
shall be registered the name and permanent address of every person
using the trailer camp or mobile home park, a description of every
trailer or mobile home located in the trailer camp or mobile home park,
together with the license number of the automobile or other vehicle and
the trailer or mobile home. Such register shall be open at all times for
inspection by any official of the Village.
(j) Health and safety. The person to whom a license is issued under the
provisions of § 50-3 shall promptly report to the Building Inspector of
the Village the name of every person located upon the licensed
premises whom such licensee knows, or has reason to believe, is
infected with a contagious disease. Every trailer or mobile home shall
have at least one fire extinguisher, which shall at all times be
maintained in good working order. The person to whom a license is
granted under this chapter shall at all times maintain and operate the
trailer camp or mobile home park for the protection of the public health
and safety. All regulations of the state department of health in effect
relating to the establishment and maintenance of trailer camps or
mobile home parks and which are not in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a part of this subsection with the same
force and effect as though set forth in full in this subsection, and the
person to whom a license is issued under this chapter shall be
responsible for the enforcement of all such regulations of the state
department of health in the trailer camp or mobile home park for which
such license is issued.
(k) Residence. No person, except the licensee to whom a license is issued
for the operation of a trailer camp under the provisions of this chapter
and the members of his immediate family, shall reside in any trailer
camp so licensed for a period of more than six months in any one year,
whether such residence shall be continuous or at intermittent periods.
Every person to whom such a license is issued shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter, and shall promptly report to the Village
Board the name of any person residing in such trailer camp in violation
of the provisions of this chapter, together with all information
concerning such person and his property as is included in the register
§ 50-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-4
1:333
§ 50-5. License revocation. [Code 1993, § 12.10(5)]
Any person to whom a license has been issued under this chapter who is
found to be in violation of any of the provisions of §§ 50-3 and 50-4, or
fails to pay, or cause to be paid, any special assessment levied against the
trailer camp or mobile home park within a period of 10 days after such
special assessment is required to be paid, may be subject to revocation
of his license under the provisions of this chapter. Upon revocation of any
license issued under this chapter, no refund of the license fee shall be made
and the Village Board may refuse to grant to such person any further license
under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 50-6. Monthly parking fee imposed. [Code 1993, § 12.10(6)]
There is imposed on each occupied, nonexempt mobile home located in the
Village, a monthly parking fee as determined in Wis. Stats. § 66.0435. Such
fees shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer on or before the 10th day of the
month following the month for which such fees are due.
§ 50-7. Zoning. [Code 1993, § 12.10(7)]
Whenever there is any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of any applicable zoning ordinance, the provision which is the
most restrictive shall apply with respect to the establishment and operation
of any trailer camp or mobile home park in the Village.
§ 50-8. Nondependent mobile homes. [Code 1993, § 12.10(8)]
A mobile home park harboring only nondependent mobile homes shall not
be subject to the provisions of § 50-4(d).
Chapter 54
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 54-1. Weapons. [Code 1993, § 9.02]
required to be maintained by such licensee under the provisions of
Subsection (i) of this section.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
PERMITTED WEAPON — A shotgun with a load not to exceed BB shot,
and any bow and arrow, but not including crossbows.
WEAPON — Any gun, pistol, rifle, airgun or other device used to
propel a missile in the form of a ball, bullet, slug, BB shot or pellet,
whether the propelling force is gunpowder, an explosive, compressed
air, mechanical action or any other force.
§ 50-4 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 54-1
1:334
(b) Discharge.
(1) Prohibited area. No person shall discharge a weapon within the
area in the Village described as follows:
Commencing at the most southeasterly point of the Village, at
Lake Michigan, proceed westerly on CTH KR, as extended, to
its intersection with STH 31; thence north on STH 31 to its
intersection with Braun Road; thence west on Braun Road to its
intersection with 90th Street; thence following the westerly
boundary line of the Village of Sturtevant to its intersection with
CTH H, north of STH 11; thence north on CTH H to its intersection
with Fancher Road; thence north on Fancher Road to its
intersection with Gittings Road; thence east on Gittings Road to its
intersection with Airline Road; thence south on Airline Road to its
intersection with CTH C; thence east on CTH C to its intersection
with Emmertsen Road; thence north on Emmertsen Road to its
intersection with STH 38; thence east on STH 38 to the
easternmost Village limits.
(2) Farmers. The prohibition set forth in Subsection (b)(1) of this
section shall not apply to a farmer owning not less than 10 acres
who may use a weapon for rodent control on his own premises,
provided the missile discharged will stop on or over such farmer's
land.
(3) Use of permitted weapons.
a. Permit required. No person shall discharge a permitted
weapon or use a bow and arrow at any time within the
prohibited area described in Subsection (b)(1) of this section,
except the owner of any land within such area may apply to the
Police Department for a yearly permit to discharge a permitted
weapon or use a bow and arrow on such owner's land. Such
owner shall then certify to the Chief of Police that any
discharge of a permitted weapon or use of a bow and arrow can
occur without danger to any other resident of the Village and,
in any event, that any discharge of a permitted weapon or use
of a bow and arrow can occur not less than 500 feet from any
public or private street, alley, highway, park, picnic ground,
playground, railroad right-of-way, dwelling, industrial
business, professional or mercantile establishment or any
school, hospital or other institution. If the Chief of Police or his
designee is satisfied that such land can be so used, he shall
grant a permit, which shall contain a description of the owner
and his land, together with a statement that such permit may
be revoked upon conviction of a violation of any ordinance
relating to such issuance, or county ordinance or law which
relates to illegal weapons discharge. A permit may be denied
or revoked if conditions of the land or surrounding lands
change so as to no longer be in compliance with this section. If
§ 54-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-1
1:335
the Chief of Police or his designee declines to issue such
permit, the affected owner may appeal such decision to the
Village Board for review.
b. Guests of permittees. A person who is a guest of the owner who
has been issued a permit under Subsection (b)(3)a of this
section may discharge a permitted weapon or use a bow and
arrow on the land of the permittee, provided such guest has
the owner's written permission on his person at the time.
(4) Possession of weapons. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, no person shall have any weapon, whether a permitted
weapon or otherwise, in the prohibited area described in
Subsection (b)(1) of this section where a permit to discharge a
permitted weapon or use a bow and arrow has not been issued,
unless such weapon, whether a permitted weapon or otherwise, is
unloaded and enclosed in a carrying case or other suitable
container or is unslung in the case of a bow and arrow.
(5) Exceptions.
a. A person may discharge a weapon within the Village only in the
following specific cases:
1. As permitted by Subsection (b)(2) of this section.
2. A public official while in the lawful discharge of official
duty.
3. A member of the Armed Forces of the United States or the
state while in the lawful discharge of his official duty.
4. Any person while in the lawful defense of his person or
property.
5. Any person while on a clearly defined target range or
shooting gallery, provided the missile discharged will stop
on or over the target range or shooting gallery.
6. Any person outside the prohibited area described in
Subsection (b)(1) of this section, if he is the owner of such
land or a guest of the owner of such land who has written
permission of the owner on his person at the time; is at
least 500 feet from any public or private street, alley,
highway, park, picnic ground, playground, railroad, rightof-
way, dwelling, industrial business, professional or
mercantile establishment, or any school, hospital or
institution; and the missile discharged will stop on or over
such land.
b. Crossbows may be permitted by the Chief of Police or his
designee beyond the prohibited area described in Subsection
(b)(1) of this section. Any person desiring to use a crossbow
§ 54-1 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 54-1
1:336
§ 54-2. Fireworks. [Code 1993, § 9.03]
shall be properly licensed under law and the Chief of Police
shall issue permits in accordance with Subsection (b)(3) of this
section.
(6) This section shall not apply to the legal use of a bow and arrow or
crossbow while engaged in hunting during the legally established
seasons set forth by the State of Wisconsin, provided:
a. No person engaged in archery hunting activity may discharge a
bow and arrow or crossbow within 300 feet of a building
devoted to human occupancy unless the property owner who
owns the property on which the building is located on permits
the hunter to hunt within 300 feet of the building.
b. All persons engaged in archery hunting activity are required to
fire all projectiles toward the ground.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FIREWORKS — Any firecracker, blank, cartridge, toy pistol or cannon,
or cane in which explosives are used, contrivances using nonpaper caps
or cartridges, sparklers, display wheels, the type of balloons which
require fire underneath to propel them, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman
candles, aerial salutes, American or Chinese bombs, or other devices
of similar construction and any similar device containing any explosive
or flammable compound, nitrate, chlorate, exalate, sulphide of lead,
barium, antimony, arsenic, mercury, nitroglycerine, phosphorous or any
compound of thereof and commonly known as fireworks.
(b) Prohibited; exemptions. No person shall sell, expose or offer for sale,
use, keep, discharge or explode any fireworks in the Village.
(1) Such ban shall not apply to any of the following, as may be
commonly found in permanent retail outlets, such as department
stores and supermarkets:
a. Toy pistols, canes, guns or other devices using paper caps
made in accordance with U.S. Interstate Commerce
Commission regulations. Paper caps are also permitted.
b. Gold star producing sparklers on wires which contain no
magnesium, chlorate or perchlorate.
c. Toy snakes which contain no mercury.
d. Smoke and party novelties which contain less than 1/4 gram of
explosive mixtures.
§ 54-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-2
1:337
§ 54-3. Trespassing on land. [Code 1993, § 9.04]
No person shall intentionally enter upon any land of another, for any
purpose whatsoever, without the express or implied consent of the owner or
occupant thereof. Consent shall be implied only when the person entering
the lands of another does so for business or social reasons and confines his
entrance to established driveways or sidewalks.
§ 54-4. Certain trespasses. [Code 1993, § 9.05]
No person shall remain in or on any private property, land, dwelling or
business establishment after consent to remain has been expressly
withdrawn by the owner of such private property, land, dwelling or business
establishment or by his agent or representative.
§ 54-5. Unreasonable noise. [Code 1993, § 9.06; Ord. No. 8-02,
8-12-2002; Ord. No. 10-2004, § 9.06, 11-8-2004]
(2) The list of fireworks set forth in Subsection (b)(1) of this section
may only be used on private property and shall not be permitted on
public property. Streets, alleys, parks and parkways are considered
public property where fireworks are banned.
(c) Exceptions. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the use of
fireworks in the following circumstances:
(1) Pyrotechnic displays given by public authorities, fair associations,
amusement parks, park boards, civic organizations or groups of
individuals when a permit to do so has been issued by the Fire
Chief or his designee. The Fire Chief may issue such permits as he
deems advisable under the circumstances of each case, but the
issuance of any such permit shall not be deemed a guarantee by the
Fire Department or the Village that the use of any fireworks shall
be safe. In addition, the Fire Chief or his designee may specify in
such permit the days when the permit is valid and may further limit
the times of the day when the pyrotechnic display may be held. If
the Fire Chief denies a request for a permit, the applicant may
appeal to the Village Board to review the Fire Chief's decision.
(2) The use or sale of blank cartridges for circus or theatrical
purposes, signal purposes in athletic contests or sports events, or
the use by militia, police or military organizations, and the use or
sale of colored flares or torpedoes for railway, aircraft or highway
signal purposes.
(3) Sale by a resident wholesaler, dealer or jobber at wholesale, but
only when the fireworks are shipped or delivered directly outside
the state or to an organization or group permitted to use the
fireworks under the provisions of Subsection (c)(1) of this section
or statute.
§ 54-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 54-5
1:338
(a) No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in any activity on public or
private property, regardless of its zoning classification, that tends to
annoy, disturb or otherwise irritate any neighboring tenant, land owner,
or person legally entitled to possession thereof, except for the
reasonable noise which occurs in the normal course of reasonable
human activities.
(1) The operation of heavy equipment, construction equipment, lawn
mowers and other residential garden tools shall take place only
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. This provision shall
not apply to the operation of agricultural equipment on land zoned
for agricultural purposes.
(2) No activity in any zoning district other than M-1 Industrial, which
has its own standards, shall produce a sound level outside the
property boundary that exceeds the following sound level
measured by a sound level meter and associated octave ban filter:
Octave Band Frequency
(Cycles Per Second) Sound Level Decibels
0 to 75 72
75 to 150 67
150 to 300 59
300 to 600 52
600 to 1,200 46
1,200 to 2,400 40
2,400 to 4,800 34
Above 4,800 32
(3) Variance permits may be obtained upon application to the Village
Board for special circumstances such as, but not limited to:
a. Work which is necessary to promote public health and/or
welfare including road construction and reasonable steps are
taken to keep such noise at the lowest possible practical level.
b. Special community events, such as circuses, 4th of July
Celebrations and other similar community events.
c. Existing business operations and equipment which produce
excessive noise if it is found that it is not technically or
economically feasible to alter such operation to reduce noise to
the standard prescribed by this section. Such variance permit
may be of a duration set by the Village Board after considering
all existing circumstances.
(b) No person shall operate any motor vehicle or any other recreational
vehicle such as a dirt bike, trail bike, ATV or snowmobile without a
§ 54-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-5
1:339
§ 54-6. 911 emergency telephone system. [Code 1993, § 9.07]
functioning muffler or in such a manner as to create unreasonable or
excessive noise.
(c) The Village Board acting through the Village Administrator shall
administer the provisions of this section. Citations as to violations of
this section may be issued on complaint of the Village Board by the
Village Administrator or Police Department. Violations of this section
shall be penalized by a fine not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for
any occurrence. Each day of unabated or continuing violations shall be
deemed a separate offense and fined accordingly.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
911 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM — Has the meaning specified
in Wis. Stats. § 146.70(1)(i).
(b) Regulated use.
(1) No person shall use the 911 emergency telephone system for
regular business or nonemergency telephone calls. If the identity of
such caller is not, or cannot, be determined, the person or entity to
whom the 911 service is billed shall be deemed to be in violation of
this section.
(2) No person shall intentionally dial the telephone number 911 to
report an emergency knowing that the situation which he reports
does not exist.
(c) Violations; penalties. Any person convicted of a violation of this section
shall forfeit not less than $25, nor more than $300, plus costs and
penalty assessments, for the first offense, and not less than $50, nor
more than $750, plus costs and penalty assessments, for the second and
subsequent offenses, and in default of payment thereof, may be
confined in the county jail for not more than 30 days.
(d) Forfeiture in lieu of court appearance. Any person charged with the
offenses listed under this section may, in lieu of a court appearance, pay
the following amounts at the Police Department:
(1) Nonemergency use of 911:
a. First offense: $30.
b. Second and subsequent offenses: $60.
(2) Intentional violation of 911:
a. First offense: $150.
b. Second and subsequent offenses: $300.
§ 54-5 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 54-7
1:340
§ 54-7. Parties to ordinance violations. [Code 1993, § 9.10]
§ 54-8. Alcohol beverages. [Code 1993, § 9.11]
§ 54-9. Loitering. [Code 1993, § 9.12]
(a) Any person who is concerned in the commission of an ordinance
violation is a principal and may be charged with, and found guilty of, the
commission of the ordinance violation although he did not directly
commit the violation, and although the person who directly committed
the violation has not been found guilty or has been found guilty of some
other ordinance violation based on the same act.
(b) A person is concerned in the commission of an ordinance violation if he:
(1) Directly commits the ordinance violation;
(2) Intentionally aids and abets the commission of the ordinance
violation; or
(3) Is a party to a conspiracy with another to commit, or advises, hires,
counsels or otherwise procures another to commit, the violation.
Such a party is also concerned in the commission of any other
ordinance violation which is committed in the pursuance of the
intended ordinance violation. This subsection does not apply to a
person who voluntarily changes his mind and no longer desires that
the ordinance violation be committed and notifies the other parties
concerned of his withdrawal within a reasonable time before the
commission of the ordinance violation so as to allow the others also
to withdraw.
(c) Any person who violates the provisions of Subsection (a) of this section
shall forfeit such sum not exceeding the maximum forfeiture permitted
for the violation of the ordinance in question, nor less than the
minimum forfeiture so permitted, and in default of payment, by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than the term permitted
for such violation of an ordinance.
(a) Selling, serving or giving to another in public. No person shall sell,
serve or give to another person, or offer to sell, serve or give to another
person, any fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor while upon
any public street or sidewalk, or within a parked motor vehicle located
on any street or upon any parking lot open to the public, whether
privately owned or not, within the Village.
(b) Consumption or possession in public. No person shall consume or
possess an open container containing any fermented malt beverage or
intoxicating liquor while upon any public street or sidewalk, or within a
parked vehicle located on any street or upon any parking lot open to the
public, whether privately owned or not, within the Village.
§ 54-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-9
1:341
§ 54-10. Littering. [Code 1993, § 9.13]
No person shall throw, place or deposit, or allow to be thrown, placed or
deposited, any type of handbill, circular, debris, foodstuff or waste material
(a) No person shall loiter in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for
law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the
safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances
which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is
warranted is the fact that such person takes flight upon appearance of a
police officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to
conceal himself or any object.
(b) Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it practicable,
a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this
section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which
would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify
himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be
convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer did not
comply with the such requirement or, if it appears at trial that the
explanation given by the person was true and, if believed by the police
officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
(c) No person shall stand, assemble or loiter upon any sidewalk, street,
public ground or public way in the Village so as to obstruct, hinder or
impede free passage upon or along such sidewalk, street, public ground
or public way, or obstruct, hinder or impede free ingress or egress to
and from any place of business, institution, public building or property.
No person so assembled shall refuse or neglect to move or depart, or
give free passage after being requested to do so by the owner, lessee,
tenant, manager or occupant of such obstructed premises or upon
order of any police officer in the Village.
(d) No person shall hide, wait or otherwise loiter in the vicinity of any
private dwelling, house, apartment building or any other place of
residence with the intent to watch, gaze or look upon the occupants
therein in a clandestine manner.
(e) No person shall loiter in or about any toilet open to the public for the
purpose of engaging in or soliciting any lewd, lascivious or unlawful act.
(f) No person shall lodge in any building, structure or place, whether
public or private, without the permission of the owner or person in
possession or control thereof.
(g) No person shall loiter in or about a restaurant, tavern or other public
building. As used in this subsection, the term "loiter" means to, without
just cause, remain in a restaurant, tavern or public building, or remain
upon the property immediately adjacent thereto, after being asked to
leave by the owner or person entitled to possession or in control thereof
or by any police officer.
§ 54-9 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 54-10
1:342
upon any street, alley, vehicle, waterway, beach, park, sidewalk or other
public or private place within the Village, or allow the accumulation of
debris or waste material upon any premises other than in designated trash
receptacles.
§ 54-11. Curfew. [Code 1993, § 9.14]
(a) Imposed. No minor person under the age of 18 years shall loiter, idle,
wander, play or otherwise be upon the streets, alleys, highways, roads,
sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, public grounds or vacant lots, either on
foot or in or on a vehicle of any nature, in the Village between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Sunday — Thursday, and between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday, unless
such minor is accompanied by either of his parents, his guardian or
other person having the legal custody of such minor, is engaged in
interstate travel or on the sidewalk in front of the residence of the
minor as allowed by law.
(b) Exceptions.
(1) The curfew imposed in Subsection (a) of this section does not apply
to minors who are returning home from functions authorized by
schools, churches or other civic organizations, provided such
minors take the shortest and most direct route and as fast as
reasonably possible under the circumstances.
(2) This section does not apply to minors whose employment makes it
necessary to be upon such public streets, alleys, highways, roads,
sidewalks, parks, playgrounds or other public places in the time
restricted, but in such event, such minors must carry a pass issued
by the superintendent of police and they must use the shortest and
most direct route going to the place of employment from the
minor's home and returning home from such place of employment.
(c) Parental responsibility. No parent, guardian or other person having
legal custody of any minor person under the age of 18 years shall
knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, play or otherwise
be, either on foot or on or in a vehicle of any nature, upon the streets,
alleys, highways, roads, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, public grounds
or vacant lots between the hours and days specified in Subsection (a) of
this section, unless such minor is:
(1) Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person having
the legal custody of such minor;
(2) Returning home from functions authorized by schools, churches or
otherwise recognized civic organizations; or
(3) Going to or returning home from work as specified in this section.
§ 54-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-11
1:343
§ 54-12. Rummage and garage sales. [Code 1993, § 4.15; Ord. No.
13-2004, § 9.15, 12-13-2004]
The owner of any property within the Village which is not zoned
commercial, pursuant to Chapter 90 of this Code, may conduct no more
than three rummage or garage sales, during any calendar year, on premises
owned by the seller, and any such sale shall be limited to a period of not
more than 72 consecutive hours within any one week. A week shall be
deemed to commence on any Monday.
§ 54-13. Obscenity defined. [Code 1993, § 9.17]
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
OBSCENITY — As defined in Wis. Stats. § 944.21, is adopted by reference in
this section as if fully set forth in this section, and shall apply to this section.
§ 54-14. Racing. [Code 1993, § 9.18]
No person shall set up for operation, maintain, keep, permit or engage in
any race or contest of speed in the Village which race or contest employs
therein any vehicle or animal, other than human beings.
§ 54-15. Fortune tellers. [Code 1993, § 9.19]
(d) Violations; penalties. Any minor under the age of 18 years who shall
violate any of the provisions of this section shall be dealt with in
accordance with Wis. Stats. Ch. 48.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CLAIRVOYANT — Any person who shall assume preternatural
knowledge in a trance or similar unconsciousness and thereby pretend
to foretell the future of others.
FAKERS, OTHER — All other readers or interpreters, by whatever name
called, who pretend or purport to reveal the past or foretell the future
or destiny of others or any person giving, or offering to give, personal
advice because of any pretended skill, power or ability based upon any
of the practices set forth in this section.
FORTUNE TELLER — Any person who pretends to reveal the past or
future of others.
PALMIST — Any person who attempts to foretell the future of others by
purporting to read the marks or other appearances of the hand or arm.
PHRENOLOGIST — Any person who attempts to give information to
others to the effect that the faculties of the mind or of character are
manifested through special organs or formations of the body, or are in
§ 54-11 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 54-15
1:344
§ 54-16. Auto sales and repairs. [Code 1993, § 9.22]
separate portions of the head, brain or other parts of the body, whether
or not such person attempts to foretell the future of others.
READER, CHARACTER — (See the definition of the term Reader,
spiritual.)
READER, MYSTIC — Any person who professes direct or indirect divine
or similar illumination or relies chiefly upon meditation in acquiring
pretended facts as to the past or future of others.
READER, SPIRITUAL — Any person who pretends to read the character
of others or foretell their future by pretending to read or understand
the soul or spirit of others.
(b) Purpose. This section and the provisions contained in this section are
made necessary by the fraudulent schemes and practices employed by
the persons particularly named in this section upon the people of the
Village, and regulation of such businesses by license or permit would
not prevent such fraud; therefore, such businesses are prohibited in the
Village.
(c) Prohibited. No person shall engage in the practice or business, or
pretended business, of fortune teller, palmist, mystic reader, spiritual
and character reader, clairvoyant, phrenologist or other faker, or in any
other pretended science by which such person accepts or obtains any
fee or other consideration from the patron.
(d) Advertising. No person shall advertise any of the businesses or
pretended businesses set forth in Subsection (a) of this section.
(a) The owner of any residentially zoned property in the Village, pursuant
to Chapter 90 of this Code, may permit no more than a total of three
motor vehicles to be offered or exposed for sale on such property during
any calendar year.
(b) No person shall offer or expose for sale a motor vehicle on residentially
zoned property without the written permission of the owner of such
property.
(c) No person shall, during any calendar year, offer or expose for sale a
motor vehicle on residentially zoned property on which three motor
vehicles have been offered or exposed for sale during that calendar
year.
(d) The owner of any residentially zoned property in the Village, pursuant
to Chapter 90 of this Code, may permit no more than four motor
vehicles to be repaired on such property during any calendar year.
(e) No person shall repair a motor vehicle on residentially zoned property
without the written permission of the owner of such property.
§ 54-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-16
1:345
§ 54-17. Habitual truant. [Code 1993, § 9.23]
§ 54-18. Violations; penalties. [Code 1993, § 9.25]
Except as otherwise provided, any person found to be in violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in
§ 1-15.
§ 54-19. Offenses against state laws subject to forfeiture. [Code
1993, § 9.29.288 — 9.961.575(2)]
The following statutes defining offenses against the peace and good order
of the state are adopted by reference to define offenses against the peace
and good order of the Village, provided the penalty for commission of such
offenses hereunder shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under § 1-15 of
this Code of Ordinances. The offenses include, but are not limited to, the
following:
125.07(4)(a) Underage Drinking Violations-Procedures or
Attempts to Procure
125.07(4)(b) Underage Drinking Violations-Possesses or
Consumes
125.085(3)(b) Identification Card Violations
125.09(2) School Related Possession of Alcohol Beverages
134.71(1) Violations by Secondhand Dealers
167.32 Body Passing, Object Passing or Bringing
Alcohol into a Sports Facility
175.25 Illegal Storage of Junked Vehicles
(f) No person shall, during any calendar year, repair a motor vehicle on
residentially zoned property on which four motor vehicles have been
repaired during that calendar year.
(g) For the purposes of this section, the term "motor vehicle" shall have the
definition given by Wis. Stats. § 340.01(35).
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
HABITUAL TRUANT — A pupil who is absent from school, without an
acceptable excuse under Wis. Stats. § 118.16(1)(a), for either part or all
of five or more days out of 10 consecutive days on which school is held
during the school semester, or part or all of 10 or more days on which
school is held during a school semester.
(b) If a person is found guilty of habitual truancy under this section, the
municipal court may impose any one or more of the dispositions
provided for in Wis. Stats. § 118.163(2).
§ 54-16 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 54-19
1:346
285.30(6) Pollution by Motor Vehicle/Tampering with
Pollution Control System
939.05 Parties to Crime
939.22 Words and Phrases Defined
939.32 Attempt
940.19(1) Battery
941.01 Negligent Operation of Vehicle (Off Roadway)
941.10 Negligent Handling of Burning Material
941.12(2), (3) Interfering with Fire Fighting
941.13 False Alarms
941.20(1) Reckless Use of Weapons
941.23 Carrying Concealed Weapon
941.24 Possession of Switchblade Knife
942.10 Privacy Protected
943.01(1) Criminal Damage to Property (Less Than
$1,000)
943.07(1)(3) Criminal Damage to Railroad
943.07(4) Intentionally Depositing Debris on Railroad
943.11 Entry Into Locked Vehicle
943.125 Entry Into Locked Coin Box
943.13 Trespass to Land
943.14 Criminal Trespass to Dwelling
943.20 Theft ($2,500 or Less)
943.21 Fraud on Hotel or Restaurant Keeper ($2,500 or
Less)
943.22 Use of Cheating Tokens
943.23(2) Operate Auto Without Owner's Consent
943.24 Issue of Worthless Checks (Less Than $2,500)
943.34(1) Receiving Stolen Property, Value Less Than
$2,500
943.37 Alteration of Property Identification Marks
943.41(2), (3)(a) — (d),
or (4)(b)
Credit Card Crimes Value Less than $2,500
943.50 Retail Theft (Shoplifting)
944.15 Fornication
944.17 Sexual Gratification
§ 54-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-19
1:347
944.20 Lewd and Lascivious Behavior
944.30 Prostitution
944.31 Patronizing Prostitutes
944.33(1) Pandering
944.36 Solicitations Prohibited
945.01 Definitions Relating to Gambling
945.02 Gambling
945.04 Permitting Promises to be Used for Commercial
Gambling
946.06 Improper Use of Flag
946.32 False Swearing
946.40 Refusing to Aid Officer
946.41 Resisting or Obstructing Officer
946.42(1) Escape
946.69 Falsely Assuming to Act as a Public Officer
946.70 Inpersonating Peace Officer
946.72(2) Tampering with Public Records and Notices
947.01 Disorderly Conduct
947.012 Unlawful Use of Telephone
947.013 Harass or Intimidate Another Person
Intentionally
947.06 Unlawful Assemblies
948.51 Hazing
951.01 — 951.15 Crimes Against Animals
961.41(2d) Unlawful Manufacture/Delivery of controlled
Substance
961.41(3g) Possession of Marijuana
961.41(4) Imitation Controlled Substance
961.573(2) Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
961.574(2) Manufacture/Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia
961.575(2) Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia to a Minor
§ 54-20. Sex offender residency restrictions. [Amended 1-13-2014
by Ord. No. 02-2014; 7-31-2017 by Ord. No. 06-2017]
(a) Findings and intent.
§ 54-19 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 54-20
1:348
(1) Findings. Sex offenders, including sex offenders who use physical
violence or the threat thereof and sex offenders who prey on
children are sex predators who present a serious threat to the
public safety. It is further believed that such persons present an
alarmingly high risk of re-offending once released. Sex offenders
are extremely likely to use physical violence when they offend; and
most sex offenders commit multiple offenses, have more victims
that are never reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of
their crimes. This makes the cost of sex offender victimization to
society great, and justifies efforts to protect the public from it.
Because reducing both opportunity and temptation will minimize
the risk of re-offense for those Sex Offenders who will re-commit
sex offenses against children, there is a compelling need to
separate Sex Offenders from places where children congregate or
play in public places.
(2) Intent. This Ordinance is a regulatory measure aimed at protecting
the health and safety of children in the Village from the risk that
convicted sex offenders may reoffend in locations close to their
residence. The Village establishes these regulations in order to
provide protection to children in the Village by minimizing
immediate access and proximity to children and thereby reducing
opportunity and temptation for recidivism. It is the intent of the
Village Board to protect the safety and welfare of its citizens by
creating zones around places where children regularly gather, in
which certain Sex Offenders are prohibited from establishing
Residency. It is expressly not the intent of the Village Board to
impose additional punishment on Sex Offenders.
(b) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
Ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(1) CHILD or CHILDREN — A person who has not attained the age of
18 years, for purposes of this Ordinance.
(2) SEX OFFENDER — Any person who is or was required to register
under § 301.45, Wisconsin Statutes, for any sexual offense against
a child, or any person who is or was required to register under
§ 301.45, Wisconsin Statutes, and who has been designated a
Special Bulletin (SBN) sex offender pursuant to § 301.46(2) and
(2m), Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) MINOR — A person under the age of 18 years.
(4) RESIDENCE — A place where a person resides or dwells, or is used
by a person as the primary location for basic life functions such as
sleeping or eating; whether short- or long-term but for an
aggregate of 14 or more days in any one-year period.
(5) CHILD SAFETY ZONE — An area within 1,250 feet of any private or
public school, recreational trail, playground, park having a
§ 54-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-20
1:349
children's playground, park having athletic facilities used by
persons younger than 18 years of age, child care center licensed
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 48.65, or group home as defined in Wis.
Stats. § 48.02(7), within the Village of Mount Pleasant.
(c) Residence restriction, exceptions. No Sex Offender shall establish or
maintain a Residence within a Child Safety Zone, except under the
following circumstance:
(1) It is specifically ordered that the Sex Offender reside within a Child
Safety Zone by a circuit court having competent jurisdiction.
(2) The Sex Offender established the Residence within 1,250 feet of a
private or public school, recreational trail, playground, park having
a children's playground, park having athletic facilities used by
persons younger than 18 years of age, licensed day care as defined
in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(7); reported and registered the Residence
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 301.45 before the effective date of this
ordinance, that being January 23, 2014.
(3) The person is excepted from sex-offender registration pursuant to
Wis. Stats. § 301.45(1m).
(4) The private or public school, recreational trail, playground, park
having a children's playground, park having athletic facilities used
by persons younger than 18 years of age, child care center, or
group home around which a Child Safety Zone exists first existed
after the Sex Offender established Residence and reported and
registered the Residence pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 301.45.
(5) The Sex Offender's Residence is within a jail, juvenile facility or
other correctional facility at which the Sex Offender is serving a
court-ordered sentence.
(6) The Sex Offender is a Minor or ward under guardianship and is
residing with his or her parent or guardian. In such cases involving
a Minor or ward placed in accordance with this exception, when the
Minor or ward turns 18 years of age, the Minor or ward shall be
allowed to continue to reside at the already established residence.
(d) Measurement of distances. The boundaries of the Child Safety Zone
shall be determined by measuring from the outer property boundary of
private or public schools, recreational trails, playgrounds, parks having
a children's playground, parks having athletic facilities used by persons
younger than 18 years of age, child care centers, or group homes as
defined in (b)(5), along the shortest line to the outer property boundary
of a Sex Offender's Residence. If any portion of a property is within a
Child Safety Zone, then the entire property shall be deemed within the
Child Safety Zone.
(e) Maps. A map depicting the above-enumerated uses and the resulting
residency restriction distances shall be adopted by Resolution of the
§ 54-20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 54-20
1:350
Village Board, and which map may be amended from time to time, is on
file in the Office of the Village Clerk for public inspection.
(f) Notification. A Sex Offender must notify the Police Department a
minimum of 28 days prior to establishing a Residence within the Village
of Mount Pleasant.
(g) Property owners prohibited from renting real property to certain sexual
offenders and sexual predators. It shall be unlawful for any property
owner to lease or rent any place, structure, mobile home, trailer or any
part thereof, with the knowledge that it will be used as a Residence by
any person prohibited from establishing a Residence therein pursuant
to this Ordinance, if such place, structure, or mobile home, trailer or
any part thereof, is located within a Child Safety Zone as defined in
§ 54-20(b)(5).
(h) Public nuisance. Any violation of this Chapter shall be deemed a public
nuisance affecting peace and safety, and the Village may proceed under
Chapter 62 of the Code of Ordinances and/or Chapter 823 of the
Wisconsin Statutes to abate the nuisance.
(i) Injunction for violation of residence restrictions. If an offender
establishes a Residence in violation of Subsection (c) above, the Chief of
Police may refer the matter to the Village Attorney. The referral shall
include a written determination by the Chief of Police that, upon all of
the facts and circumstances and the purpose and intent of this
Ordinance, such violation interferes substantially with the comfortable
enjoyment of life, health, and safety of another or others. Upon such
referral, the Village Attorney shall bring an action in the name of the
Village in Circuit Court to permanently enjoin such residence as a
public nuisance.
(j) Severability. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this section be declared unconstitutional or invalid, or be repealed, it
shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part
thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid or repealed.
(k) Appeal for an exemption.
(1) A Sex Offender may seek an exemption from this § 54-20 by
appealing to the sex offender residency board (the "Appeals
Board").
(2) The Appeals Board shall consist of three citizens and one alternate
who are residents of the Village. For the initial appointments to the
Appeals Board, the Village President shall appoint three members
to staggered terms of one, two or three years, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board and one alternate to a term of
three years. After the initial appointment of members to a term of
one, two and three years respectively, the Village President shall
annually, between the last Monday of April and the first Monday of
May, appoint one member for a term of three years and one
§ 54-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-20
1:351
alternate for a term of three years every third year, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board. At the first meeting held of the
Appeals Board after the first Monday of May of each year, the
members of the Appeals Board shall vote by majority to select a
chair for its meetings and appeal that come before it.
(3) The Appeals Board shall approve of an official appeal form,
establish filing procedures, a hearing schedule and deadlines for
filing an appeal. A Sex Offender seeking an exemption shall
complete this official form and submit it to the Village Clerk, who
shall forward it to the Appeals Board Notice in the form of an
agenda shall be posted and/or published as required by law and
provided to the Appeals Board.
(4) The Village elects not to be bound by Chapter 68 of Wisconsin
Statutes with respect to administrative procedure in the appeal
process. The Appeals Board shall hold a hearing on each appeal to
conduct an individual risk assessment in each case, during which
the Appeals Board may review any pertinent information and may
accept oral and written statements from any person. The Sex
Offender that filed the appeal shall appear at any hearing held,
unless otherwise approved by the Appeals Board. The Appeals
Board shall consider the public interest as well as the applicant's
presentation and concerns, giving the applicant a reasonable
opportunity to be heard. The Appeals Board shall also consider any
oral, e-mailed, and written statements from any person at the
hearing or received in advance of the hearing. The Appeals Board
shall consider the specific facts and circumstances of each
applicant and determine whether the Sex Offender presents a
threat to public safety if he or she resides at that proposed location.
The Appeals Board shall consider factors which may include, but
are not limited to, the following:
a. Circumstances surrounding the offense.
b. Relationship of offender and victim.
c. Presence or use of force.
d. Presence of enticement.
e. Need to protect victim or similarly situated individuals.
f. Current dangerousness of the offender.
g. Proximity in time from original offense.
h. Any criminal offenses, ordinance or rule violations committed
since original offense including failures to register or comply
with restrictions set by a bond, parole or probation.
i. Time out of incarceration.
§ 54-20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 54-20
1:352
§ 54-21. Prohibited conduct of designated sex offender. [Amended
1-13-2014 by Ord. No. 02-2014; 7-31-2017 by Ord. No. 06-2017]
j. Current supervision status by the Department of Corrections.
k. Counseling and treatment history.
l. Credibility of offender.
m. Remorse.
n. Proximity of proposed residence to a child safety zone.
o. Support network of offender near proposed residence.
p. Alternative options for housing.
(5) The Appeals Board shall decide by majority vote whether to grant
or deny an exemption. An exemption may be unconditional or be
conditional to a certain address or period of time. In the case of an
approval or denial, the Appeals Board shall provide a written copy
of the decision containing the reasons therein for its decision to the
Village Prosecutor and to the Sex Offender. The decision of the
Appeals Board may be appealed to the Racine County Circuit Court
by any aggrieved party within 30 days of filing of the final decision
in the Village Clerk's office, a copy of which shall be mailed to the
Sex Offender who appealed. The review shall be a review by
certiorari and the Circuit Court may affirm or reverse the final
decision, or remand to the decision maker for further proceedings
consistent with the court's decision.
(l) Penalties. Any Person who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $500,
together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment
thereof, shall be committed to the County Jail for a period not to exceed
90 days. Each violation and each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Neither the issuance of a citation nor the
imposition of forfeiture hereunder shall preclude the Village from
seeking or obtaining any or all other legal and equitable remedies to
prevent or remove a violation of this Chapter.
(a) Findings and Intent.
(1) Findings. Repeat sex offenders, sex offenders who use physical
violence or the threat thereof, and sex offenders who prey on
children are sex predators who present a serious threat to the
public safety. Sex offenders are extremely likely to use physical
violence when they offend, and most sex offenders commit multiple
offenses, have more victims that are never reported and are
prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost
of sex offender victimization to society great, and justifies efforts to
protect the public from it.
§ 54-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-21
1:353
Chapter 58
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 58-1. Prohibited activities; hours; variances. [Code 1993, § 19.01]
Because reducing both opportunity and temptation will minimize
the risk of re-offense for those Sex Offenders who will re-commit
sex offenses against children, there is a compelling need to
separate Sex Offenders from places where children congregate or
play in public places.
(2) Intent. It is the intent of the Village Board to protect the safety and
welfare of its citizens by creating zones around places where
children regularly gather, in which certain Sex Offenders are
prohibited from establishing Residency. It is not the intent of the
Village Board to impose additional punishment on Sex Offenders.
(b) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
Ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
SEX OFFENDER — Shall have the same meaning as specified in
§ 54-20(b)(2) of this Code of Ordinances.
(c) Prohibited activity. It is unlawful for any Sex Offender to participate in a
holiday event involving children under 18 years of age. Holiday events
in which the offender is the parent or guardian of the children involved,
and no non-familial children are present, are exempt from this section.
Participation is defined as actively taking part in the event and shall
include, but is not limited to, distributing candy or other items to
children on Halloween, wearing a Santa Claus costume on or preceding
Christmas, or wearing an Easter Bunny costume on or preceding
Easter.
(d) Severability. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this section be declared unconstitutional or invalid, or be repealed, it
shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part
thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid or repealed.
(e) Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed $500,
together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment
thereof, shall be committed to the County Jail for a period not to exceed
90 days. Each violation and each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
(a) Prohibited activities. No person within the Village shall do any of the
following within or upon any park or public recreational area operated
by the Village or park commission:
§ 54-21 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 58-1
1:354
(1) Damage property. Intentionally mark, deface, disfigure, damage,
displace or remove any structure, equipment, facility or other park
property, either real or personal, including trees, shrubbery and
landscaping.
(2) Litter. Scatter, litter, throw, dispose of or leave any garbage,
rubbish, bottle, can, trash, debris or other waste material in any
waters in, or contiguous to, any park or public recreational area or
any place on the grounds thereof.
(3) Animals. Bring or harbor any dogs, horses or other animals at any
time in or upon any park or public recreational area, except when
required for activities or amusements authorized by the park
commission or Village Board, whichever body has jurisdiction.
(4) Firearms. Have in his possession or under his control, or discharge
any firearm, airgun, sling shot or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon or explosive of any kind while in or upon any park or public
recreational area, except law enforcement officers.
(5) Fireworks. Use, discharge, explode or bring any fireworks in or
upon any park or public recreational area. For purposes of this
subsection, the term "fireworks" shall include all material and
devices enumerated under Wis. Stats. § 167.10(1), but shall not
include paper caps manufactured in accordance with United States
Interstate Commerce Commission regulations for packing and
shipping. This subsection shall not prohibit pyrotechnic displays
authorized by a permit issued by the president in accordance with
the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 167.10(3).
(6) Drive, ride or park in grass areas. Drive, operate, park, ride or
leave standing any vehicle, motor vehicle, motor driven cycle,
bicycle or horse in or upon any park or public recreational area,
except on the roads, ways, trails and areas established therefor.
Vehicles specifically designed to help individuals whose mobility is
handicapped, which access park facilities or public recreational
areas, are exempt from this subsection when such vehicles are
used for such purposes. Snowmobiles, minibikes, go-carts and all
other unlicensed vehicles are prohibited at all times in Village
parks and public recreational areas.
(7) Intoxicating liquor. Bring into or have in his possession, or
consume, any intoxicating liquor, except beer, upon or in any park
or public recreational area.
(8) Disorderly conduct. Use any loud, violent, obscene or profane
language, conduct himself in a disorderly manner or commit any
nuisance while in or upon any park or public recreational area.
(9) Bottles. Bring any bottle of any type into any park.
§ 58-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-1
1:355
§ 58-2. Violations; penalties.
Except as otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a forfeiture as provided in
§ 1-15.
Chapter 62
PUBLIC NUISANCES
(10) Fires. Build, or cause to be built, a fire of any kind in or upon any
park or public recreational area, except within areas designated for
fires, in designated fireplaces provided for such purpose, or except
for portable grills in restricted areas and if ashes are properly
disposed of.
(11) Locked and posted areas. Enter any building, or part thereof, or
any area in or upon any park or public recreational area which is
locked or in disregard of posted signs or notices.
(12) Sale of merchandise. Sell or vend any article or merchandise in any
park or public recreational area without the written consent of the
park commission or Village Board, whichever body has jurisdiction.
(13) Signs and notices. Post any notice or sign in or upon any park or
public recreational area within the Village without the written
consent of the park commission or Village Board, whichever body
has jurisdiction.
(14) Sound devices. Operate any sound track, loudspeaker, amplifier,
motor or other mechanical or electronic device that produces loud
and undue noise in or upon any park or public recreational area
without the written consent of the park commission or Village
Board, whichever body has jurisdiction.
(15) Games. Play softball, baseball, football or any other ball game or
horseshoes, except at locations specifically designated for such
purpose by the park commission or Village Board, whichever body
has jurisdiction.
(b) Hours. The park hours shall be set by the park commission and
appropriate signs giving notice thereof shall be posted at all Village
parks.
(c) Variance. A variance for a specified period of time to any and all of the
restrictions set forth in this section may be granted by the park
commission or Village Board, whichever party has jurisdiction, provided
that at no time may such a grant of variance have the effect of
permitting any group the exclusive use of any park or recreational area
maintained by the Village.
§ 58-1 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 62-1
1:356
§ 62-1. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 10.02]
§ 62-2. Cost of abatement. [Code 1993, § 10.12]
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance and, if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner,
such cost shall be assessed as a special charge against the real estate.
§ 62-3. Unlawful acts. [Code 1993, § 10.01]
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit any
public nuisance to exist within the Village.
§ 62-4. Public health nuisances. [Code 1993, § 10.03]
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
PUBLIC NUISANCE — A thing, act, occupation, condition or use of
property which continues for a length of time so as to:
Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose
or safety of the public.
(1)
In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property.
(2)
(3) Greatly offend the public morals or decency.
Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to
obstruct, or render dangerous for passage, any street, alley,
highway, navigable body of water or other public way or the use of
public property.
(4)
(a) The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are
specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances
coming within the definition of § 62-1:
(1) Unburied animal carcasses. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not
intended for human consumption or food which are not buried or
otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after
death of such animals, birds or fowl.
(2) Insect and vermin breeding places. Accumulations of decayed
animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding,
packing material, scrap metal or any material in which flies,
mosquitoes, disease carrying insects, rats or other vermin can
breed.
§ 62-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-4
1:357
§ 62-5. Keeping dogs. [Code 1993, § 10.11; Ord. No. 4-01,
§ 10.15(2), 9-24-2001]
(3) Stagnant water. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or
other insects can multiply.
(4) Privy vaults and garbage cans. Privy vaults and garbage cans which
are not flytight.
(5) Noxious weeds. Canada Thistle, Leafy Spurge, Field Bindweed
(creeping Jenny), and unsightly and troublesome plants which are
detrimental to cultivated crops, public health, public welfare and
the general appearance of the surrounding area or such
uncultivated rank plants which create unpleasant or noxious odors
or grow to such a height so as to permit the concealment of filthy
deposits.
(6) Water pollution. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream,
lake, canal or other body of water by sewage, creamery or
industrial wastes or other substances.
(7) Noxious odors. Any use of a property, substance or thing within the
Village which emits or causes any foul, offensive, noxious or
disagreeable odor, gas, effluvia or stench which is extremely
repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons or which
annoys, discomforts, injures or inconveniences the health of any
appreciable number of persons within the Village.
(8) Street pollution. Any use of property which causes any noxious or
unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street,
gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place within the Village.
(9) Air pollution. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids,
fumes, gases, fly ash, industrial dust or other atmospheric
pollutants within the Village or within one mile therefrom in such
quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary
sensibilities, or threaten or cause substantial damage to property
in the Village.
(10) Animals running at large. Any animals running at large in the
Village.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DOG — Any canine, regardless of age or sex.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — A parcel of land zoned as residential, occupied
or to be occupied by a dwelling, whether platted or unplatted, and
under common ownership. For the purpose of this section, any vacant
parcel adjoining a dwelling and under the same ownership shall
constitute one lot.
§ 62-4 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 62-5
1:358
§ 62-6. Public nuisances offending public morals and decency.
[Code 1993, § 10.04]
(b) Public nuisance declared. The keeping of a large number of dogs within
the Village for an extended period of time detracts from, and may be
detrimental to, the peace and safety of life in certain areas of the
Village; therefore, the keeping of a large number of dogs is declared to
be a public nuisance.
(c) Limitation. Except as provided in § 10-3(c), no family shall own, harbor
or keep more than three dogs in its possession on any residentially
zoned lot, except that a litter of pups, or a portion thereof, may be kept
for not more than eight weeks from the birth of such pups. For the
purposes of this subsection, the term "family" means one or more
persons.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DISORDERLY HOUSE — Any building, place or room in which gambling
or prostitution, or liquor and fermented malt beverage violations occur,
or which is used for the purpose of unlawfully selling, serving, storing,
keeping or giving away controlled substances as defined in Wis. Stats.
Ch. 161.
GAMBLING DEVICES — All gambling devices and slot machines.
(b) Enumerated. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and
things are specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public
morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to
exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming
within the definition of § 62-1:
(1) Disorderly house. No person shall keep, control or operate a
disorderly house or be an inmate of, frequent, patronize or be found
within any disorderly house.
(2) Unlicensed sale of intoxicated liquor and beer. All places where
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold,
possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified
without a permit or license as provided for by ordinance.
(3) Continuous violation of ordinances or laws. Any place or premises
within the Village where ordinances or laws relating to public
health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously
and repeatedly violated.
(4) Illegal drinking. Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose
of drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in
violation of law.
§ 62-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-7
1:359
§ 62-7. Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. [Code 1993,
§ 10.05]
(a) The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are
declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances
affecting public peace or safety coming within the definition of § 62-1:
(1) Dangerous signs, billboards, etc. All signs, billboards, awnings and
other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public
grounds or places frequented by the public, situated or constructed
so as to endanger the public safety.
(2) Illegal buildings. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in
violation of ordinances relating to materials and the manner of
construction of buildings and structures within the Village.
(3) Unauthorized traffic and railroad devices, signs or signals. All
unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or
maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway
crossing which purport to be, or may be, mistaken as official traffic
control devices, railroad signs or signals, or which, because of their
color, location, brilliance or manner of operation, interfere with the
effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal.
(4) Obstruction of view at intersections or pedestrian crosswalks. All
trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from
obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection
or pedestrian crosswalk.
(5) Low hanging tree limbs. All limbs of trees which project over and
less than 10 feet above any public sidewalk, street or other public
place.
(6) Menacing or annoying trees. All trees which are a menace to public
safety or are the cause of substantial annoyance to the general
public.
(7) Fireworks. All uses or displays of fireworks, except as provided by
law and ordinance.
(8) Dilapidated buildings. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated
or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise
unfit for human use.
a. After obtaining the approval of the Village Board, the Building
Inspector is authorized to act for the Village under the
provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0413, relating to the razing of
buildings, and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary
thereto. The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to place the
§ 62-7 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 62-7
1:360
assessment as a lien upon the property and collect the special
tax as provided in such statute.
b. Before a building can be demolished or removed, the owner or
agent shall notify all utilities having service connections within
the building, such as water, sewer, gas or electric. A building
shall not be demolished or removed until it is ascertained that
service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as
meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and safely
plugged. In addition, the owner or agent shall certify that the
building to be razed contains no friable asbestos or the
Building Inspector shall satisfy himself that no such friable
asbestos exists before the demolishment shall occur.
c. Excavations shall be protected with appropriate fences,
barriers and/or lights, and, within five days of removal of the
structure, shall be filled with clean solid fill (i.e., clay, sand or
stone) to match the lot grade and be landscaped compatible
with adjacent abutting lands.
(9) Low hanging wires and cables. All wires and cables over streets,
alleys or public grounds, which are strung less than 15 feet above
the surface thereof.
(10) Noisy animals or fowl. The keeping or harboring of any animal or
fowl which, by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking,
crowing or making of other noises, greatly annoys or disturbs a
neighborhood or any considerable number of persons within the
Village.
(11) Obstructions of streets; excavations. All obstructions of streets,
alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks, and all excavations in or under
streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks, except as permitted by this
Code, but including those which, although made in accordance
with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable
or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been
accomplished or which do not conform to the permit.
(12) Unlawful assemblies. Any unauthorized or prohibited use of
property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk, or of a
public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people
to gather and thereby obstructing traffic and free use of the streets
or sidewalks.
(13) Blighted buildings and premises. Premises existing within the
Village which are blighted because of faulty design or construction,
failure to maintain them in a proper state of repair, improper
management or due to the accumulation thereon of junk or other
unsightly debris, structurally unsound fences and other items
which depreciate property values and jeopardize or are detrimental
to the health, safety, morals or welfare of the people of the Village.
§ 62-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-7
1:361
§ 62-8. Grass fires; confinement. [Code 1993, § 10.06]
§ 62-9. Accumulation of used motor vehicles. [Code 1993, § 10.07]
No person, except a person licensed under § 46-182 or a licensee of a motor
vehicle dealer's license issued under statute, shall accumulate or store or
allow to remain outside of any building on real estate located within the
Village for a period of more than 10 days, or dump, deposit or otherwise
abandon upon any property or upon any highway, street, road, alley or way
within the Village, any used motor vehicle, as defined by statute, or any
detached part thereof, for which no current registration fee has been paid
under statute or which, if paid, does not have properly attached thereto
under statute a current license plate, if required, and which is in a condition
which would mechanically prevent the immediate operation thereof upon
any public highway or its operation thereon would be in violation of the
law. Each day that any used motor vehicle, as defined in this section, or any
detached part thereof, shall be accumulated or stored or allowed to remain
contrary to this section shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
§ 62-10. Abatement. [Code 1993, § 10.10]
a. Blighted premises contribute to conditions that are dangerous
to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
people; the conditions necessitate excessive and
disproportionate expenditure of public funds for public health
and safety, crime prevention, fire protection and other public
services; and such conditions cause a drain upon public
revenue and impair the efficient and economical exercise of
governmental functions in such areas.
b. Elimination of blighted premises and prevention of blighted
premises in the future is in the best interest of the citizens and
shall be fostered and encouraged by this section. It is essential
to the public interest that this section be liberally construed to
accomplish such purposes.
(a) Grass fires. No person shall kindle any grass fire within the Village
without first securing a written permit from the Village Fire Chief, who
shall issue such permit subject to any conditions for the protection of
life and property imposed by the him. No permit shall be valid until the
permittee has notified the Fire Department of the time and place of
such burning.
(b) Confinement. No person shall kindle, or cause to be kindled, any fire in
or upon any street, alley, public way, park, or public or private grounds
within the Village within 25 feet of any building or within any fire lane
unless the fire is confined within a wire refuse burner or basket, or
metal enclosure with a wire cover attached to prevent the escape of
sparks and burning material.
§ 62-7 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 62-10
1:362
§ 62-11. Violations; penalties. [Code 1993, § 10.15]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any regulation,
rule or order made under this chapter, or permit or cause a public nuisance,
shall be subject to § 1-15.
§ 62-12. Graffiti. [Amended 10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-16]
(a) Enforcement. The Village Administrator or designee shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter that come within the jurisdiction of their
offices, and shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon
complaint to ensure that such provisions are not violated. No action
shall be taken under this section to abate a public nuisance unless the
officer has inspected, or caused to be inspected, the premises where the
nuisance is alleged to exist and has satisfied himself that a nuisance
does in fact exist.
(b) Summary abatement. If the inspecting officer determines that a public
nuisance exists within the Village, and that there is great and
immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or
decency, the Village Board may direct the proper officer to cause the
nuisance to be abated and charge the cost of abatement to the owner,
occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as
the case may be.
(c) Abatement after notice. If the inspecting officer determines that a
public nuisance exists on private premises, but that such nuisance does
not threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety,
peace, morals or decency, he shall serve notice on the person causing or
maintaining the nuisance to remove the nuisance within 10 days. If
such nuisance is not removed within 10 days, the officer shall cause the
nuisance to be removed as provided in Subsection (b) of this section.
(d) Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the Village or its
officials in accordance with law.
(e) Court order. Except when necessary under Subsection (b) of this
section, an officer under this section shall not use force to obtain access
to private property to abate a public nuisance, but shall request
permission to enter upon private property, if such premises are
occupied and, if such permission is denied, shall apply to any court
having jurisdiction for an order assisting the abatement of the public
nuisance.
(a) Graffiti defined. Graffiti means marks, symbols, signs, letters, names,
phrases, or sentences which are inscribed or placed on real and
physical property and tend to deface said property.
(b) Public nuisance. The existence of graffiti on real and physical property
within the Village of Mt. Pleasant is expressly declared to be a public
§ 62-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-12
1:363
Chapter 66
SOLID WASTE
nuisance as it affects the public health, safety and welfare and creates
blighting influences on neighborhoods, and it shall be the duty of the
owner of the property to remove or cover graffiti which is placed
thereon.
(c) Graffiti prohibited. Graffiti is prohibited on any private or public
building or property whether real or physical. Graffiti shall be removed
by the property owner after written notice and order is given by the
Police Department or the building department to the owner of record.
(d) Removal of graffiti. Graffiti shall be removed within a reasonable time
(14 days) after the Police Department or the building department issues
a written notice and order to the property owner.
(e) Failure to remove; extension.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner of real property to fail to remove
graffiti from the property within 14 days, after being provided a
written notice and order for removal by a certain date served upon
the owner by personal service or by regular mail sent to the
address listed on the real estate tax bill, and by posting the order
on the real or physical property.
(2) Upon written request received by the Police Department that
issued the notice and order, prior to expiration of the time provided
for compliance, the Chief of Police or his designee may, for just
cause, grant an extension of time for compliance.
(3) If the owner fails to comply with the order(s) after being provided
with a written notice and order for removal and upon the expiration
of any extension(s) granted, the Chief of Police or his designee may
remove or cover the graffiti and all costs, fees and expenses
incurred in the removal shall be levied against the property as a
special charge, if such amounts are not paid by the property owner
within such time as is allowed in the billing for such removal. Such
costs shall be in addition to any other enforcement actions taken
under this Code. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(f) Notification of defacement. Every owner or occupant of a structure or
property defaced by graffiti shall notify the Police Department of the
graffiti before removing or covering such graffiti.
(g) Enforcement of graffiti prohibition. The Chief of Police or his designee
shall have primary responsibility to enforce the provisions of this
section.
§ 62-12 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 62-12
1:364
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 66-1. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 11.02]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ASHES — Solid waste products in fuels.
GARBAGE — Waste products, other than sewage and manure, of animal,
fruit and vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking,
dealing in or storage of food.
REFUSE — Waste materials, including paper, rags, metal, wood, glass,
crockery, tin cans and materials commonly referred to as rubbish, but
specifically excluding garbage, ashes, sewage and manure.
§ 66-2. Garbage, ashes and refuse. [Code 1993, § 11.05; amended
11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 09-2015]
(a) Deposit, storage and accumulation. No person shall deposit, or cause to
be deposited, any garbage, ashes or refuse on any highway, street or
public or private alley in the Village. No person shall store or
accumulate any garbage, ashes or refuse in any part of the Village
where provision is made by the Village Board for the periodic collection
thereof for a longer period of time than elapses between such periodic
collection, unless permission to do so is obtained from the Village
Board; provided, however, that the prohibitions contained in this
subsection shall not apply to the storage and accumulation of refuse by
licensed junkyards or the storage and accumulation of ashes and refuse
by industrial establishments which maintain adequate and sanitary
facilities and space for the storage of ashes and refuse.
(b) Collection. Except for multi-family units of nine or more, commercial, or
industrial establishments, garbage, ashes and refuse shall be collected
in such parts of the Village, and disposed of in such manner and by such
means as the Village Board shall determine from time to time. All
collections shall be subject to the following:
(1) The owner and/or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for
the proper and sanitary storage of all garbage, refuse and ashes.
(2) Garbage and ash receptacles shall be durable, rust-resistant,
nonabsorbent, watertight, and rodent-proof, and in no event shall
such receptacles be placed on any highway, street or alley.
(3) Containers and equipment used to hold garbage, refuse and ashes
shall be placed at the roadside for collection by 7:00 a.m. on the
scheduled day of collection but no sooner than 15 hours before 7:00
a.m. of such day.
§ 66-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-2
1:365
§ 66-3. Garbage, ash and refuse containers. [Code 1993, § 11.04]
§ 66-4. through § 66-30. (Reserved)
(4) Containers and equipment used to hold garbage, refuse and ashes
for roadside collection shall be removed from the roadside within
12 hours after collection.
(5) Such other rules as the Village Board may provide from time to
time by resolution of which notice is given by distribution thereof in
the parts of the Village where such collections are to be made.
(c) Yard wastes. Yard wastes, including, but not limited to, grass clippings,
brush and leaves, shall not be collected as a part of the Village's regular
curbside garbage/refuse collection. Disposal of yard wastes shall be the
responsibility of each household or property owner and shall be
consistent with all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
(a) The owner or occupant of any vacant or improved property in any part
of the Village where provision is made by the Village Board for the
periodic collection of garbage and ashes shall maintain receptacles
sufficient to contain all garbage and ashes between the times of
collection thereof, provided that this subsection shall not apply to the
accumulation of ashes by industrial establishments which maintain
adequate and sanitary facilities and space for the storage of ashes. All
such garbage and ash receptacles shall be of metal or plastic,
watertight, equipped with handles for carrying the receptacles and
shall be provided with a tight-fitting cover which shall not be removed,
except when necessary to fill, empty and cleanse the receptacles.
Refuse may be accumulated in a sanitary manner on any premises for
periodic disposal.
(b) The owner or occupant of any vacant or improved property in any part
of the Village where provision is made by the Village Board for the
periodic collection of refuse, shall place such refuse in containers so
that the containers may be readily handled at the time of collection,
provided that this subsection shall not apply to the accumulation of
refuse by industrial establishments which maintain adequate and
sanitary facilities and space for the storage of refuse.
§ 66-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 66-4
1:366
ARTICLE II
Landfill
§ 66-31. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 11.16(3)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FOR HIRE — Compensation, in any form, being charged by the person to
dispose of materials as defined in this section.
MATERIAL — Garbage, refuse and all other discarded material, including
waste material resulting from industrial, commercial or agricultural
operations, and from domestic use and public service activities, and also
including toxic and hazardous substances as defined in Wis. Stats. § 285.01.
PERSON — An individual, group of individuals, partnership, firm,
corporation, association or any duly authorized agent thereof.
SANITARY LANDFILL SITE — The area where there is practiced a method
of disposing of solid waste on land by utilizing the principles of engineering
to confine the solid waste to the smallest practical area, reduce it to the
smallest practical volume and cover it with a layer of earth at the conclusion
of each day's operation or at such more frequent intervals as may be
necessary.
WASTES — Includes toxic and hazardous substances as defined in Wis.
Stats. § 285.01.
§ 66-32. Intent. [Code 1993, § 11.16(1)]
At the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is
derived, there is one licensed sanitary landfill site presently operating in
the Village. Such sanitary landfill site operates under both state and county
regulations that material to be disposed of may only be collected from, or
brought to, the site from the county, and commercial and industrial wastes
only may be brought to the site from Kenosha County. It is the intent of this
section to indicate to all users of sanitary landfill sites that a violation of
such regulations is contrary to Village policy.
§ 66-33. Unauthorized use. [Code 1993, § 11.16(2)]
No person shall, for hire, dispose of any material whatsoever in any licensed
sanitary landfill site location in the Village if such material is collected
from, or brought to, such sanitary landfill site from outside the county.
However, commercial and industrial wastes from Kenosha County only, but
not including any municipal refuse from Kenosha County, may be brought
to, and disposed of, at any licensed landfill site in the Village.
§ 66-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-34
1:367
§ 66-34. Permits; fees. [Code 1993, § 11.16(4)]
No person shall transport any garbage, rubbish or other refuse into, or
within, the Village for the purpose of dumping or otherwise disposing of
such garbage, rubbish or other refuse until such person has first secured
a permit to do so from the Village Board. The rights granted under such
permit shall expire on June 30 each year. The fee for the issuance of such
permit shall be as set by the Village Board.
§ 66-35. Compost dropoff site. [Code 1993, § 11.22]
§ 66-36. through § 66-70. (Reserved)
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CONTRACTOR — Any individual or entity in the business of landscape
architecture, construction or maintenance.
(b) Use by contractors. Contractors may dispose of compostable material
at the Village compost dropoff site only after complying with the
following:
(1) Any contractor seeking to use the Village compost dropoff site must
purchase a contractor's permit at the Clerk-Treasurer's office for
disposal of compost materials. The annual cost for such permit
shall be as set by the Village Board. Permits shall remain on file at
the Village hall public works department.
(2) Upon issuance of the permit described in Subsection (b)(1) of this
section, contractors may purchase coupon booklets from the Clerk-
Treasurer at a cost as set by the Village Board. Each coupon
booklet shall contain 10 coupons. Coupons shall be in a form
prescribed by the Village public works department, and shall
contain space for contractors to provide verification that the
compostable material to be left at the site originated at a Village
address. Contractors shall gain entry to the Village compost dropoff
site only upon presentation to the attendant of one coupon
containing the required verification.
§ 66-34 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 66-36
1:368
ARTICLE III
Recycling
§ 66-71. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 11.19(10)]
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BIMETAL CONTAINER — A container for carbonated or malt beverages
that is made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
CONTAINER BOARD — Corrugated paperboard used in the
manufacture of shipping containers and related products.
FOAM POLYSTYRENE PACKAGING — Packaging made primarily from
foam polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
HDPE — High density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code no. 2.
LDPE — Low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code no. 4.
MAGAZINES — Magazines and other materials printed on similar
paper.
MAJOR APPLIANCE — A residential or commercial air conditioner,
clothes dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven,
oven, refrigerator or stove.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A property containing five or more
residential units, including units which are occupied seasonally.
NEWSPAPER — A newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES — Commercial,
retail, industrial, institutional and governmental facilities and
properties. Such terms do not include multiple-family dwellings.
OFFICE PAPER — High grade printing and writing paper from offices
in nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledgers and
computer printouts are examples of office paper generally accepted as
high grade. Such term does not include industrial process waste.
OTHER RESINS and MULTIPLE RESINS — Plastic resins labeled by the
SPI code no. 7.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
business entity, association, local governmental unit, state agency or
authority, or federal agency.
(1) Is designed for serving food or beverages.
Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
(2)
Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
(3)
§ 66-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-71
1:369
§ 66-72. Purpose. [Code 1993, § 11.19(2)]
The purpose of this article is to promote recycling, composting and resource
recovery through the administration of an effective recycling program, as
provided in Wis. Stats. § 287.116 and Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 544.
§ 66-73. Statutory authority. [Code 1993, § 11.19(3)]
This article is adopted as authorized under Wis. Stats. § 287.09(1)(a).
PETE — Polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code no. 1.
PLASTIC CONTAINER — An individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle,
can, jar or carton, except a blister pack, that is originally used to
contain a product that is the subject of a retail sale.
POST-CONSUMER WASTE — Solid waste, other than solid waste
generated in the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined
Wis. Stats. § 291.07(7), waste from construction and demolition of
structures, scrap automobiles or high volume industrial waste, as
defined in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(17).
PP — Polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code no. 5.
PS — Polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code no. 6.
PVC — Polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code no. 3.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Includes lead acid batteries; major
appliances; waste oils; yard wastes; aluminum containers; corrugated
papers or other container boards; foam polystyrene packaging; glass
containers; magazines; newspapers; office papers; rigid plastic
containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS
and other resins or multiple resins; steel containers; waste tires; and
bimetal containers.
SOLID WASTE — Has the meaning specified in statute.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Has the meaning specified in Wis. Stats.
§ 209.01.
SOLID WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process
which is designed to change the physical, chemical or biological
character or composition of solid waste. The term "treatment" includes
incineration.
WASTE TIRE — A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and
brush, including stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls.
§ 66-71 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 66-74
1:370
§ 66-74. Abrogation and greater restrictions. [Code 1993,
§ 11.19(4)]
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing rule, regulation, ordinance or permit previously
adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this article imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall apply.
§ 66-75. Interpretation. [Code 1993, § 11.19(5)]
In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other power granted by statute. Where any terms or
requirements of this article may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more
restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a provision of
this article is required by statute, or by a standard in Wis. Admin. Code
Ch. NR 544, and where the article provision is unclear, the provision shall
be interpreted in light of the statute and the Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR
544 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from
which this article is derived, or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this article.
§ 66-76. Applicability. [Code 1993, § 11.19(7)]
The requirements of this article apply to all persons within the Village.
§ 66-77. Administration. [Code 1993, § 11.19(8)]
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the Village Board and
its duly designated agents.
§ 66-78. Enforcement; violations; penalties. [Code 1993,
§ 11.19(19)]
(a) For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
article, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the solid
waste contractor for the Village and/or the Police Department may
inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling, post-consumer
waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities,
collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwellings, and
nonresidential facilities and properties, and any records relating to
recycling activities, which shall be kept confidential, when necessary, to
protect proprietary information. No person may refuse access to any
authorized officer, employee or authorized representative of the solid
waste contractor and/or the Police Department who requests access for
purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No
person may obstruct, hamper or interfere with such an inspection.
(b) Any person who violates a provision of this article may be issued a
citation by the Police Department. The issuance of a citation shall not
preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the
§ 66-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-78
1:371
§ 66-79. Removal of deposited recyclables. [Code 1993, § 11.21]
same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law
relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance
of a citation under this subsection.
(c) Penalties for violations of this article may be assessed as follows:
(1) Any person who violates § 66-86 may be required to forfeit $50 for
a first violation, $200 for a second violation and not more than
$2,000 for a third or subsequent violation.
(2) Any person who violates a provision of this article, except § 66-86,
may be required to forfeit not less than $10, nor more than $1,000
for each violation.
(a) Permission required. No person, unless granted permission by the
Village allowing for the collection and removal of recyclable materials,
shall collect or remove any recyclable material which has been
deposited or placed by any person adjoining such premises for
collection and disposal.
(b) Exception. For the purposes of this section, the term "recyclable
material" shall not include the usual household appliances which may
be deposited for collection and disposal.
(c) Enforcement. The duly authorized police officers of the Police
Department shall exclusively enforce the provisions of Subsection (a) of
this section.
(d) Violations; penalties.
(1) First offense. Any person who shall violate the provisions of
Subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less
than $25, nor more than $100, together with the costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs,
shall be imprisoned in the county jail until such forfeiture and costs
are paid, but not exceeding three days.
(2) Second offense. Any person found guilty of violating Subsection (a)
of this section, who has previously been convicted of a violation of
such subsection within one year, shall, upon conviction, forfeit not
less than $50, nor more than $500 for each such offense, together
with the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such
forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the county jail until
such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding six days.
(3) Third offense. Any person found guilty of violating Subsection (a) of
this section, who has previously been convicted of a violation of
such subsection two times within one year, shall, upon conviction,
forfeit not less than $100, nor more than $500 for such third
offense, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of
§ 66-78 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 66-79
1:372
§ 66-80. Separation of recyclable materials. [Code 1993,
§ 11.19(11), (12)]
payment of such forfeiture and costs, shall be imprisoned in the
county jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not
exceeding nine days.
(a) Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings, and nonresidential facilities and properties shall
separate the following materials from post-consumer waste:
(1) Lead-acid batteries.
(2) Major appliances.
(3) Waste oil.
(4) Yard waste.
(5) Aluminum containers.
(6) Bimetal containers.
(7) Corrugated paper or other container board.
(8) Foam polystyrene packaging.
(9) Glass containers.
(10) Magazines.
(11) Newspaper.
(12) Office paper.
(13) Rigid plastic containers of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and
other resins or multiple resins.
(14) Steel containers.
(15)Waste tires.
(b) The separation requirements of Subsection (a) of this section do not
apply to the following:
(1) Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences,
multiple-family dwellings, and nonresidential facilities and
properties that send their post-consumer waste to a processing
facility licensed by the state department of natural resources
(DNR) that recovers the materials specified in Subsection (a) from
solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
(2) Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility, if
less than 30% of the heat input to the facility is derived from the
solid waste burned as supplemental fuel.
§ 66-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-80
1:373
§ 66-81. Care of separated recyclable materials. [Code 1993,
§ 11.19(13)]
To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in
accordance with § 66-80(a) shall be clean and kept free of contaminants,
such as food or product residue, oil or grease, or other nonrecyclable
materials, including, but not limited to, household hazardous waste, medical
waste and agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be
stored in a manner which protects them from wind, rain and other
inclement weather conditions.
§ 66-82. Management of lead-acid batteries, major appliances,
waste oil and yard waste. [Code 1993, § 11.19(14)]
§ 66-83. Preparation and collection of recyclable materials. [Code
1993, § 11.19(15)]
(3) A recyclable material for which a variance has been granted by the
DNR under Wis. Stats. § 287.11(2m) or Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR
544.14.
(a) Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings, and nonresidential facilities and properties shall
manage lead-acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil and yard waste
as follows:
(1) Lead-acid batteries shall be brought to the Village recycling center
or taken to a licensed vendor of the resident's choice.
(2) Major appliances shall be handled at the Village recycling center
and then removed by a licensed vendor, or the resident may take
such appliances to a licensed vendor of his choice.
(3) Waste oil shall be handled at the Village recycling center and then
removed by a licensed vendor, or the resident may take such waste
oil to a licensed vendor of his choice.
(4) Yard waste shall be taken to the Village compost site or other
appropriate yard waste management unit.
(a) Except as otherwise directed by Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 544,
occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences shall do the
following for the preparation and collection of the separated materials
specified in § 66-80(a)(5) – (15):
(1) Aluminum containers shall be cleaned and brought to the Village
recycling center or other licensed vendor.
(2) Bimetal containers shall be cleaned, ends cut and brought to the
Village recycling center or taken to another licensed vendor.
§ 66-80 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 66-83
1:374
§ 66-84. Responsibilities of owners and designated agents of
multiple-family dwellings. [Code 1993, § 11.19(16)]
(3) Corrugated paper or other containerboard shall be clean and
flattened, and brought to the Village recycling center or taken to
another licensed vendor.
(4) Foam polystyrene packaging shall be cleaned and brought to the
Village recycling center or taken to another licensed vendor.
(5) Glass containers shall be cleaned, caps removed and taken to the
Village recycling center or an appropriate licensed vendor.
(6) Magazines shall be taken to the Village recycling center or other
licensed vendor.
(7) Newspapers shall be put into brown paper bags and taken to the
Village recycling center or other licensed vendor.
(8) Office paper shall be taken to the Village recycling center or other
licensed vendor.
(9) Rigid plastic containers shall be prepared and collected as follows:
a. Plastic containers made of PETE, including no. 1 liquor and
soda containers, shall be cleaned, caps removed and taken to
the Village recycling center or other licensed vendor.
b. Plastic containers made of HDPE, including no. 2 milk and
shampoo containers, shall be cleaned, caps removed and taken
to the Village recycling center or other licensed vendor.
c. Plastic containers made of PVC, including yogurt, cottage
cheese, etc., shall be temporarily allowed in the landfill.
d. Plastic containers made of LDPE, including no. 4 containers,
shall be temporarily allowed in the landfill.
e. Plastic containers made of PP, including no. 5 containers, shall
be temporarily allowed in the landfill.
f. Plastic containers made of PS, including no. 6 containers, and
all foam polystyrene packaging shall be cleaned and taken to
the Village recycling center or other licensed vendor.
g. Plastic containers made of other resins or multiple resins,
including no. 7 containers, shall be temporarily disposed of by
residents in the landfill.
(10) Steel containers shall be cleaned, ends removed and taken to the
Village recycling center or a licensed vendor.
(11)Waste tires shall be disposed of by residents at an approved facility
other than the Village recycling center.
§ 66-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-84
1:375
§ 66-85. Responsibilities of owners and designated agents of
nonresidential facilities and properties. [Code 1993, § 11.19(17)]
(a) Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of
the following to recycle the materials specified in § 66-80(a)(5) – (15):
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify tenants about the established recycling program, in writing,
at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling and at least
semiannually thereafter.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility.
(4) Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which
materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to
meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites,
locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or company,
including the name, address and telephone number of such person
or company.
(b) The requirements specified in Subsection (a) of this section do not apply
to the owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings, if the
post-consumer waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a
processing facility licensed by the state department of natural
resources (DNR) that recovers for recycling the materials specified in
§ 66-80(a)(5) – (15) from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically
feasible.
(a) Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties
shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in
§ 66-80(a)(5) – (15):
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify all users, tenants and occupants of the properties, in writing,
at least semiannually, of the established recycling program.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
(4) Notify the users, tenants and occupants of the reasons to reduce
and recycle, which materials are collected, how to prepare
materials in order to meet the processing requirements, collection
methods or sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact
person or company, including the name, address and telephone
number of such person or company.
(b) The requirements specified in Subsection (a) of this section do not apply
to the owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and
§ 66-84 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 66-85
1:376
§ 66-86. Disposal and burning of recyclable materials separated for
recycling. [Code 1993, § 11.19(18)]
Any of the materials specified in § 66-80(a)(5) – (15) which have been
separated for recycling may not be disposed of by a person in a solid waste
disposal facility or burned in a solid waste treatment facility, except waste
tires may be burned with energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
properties, if the post-consumer waste generated within the facility
or property is treated at a processing facility licensed by the state
department of natural resources (DNR) that recovers for recycling the
materials specified in § 66-80(a)(5) – (15) from solid waste in as pure a
form as is technically feasible.
§ 66-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-86
1:377
Chapter 70
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
§ 66-86 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 66-86
1:378
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 70-1. Excavations in streets. [Code 1993, § 8.01]
(a) Permit required. No person shall injure, break, remove or tear up any
pavement, street, alley, highway, road, sidewalk, crosswalk, drain,
sewer, public right-of-way or public ground, or any part thereof, or dig
any hole, ditch or drain in any pavement, street, alley, highway, road,
sidewalk, crosswalk, public right-of-way or public ground, or remove
any gravel, sod, dirt or sand from any pavement, street, alley, highway,
road, sidewalk, crosswalk, public right-of-way or public ground or from
the east end of any street, alley, highway, road, sidewalk, crosswalk,
public right-of-way or public ground abutting on Lake Michigan, or
place, or allow to be placed, on any pavement, street, alley, highway,
road, sidewalk, crosswalk, public right-of-way or public ground any
building, material, equipment or machinery, or obstruct travel thereon
of any nature, without a written permit obtained from the Village Board
or its authorized agent. All work authorized by the permit shall be
completed within the time specified in the permit. The fee for such
permit shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the
Village Board.
(b) Removing material. No openings in streets, highways, roads or alleys
will be permitted when the ground is frozen, except where absolutely
necessary, as determined by the Village Board or its authorized agent.
In opening any street or other public way, all materials for paving or
ballasting shall be removed, together with the excavated material from
trenches, and shall be placed where the least practicable inconvenience
to the public will be caused and will permit the free passage of water
along the gutters.
(c) Barriers and lights. Every person who receives a permit shall place
upon or around any building, material, machinery, equipment or other
obstruction located in whole or part upon any street, alley, highway,
road, sidewalk, crosswalk, public right-of-way or public ground, and
maintain in working order thereon until such building, material,
machinery, equipment or other obstruction is completely removed, from
one hour after sunset until daylight of the next day, sufficient lights and
barriers to warn all persons passing along or across such street, alley,
road, highway, sidewalk, crosswalk, public right-of-way or public
ground of the presence of such material, machinery, equipment or other
obstruction.
(d) Bonds for drainlaying. Drains shall be laid only on the condition that the
person has filed with the Clerk-Treasurer a bond and insurance policy
for all damages that may result from such person's neglect of any
necessary precautions against all accidents to persons or property.
(e) Closing streets to traffic. One lane of traffic shall be maintained at all
times unless a permit for a temporary closing is granted by the Village
§ 70-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-1
1:379
Board. Application for such closing shall be made, in writing, to the
Village Board or its authorized agent and shall only be granted on the
condition that the applicant for such permission shall notify the Police
Department and Fire Department of the time and place of such closing,
and that the applicant barricade the street at the intersections of each
end of the block wherein the opening is made and post signs informing
the public that the street is closed. The barricades shall be protected in
the nighttime in the manner provided for openings.
(f) Trenches. No trench shall have a clear width inside the necessary
sheeting or bracing which is more than 12 inches greater than the
maximum outside dimension of the pipe or conduit being installed,
except that no trench is required to have a clear width of less than 30
inches. All trenches shall be sheeted and braced in accordance with the
current regulations of the department of commerce.
(g) Backfilling. All excavated material from openings shall be removed from
the site and such openings shall be backfilled with an approved material
to within 10 inches of the finished grade. The remaining distance shall
be backfilled with crushed stone to its existing grade and the pavement
material shall be replaced in kind. Such fill material shall be slurry sand
or granular fill, tamped by mechanical means in two-foot lifts, as may be
directed by the Village Board or its authorized agent. All water or gas
pipes, electric or telephone cables or conduit, and drain and sewer tiles
must be protected from injury or settling in a manner satisfactory to the
Village Board or its authorized agent.
(h) Street restoration.
(1) In the case of a permit to open a paved street which is concrete,
asphalt or brick surface, the applicant for a permit, in addition to
the permit fee specified in Subsection (a) of this section, may be
required, as determined by the Village Board or its authorized
agent, to deposit with the Village the sum set by the Village Board
to cover the expense of relaying such pavement, which shall be
performed by the Village Board or under its direction or
supervision. Where the street restoration area exceeds 125 square
feet, there shall be an additional fee as set by the Village Board. In
the case of a permit to open an unpaved street which has a crushed
stone base, the applicant for a permit shall deposit with the Village,
in addition to the permit fee specified in Subsection (a) of this
section, the sum as set by the Village Board. Where the street
restoration area exceeds 125 square feet, there shall be an
additional fee as set by the Village Board. In case of a permit to
open a public right-of-way, the applicant shall deposit with the
Village, in addition to the permit fee specified in Subsection (a) of
this section, the sum as set by the Village Board. The sum shall be
deposited in the name of the permit applicant. Neither the permit
fee or any deposit shall be refundable.
§ 70-1 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 70-1
1:380
§ 70-2. Removal and destruction of lights, barriers and property.
[Code 1993, § 8.02]
(2) Prior to the paving or repaving of any Village street, the Village
Board may determine that, in the interest of preserving and
protecting such proposed street from unnecessary excavations,
property owners abutting on such street should, upon written
notice by the Village Board, extend such utilities or water lines,
etc., as may be then present in the right-of-way, to the lot line on
the street proposed to be paved or repaved.
(3) The requirements for permit fees and deposits set forth in
Subsections (h)(1) and (h)(2) of this section shall apply to each such
property owner. Written notice shall give the property owner not
less than 30 days to arrange for the necessary extensions. If the
property owner fails make such arrangement, the Village Board
may then order the work done and the cost thereof, including the
permit fees and deposits, shall be payable upon demand by the
Village. If the amount is not paid to the Village, it may be added to
the tax rolls and collected as any other tax.
(i) Final inspection; maintenance. Upon the completion of backfilling, the
applicant shall request final inspection of the trench. Upon acceptance
of the trench by the Village Board or its authorized agent, the Village
shall thereafter maintain the trench, including the replacement of the
oiled surface on all oiled streets and the bituminous mat on bituminous
surfaced streets.
(j) Traffic hazards. Prior to the time of acceptance of the backfilled trench,
if any opening made pursuant to this article shall become a hazard to
vehicular traffic or pedestrians due to settlement or any other cause,
the Village Board or its authorized agent may protect such opening by
barricades or make such repairs as may be necessary, and in either
event, charge the costs of furnishing the protection or making the
repairs to the applicant for the opening permit.
(k) Liability for violations. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall pay all damages and costs which may
arise from such offense.
(l) Permit required for excavations near sewers. No person shall uncover
or excavate under or around any sewer, for any purpose whatsoever,
without the written permit of the Village Board or its authorized agent.
(a) No person shall knock down, destroy, injure or remove any barrier, light
or other protection in and upon any pavement, street, alley, highway,
road, sidewalk, crosswalk, public right-of-way or public place which has
been set up in accordance with the provisions of § 70-1(c) or pursuant
to other directions of the Village Board or any Village official.
§ 70-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-2
1:381
§ 70-3. Sidewalks. [Amended 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 06-2016]
(b) No person shall walk upon, drive upon or in any way injure, disfigure or
destroy any pavement upon any street, alley, highway, road, sidewalk,
crosswalk, public right-of-way or public place which has not been
opened and is not open at the time for public use or travel.
(c) No person shall knock down, destroy, injure or remove any manhole,
water hydrant or catch basin, in whole or in part, located in or upon any
street, alley, highway, road, sidewalk, crosswalk, public right-of-way or
public place in the Village.
(d) No person shall enter upon any property from any street, alley, highway,
road, sidewalk, crosswalk, public right-of-way or public place with any
vehicle, machinery or equipment, or cause any vehicle, machinery or
equipment to be entered thereon from any street, alley, highway, road,
sidewalk, crosswalk, public right-of-way or public place, except at and
over a complete driveway, with a culvert installed therein where
necessary, for drainage, connecting such property with the traveled
portion of such street, alley, highway, road, sidewalk, crosswalk, public
right-of-way or public place.
(a) No person shall build any sidewalk or rebuild an existing sidewalk in a
public street in the Village without a permit for such construction.
Application shall be made to the Director of Engineering or designee for
permission to construction or rebuild such sidewalk. The permit
application shall contain a full statement of the materials to be used in
the construction of the sidewalk, the width thereof, and shall request
that the line and grade for construction of such sidewalk be furnished
by public works.
(b) Any person may lawfully rebuild his sidewalk to a grade corresponding
with the grade of the adjoining sidewalk unless he shall have been
ordered to rebuild such sidewalk on a different grade. The Director of
Engineering or designee may order any sidewalk which is unsafe,
defective or insufficient to be repaired or removed and replaced. A copy
of the order directing such laying, removal and replacement or repair
shall be served on the owner or agent of each lot or parcel of land in
front of which such work is ordered. Whenever any such owner shall
neglect to do such work for a period of 20 days after service of the
order, the Village may cause such work to be done at the expense of
such owner. All work for such construction shall be let by contract to
the lowest responsible bidder. Any amount unpaid by the owner shall be
charged by the Clerk-Treasurer to each lot or parcel of land and entered
on the tax roll as a special tax against the lot or parcel of land, and such
amount shall be collected in all respects like other taxes upon real
estate.
(c) All sidewalks constructed within the Village of Mount Pleasant shall
conform to the United States federal guidelines adopted as the "2010
ADA Standards for Accessible Design," including both the Title II
§ 70-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 70-3
1:382
regulations at 28 CFR 35.151 and the 2004 ADAAG at 36 CFR part
1191, appendices B and D.
(1) Definitions of words used herein.
a. CRACK — A fissure within a sidewalk square.
b. JOINT — A cleavage created for expansion purposes which
separates two or more sidewalk squares.
c. PITCH — The constructed slope of a sidewalk to the street
(normally 1/4 inch per foot).
d. SIDEWALK(S) — A public sidewalk within the street right-ofway.
e. SIDEWALK SQUARE — That portion of a sidewalk bordered by
joints and the sidewalk edge.
f. SPALLING — Chipped or splintered condition of a sidewalk
square.
(2) Notice and special assessments. § 66.0907, Wisconsin Statutes,
incorporated herein by reference, shall govern notices and special
assessments.
(3) Examples of conditions that could develop into hazards. Sidewalk
Inspectors shall consider the following examples of conditions,
which, if not addressed, could develop into a hazard, in
determining whether to order a sidewalk square replaced or
repaired:
a. There is a difference in height greater than 1/4 inch but less
than 1/2 inch; beveling the surface with a maximum grade of
50% is required. If the height is greater than 1/2 inch; removal
and replacement is required unless a ramp can be installed
with a maximum grade of 8.33%.
b. The transverse slope of the sidewalk is greater than 2%.
c. There is a crack greater than 1/2 inch in width.
d. There is a difference in height greater than one-half inch in the
elevation of adjacent sections of a crack.
e. There is a depression greater than 1/2 inch within a sidewalk
square.
f. There is spalling which has resulted in a surface texture of 1/4
inch or more every 30 inches.
g. There has been a temporary sidewalk repair.
h. Curb ramps shall not exceed 8.33%.
§ 70-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-3
1:383
§ 70-4. Placement of merchandise for sale. [Code 1993, § 8.04]
No person shall place, or cause to be placed, out for sale any goods, wares
or merchandise on or over a sidewalk in the Village.
§ 70-5. Vehicular travel. [Code 1993, § 8.05]
(4) Temporary sidewalk repair. No sidewalk square shall be ordered or
arranged to be repaired by way of crack fillers, wedges, surface
treatments or the like by a Sidewalk Inspector, except as a
temporary measure pending replacement. Sidewalk squares which,
upon inspection, are noted to have been temporarily repaired shall
be ordered or arranged to be replaced. However, where the only
defect is a difference in elevation due to settlement, it shall be
permissible to remedy said condition without replacing the
sidewalk square.
(5) Documentation of inspection. Sidewalk Inspectors, upon finding a
sidewalk in need of replacement or repair, shall document the date
of sidewalk inspection and condition of the sidewalk, and notify the
property owner in writing of the condition of the sidewalk and
corrective action required.
(d) No person shall place, deposit or cast, or cause to be placed, deposited
or cast, upon any sidewalk in the Village, any timber, wood, lumber,
ashes, rubbish, offal, vegetables, paper shavings, carcasses, earth or
anything or substance whatsoever which may obstruct any such
sidewalk or impede, hinder or endanger travel thereon, tend to injure
or disfigure such sidewalk, or tend to render the sidewalk unclean or a
nuisance. No person shall cause any wagon, carriage, cart, automobile
or other vehicle, or any box, crate, bale, package, merchandise or other
thing to stand or be in or upon any such sidewalk.
(e) Any constable or other designated official of the Village shall require
any person who may have placed, or caused or permitted to be placed,
any of the items set forth in Subsection (c) of this section upon any
sidewalk in the Village, or any person who may be the owner of such
items, to immediately remove the items, or cause the removal thereof,
from such sidewalk and, in case such person shall neglect or fail to
remove the items within a reasonable time after being so notified, it
shall be the duty of such constable or Village official to remove, or cause
to be removed, from such sidewalk, at the expense of the person who
placed, or caused to be placed, such items upon such sidewalk or who is
the owner of the items, or both.
(a) No person shall place, or cause to be placed, drive, ride, push or draw
any horse or other beast of burden, or any wagon, cart, carriage,
automobile, bicycle or other vehicle, upon any sidewalk or crosswalk in
the Village so as to obstruct the sidewalk or crosswalk.
§ 70-3 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 70-5
1:384
§ 70-6. Snow and ice. [Code 1993, § 8.06; amended 1-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 01-2012]
(b) No person shall fasten, or cause to be fastened, any horse or other
animal in such a way that such horse or animal, or any vehicle or
equipment attached to the horse or animal, shall obstruct any sidewalk
or crosswalk in the Village.
(a) The occupants or owners of every building, tenement or premises
fronting upon any street within the Village, and the owners of any
unoccupied building or premise fronting on any street in the Village,
shall keep the sidewalks adjoining such premises reasonably free and
clear of snow and ice and, after and during every snow, such persons
shall clear the snow from such sidewalks before 10:00 a.m. of each day.
No snow or ice shall be placed upon any street, alley, highway, road,
sidewalk, and crosswalk. The Village shall attempt to contact property
owners, which violate the intent of the Ordinance, prior to snow
remediation by the Village. Where such property occupant(s) or
owner(s) fails to remove snow such that it may cause a hazard to
pedestrians, the motoring public, or Village snow removal equipment,
the Village may cause such snow (obstruction) to be removed to provide
safe passage by the public on any portion of the public right-of-way and
charge personnel time and equipment expense to the occupant or
owner at such rate as adopted by the Village Board as identified in Sec.
70-6(c)(3) below.
(b) The Village shall notify property owners of violations and penalties.
Notifications shall be provided by a minimum of two of the following
methods.
(1) Identifying snow removal ordinance in the Village newsletter.
(2) Placement of a one time notice in the official newspaper for public
notices.
(3) Personal letter mailed by the U.S. Postal Service mailed to the
property owner.
(c) Fines and fees may be levied against the property as follows:
(1) Inspection fee of $50 for each inspection.
(2) Fine of $50-$500.
a. First time offense $50.
b. Second time offense $100.
c. Third time offense $250.
d. Further offenses $500 each occurrence.
§ 70-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-6
1:385
§ 70-7. Road names. [Code 1993, § 8.07]
In accordance with Wis. Stats. § 81.01(11), which requires the assignment
of names for each road under the jurisdiction of the Village, the road names
as shown on the plat on file in the Clerk-Treasurer's office are hereby
assigned.
§ 70-8. Raking leaves and refuse. [Code 1993, § 8.08]
No person shall rake or place, or otherwise cause to be raked or placed, any
leaves, branches or other refuse onto any street, highway or public right-ofway
within the Village.
§ 70-9. Violations; penalties. [Code 1993, § 8.10]
Except as otherwise provided, any person found to be in violation of any
provision of this chapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated under this
chapter, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-15.
§ 70-10. through § 70-40. (Reserved)
(3) Fee to remove snow via contracted or Village personal equivalent
to costs incurred by the Village. Village charge of $90/hr shall be
levied for time spent by Village employee with hand controlled
snow removal equipment, or a charge of $125 per hour for operator
and driven snow removal equipment (i.e. front end loader, truck
with mounted snow plow), and a Portal to Portal Charge of one
quarter hour plus administrative costs.
(d) This ordinance does not apply to the Village of Mount Pleasant or other
governmental entities.
§ 70-6 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 70-10
1:386
ARTICLE II
Road Standards
§ 70-41. Construction. [Code 1993, § 8.09; Ord. No. 1-02, 1-14-2002;
Ord. No. 6-03, 5-15-2003]
(a) Any division of land as provided by statute, a subdivision control
ordinance of the county or Chapter 74 of this Code shall be subject to
the following conditions for approval:
(1) The minimum right-of-way width for a local street shall be 66 feet
and the minimum right-of-way width for a collector street shall be
80 feet.
(2) The following sections are typical cross sections for the Village. The
use of a particular section shall be determined by the Village Board
prior to the preparation of roadway plans:
a. Rural section.
1. Local street. Sixty-six-foot right-of-way, typical section
RU-1.
2. Collector street. Eighty-foot right-of-way, typical section
RU-2.
b. Urban section.
1. Local street. Sixty-six-foot right-of-way, typical section
URB-1.
2. Collector street. Eight-foot right-of-way, typical section
URB-2.
3. Commercial street. Eight-foot right-of-way, typical section
URB-2C.
c. Industrial section.
1. Urban. Typical section IND-URB.
2. Rural. Typical section IND-RU.
(3) The developer or his designated agent shall submit two sets of
plans for the proposed road construction to the Village for review of
conformance to the Village standards. A plat of the street, showing
all legal drainage easements, descriptions and legal land
descriptions, shall be furnished to the Village.
(4) Upon completion of final subgrade work and prior to the placement
of crushed aggregate base material, the roadway will be inspected
by the Village engineer to ensure that conformance to the proposed
grades is maintained.
§ 70-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-41
1:387
(5) Any street constructed in the Village shall conform to one of the
typical sections referred to in Subsection (a)(2) of this section and
shall be in accordance with the following minimum specifications:
a. Roadway type. The type of roadway shall be determined by the
type of drainage facilities available. Where the Village Board
determines that there are storm sewer facilities available or
are to be made available, the roadway section shall incorporate
a curb and gutter section conforming to the typical sections. If
the storm sewer facilities are not available, the rural roadway
section may be utilized.
b. Base course. The crushed aggregate base course will vary in
width in conformance with the typical section utilized and will
conform to the following depth requirements:
1. The base course for the residential sections shall be 10
inches of crushed stone, five inches of no. 2 stone (1 1/2
inches), five inches of three-quarter-inch traffic bond.
2. The depth for the base course for the industrial and
commercial sections shall be 14 inches of crushed stone,
eight inches of no. 2 stone (1 1/2 inches) and six inches of
three-quarter-inch traffic bond.
Such stone shall be of a quality at least equal to the quality
of stone used on streets maintained by the Village. Prior to
application, the grade of crushed stone must be approved by the
Village Highway Superintendent or the Village engineer prior to
application.
c. Curb and gutter.
1. Concrete curb and gutter utilized in the residential
sections shall conform to the typical section for a threeinch
mountable curb and gutter. In the commercial and
industrial areas, the curb and gutter shall conform to the
thirty-inch type D standard curb and gutter section.
2. The concrete curb and gutter shall not be placed earlier
than nine months, nor later than three years after
construction of the base course. If building permits have
been issued for 50% or more of the lots within the
subdivision, the developer shall complete the curb and
gutter installation no later than 18 months after
construction of the base course. Approval must be
obtained from the Village prior to construction of the curb
and gutter.
3. Whenever the construction of curb and gutter is required
pursuant to Subsection (a)(5)a of this section, the
subdivider shall furnish a document or surety bond
§ 70-41 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 70-41
1:388
sufficient to ensure compliance with such construction
within the time period, not earlier than nine months, nor
later than three years after construction of the base
course, all without expense to the Village.
4. Whenever any portion of curb and gutter existing in the
Village shall become so deteriorated and out of repair as to
be unsafe, replacement thereof shall be made by the
Village, without cost to the abutting property owner.
d. Drainage ditches. In areas where the rural section is
incorporated, the drainage ditches on each side shall have a
minimum of three to one side slopes and a depth sufficient to
provide adequate drainage. Drainage ditches shall not be less
than two feet, two inches in depth below the finished grade of
the center line of the street. Where deemed necessary by the
Village, the bottom of the drainage ditch shall be sodded with
sod acceptable to the Village and in such a manner that any
and all erosion will be eliminated. Sod used shall measure 18
inches by 72 inches, and the distance of laying the sod shall be
determined by the Village Highway Superintendent. Sod shall
be laid at both ends of all culverts unless otherwise stated.
e. Culverts required at driveway entrances. Culverts of sufficient
length and diameter to provide adequate drainage and access
shall be placed at all driveway entrances. Prior to installation,
such culverts are subject to approval of the Village engineer.
f. Culs-de-sac. A cul-de-sac with a minimum right-of-way radius
of 75 feet or a turnaround T with a minimum roadway length of
80 feet and minimum width of 20 feet shall be constructed to
the such specifications and shall be provided on all dead-end
streets and roads greater than one lot or 200 feet in depth.
g. Slopes of ditches and terrace areas. The slopes of the ditches
and terrace areas within the right-of-way shall be dressed with
a minimum of four inches of topsoil and seeded with perennial
rye grass mixed with Kentucky 31 fescue and Timothy seed at a
rate of one part perennial rye grass, one part Timothy seed and
two parts of Kentucky 31 fescue. Such seeding shall be
completed prior to the acceptance of the base course.
Following construction of the curb and gutter, all disturbed
areas shall be restored as outlined in this subsection.
h. Culverts crossing rural streets. All culverts crossing rural
streets shall be at least 44 feet in length and of such diameter
as prescribed by the Village engineer. Any culverts needed for
entrance to any Village road shall be of a sufficient length and
diameter as prescribed by the Village engineer.
i. Removal of dirt and topsoil. All black dirt and other topsoil
shall be removed from under the roadway and curb areas.
§ 70-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-41
1:389
j. Crushed stone. No crushed stone shall be allowed to be laid on
frozen ground or ground which has a water content which is
too high, all in accordance with the approval of the Village
Highway Superintendent.
k. Responsibility of developer. Prior to the paving of any road, the
developer shall be responsible for any additional stone or
grading work required. The work shall be completed by July 1
of the calendar year in which the paving is to be completed. If
the developer fails to complete the work by July 1, the Village
shall complete the work and charge the cost thereof to the
developer. The July 1 date may be subject to exceptions for
weather related reasons or extraordinary circumstances as
determined by the Village Highway Superintendent.
l. Required inspections.
1. The construction of any public road and storm sewer shall
take place under the supervision of a licensed professional
engineer, except for the binder/topping and proof roll,
which shall be inspected by the Village engineer. All public
sanitary sewer infrastructure shall be staked and
inspected by the Village engineer. Public water mains shall
be inspected per requirements and standards of the state
department of natural resources and/or the City of Racine
Water Utility.
2. Prior to commencing the construction of any public road or
storm sewer, the developer shall inform the Village of its
selection of a licensed professional engineer who will be
responsible for staking and full-time inspection of the work
pertaining to the construction of such road and storm
sewer. The professional engineer or firm thereof must have
a minimum of 10 years of municipal engineering
experience in the state and carry professional liability
insurance, naming the Village as an additional insured, in
the amount of $2,000,000.
3. The supervising licensed professional engineer shall
report directly and on a timely basis to the Village
Administrator or assigned staff on the progress of the
inspection and problems found during the inspection. The
expense for such inspections will be paid by the developer.
As an alternative and with the agreement of the Village,
the developer may have the Village perform such work,
and fees shall be paid in accordance with the developer's
agreement. Upon completion of the work, the licensed
professional engineer will certify to the Village that the
roads and associated public infrastructure (storm sewer
and water main) have been constructed according to
§ 70-41 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 70-41
1:390
plans, specifications and all applicable permits, approvals,
codes and ordinances.
4. Inspection and daily log requirements are as described in
Subsection (a)(5)1.7 of this section, as amended from time
to time.
5. In addition, the engineer in charge must be able to provide
as-built information, in an electronic format, meeting
Village requirements.
6. The developer will be assessed a charge based on the time
it takes to input the development as-built data into the
Village's existing electronic data base system.
7. Inspection requirements are generally as follows:
Minimum Inspection Standards for Public Road
Construction
Inspection Required
Item Full-Time Part-Time
Verification
Upon
Completion
Roadway cut
section
X
Roadway fill
sections
X
Excavation below
subgrade
X
Filling of
excavation below
subgrade
X
Proofrolling
subgrade
X
Placement of
aggregate base
course
X
Proofrolling
aggregate base
course
X
Installation of
curb and gutter
X
Pavement
placement
X
§ 70-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-41
1:391
Minimum Inspection Standards for Public Road
Construction
Inspection Required
Item Full-Time Part-Time
Verification
Upon
Completion
Pavement
marking and
signage
X
Restoration X
Erosion control
installation and
maintenance
X
Punchlist work X
Minimum Inspection Standards for Public Storm
Sewer Projects
Inspection Required
Item Full-Time Part-Time
Verification
Upon
Completion
Pipe Installation X
Structure
installation (MHs,
CB, FES)
X
Manhole invert
pouring
X
Restoration of
lawn areas
X
Restoration of
pavement
X
Detention pond
excavation
X
Detention pond
dam/berm
construction
X
Swale grading X
Erosion control
installation and
maintenance
X
Punchlist work X
§ 70-41 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 70-41
1:392
Minimum Standards for Inspection Logs
1. Project name and date of report
2. Name of firm providing the inspection services, name
of inspector, name of supervising engineer and names
of all contractors performing the work.
3. A detailed description of work performed, including:
a) Bedding and cover material used
b) Type of backfill material used
c) Method of compaction used
d) All drain tiles encountered and method of repair
and/or connection to storm sewer system
e) Erosion control methods and maintenance
information
f) All problems encountered and method of resolution
(6) The subdivider shall furnish either a document acceptable to the
Village, which shall require compliance with this section, or a
surety bond, sufficient to ensure compliance with this section
within 15 months from the date of approval, all without expense to
the Village, which document or surety bond shall also provide that
no parcels of land abutting upon the street shall be sold until after
the base course has been constructed and approved as provided in
this section.
(7) The use of land included in the plat, adjacent to curves and
intersections of such streets, sufficient in width and length for
adequate vision thereof for their use as a street, shall be restricted
so as not to interfere with such vision.
(8) The Village shall be notified before culverts are ready to be
installed, when rough and finished grading has been completed,
before crushed stone is applied and before the construction of curb
and gutter. The Village Highway Superintendent or Village
engineer, or both, shall make one inspection after grading has been
completed, one inspection after the required amount of stone and
full-time inspection for the curb and gutter construction.
(9) An inspection of the road shall be made after construction of the
base course is completed. The inspection will ensure the sanitary
sewers have not been damaged during the road construction. The
owner or contractor must be present when the inspection of the
street is made.
(10) All direct costs incurred by the Village for review and inspection,
including full-time inspection during curb and gutter construction,
will be the responsibility of the owner or developer.
§ 70-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-41
1:393
§ 70-42. through § 70-49. (Reserved)
(11)Written certification of the road base and curb/gutter elevations
shall be made by the developer's licensed engineer.
§ 70-41 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 70-42
1:394
ARTICLE III
Policies for Recouping Costs of Infrastructure Improvements
§ 70-50. Purpose.
The Village regularly installs public infrastructure improvements, such as
streets, water mains and sewers at Village cost. In some instances none of
such costs should be recouped by either special assessment or connection
charges. In some instances, to recover an appropriate share of such costs,
special assessment procedures should be used. In other situations, an
appropriate cost share should be recovered through the imposition of
connection charges.
§ 70-51. General special assessment policy.
(a) The Village will levy special assessments, when appropriate to do so,
under and pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0703.
(b) In an appropriate case, the Village will levy special assessments under
the taxing power of the Village, within a limited and determinable area,
for special benefits conferred, but not in excess of the value of the
special benefits conferred.
(c) In an appropriate case, the Village will levy special assessments under
the police power of the Village, within a limited and determinable area,
for special benefits conferred, upon a reasonable basis and in
proportion to the benefits accruing.
(d) All special assessments will be apportioned fairly and equitably among
properties in similar situations, taking into consideration the
uniqueness of individual properties.
(e) Special assessments will only be levied for a local improvement. If a
project provides both a community-wide and a local improvement, only
the local improvement component will be considered in levying special
assessments. In determining whether an improvement is local, in whole
or in part, the Village will refer to the then-current Village
Comprehensive Plan and other relevant information.
(f) For all special assessments, the Village will consider whether special
benefits have the effect of furnishing an uncommon advantage, which
either increases the services provided to the property, or otherwise
enhances its value. An uncommon advantage must be a benefit that
differs in kind, rather than in degree, from benefits enjoyed by the
general public.
(g) The Village will not levy a special assessment against any property that
is exempt from special assessment under Wisconsin Statutes.
(h) In considering any special assessment for a corner property, the Village
will allow a deduction or exemption where a special assessment has
previously been levied for the same improvement in an abutting street.
§ 70-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-51
1:395
(i) The special assessment costs may include the direct and indirect
construction costs, the resulting damages, the interest on bonds or
notes issued in anticipation of the collection of the assessments, a
reasonable charge for the services of the administrative staff of the
Village, the cost of any architectural, engineering and legal services
and any other item of direct or indirect cost that may reasonably be
attributed to the proposed work or improvement. The Village Board
may include costs incurred when private property is acquired for a
public project.
(j) In considering any special assessment, the formula to be used may be
any recognized formula, or combination thereof.
(k) In considering any special assessment, costs to be included for
calculation of the special assessment will be reduced by the costs added
for oversized facilities.
(l) In considering any special assessment, the Village will give
consideration to the presence of wetlands, flood plains, conservation
easements and similar factors affecting property.
(m) In the situation of property owners in a discrete developed area who
petition the Village to extend an improvement to serve their properties,
if the owners of 51% or more of the group of properties to be served by
the improvement agree to be specially assessed, all of the properties in
the group will be subject to special assessment.
(n) Special assessments may be deferred in certain limited situations.
(o) The Village will periodically review its special assessment payment
plan, for installments and interest rates. The current policy is as
follows:
Special Assessments shall be paid in full, or in annual installments.
Assessments also may be prepaid, partially or in whole, after the
installment method has been selected. The number of annual
installments in which an assessment is to be paid will be determined
in the Preliminary Assessment Resolution, based on the total amount of
the assessment, and in accordance with the following:
(1) If the assessment is less than $400, the assessment shall be paid in
one payment, within 90 days of completion of project.
(2) If the assessment is at least $400.01 to $1,500, the assessment
shall be paid in five annual installments.
(3) If the assessment is greater than $1,500.01, the assessment shall
be paid in 10 annual installments, as determined in the preliminary
assessment roll. In no event, shall the assessment installments be
for a period longer than 10 years.
(4) The rate of interest on the outstanding balance shall be 1.5%
greater than the Village's rate of interest on the bonds which were
§ 70-51 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 70-51
1:396
§ 70-52. Connection charges in lieu of special assessments.
issued to finance the project, or in the event no bonds were issued,
then 1.5% greater than the average rate of interest on all similar
bonds issued in the previous calendar year.
(5) All special assessments are due and payable in full upon
subdivision of the property or connection to the improvement for
which the special assessment was made.
(p) In all situations where a special assessment has been deferred for more
than 10 years, as of January 1, 2017, but has not become due and
payable because no event described in Subsection (o)(5) above has
occurred, the special assessment shall be converted to a connection
charge, as provided in § 70-52 below.
(a) In the situation of a property owner seeking to extend a public
infrastructure improvement to property to allow for development, with
the improvement traversing sparsely developed or agricultural areas,
the Village may require the requesting property owner to pay to the
Village, in advance, the total amount to extend the improvement to its
property. When an additional property connects to the improvement,
that property owner will contribute to the original requester's cost, by
payment of a connection charge to the Village. The Village will
periodically remit such collected sums to the requester or requester's
assignee. The amount of the connection charge will be equal to the
then-current connection charge, as set by the Village from time to time.
(b) In the situation of a property owner seeking to extend a public
infrastructure improvement to property to allow for development, with
the improvement traversing sparsely developed or agricultural areas,
the Village may charge the requesting property its fair share of the cost
of installation to the property and fund the remainder itself, with
municipal funds. When an additional property connects to that
improvement, that property owner will contribute to the Village's cost
by payment of a connection charge to the Village. The amount of the
connection charge will be equal to the then-current connection charge,
as set by the Village from time to time.
(c) In instances where the Village has installed a public infrastructure
improvement entirely at its expense and has not imposed a special
assessment for the project, which would otherwise qualify for special
assessment, a connection charge will be utilized. When a property
connects to the improvement, that property owner will contribute to the
Village's cost through a connection charge paid to the Village. The
amount of the connection charge will be equal to the then-current
connection charge, as set by the Village from time to time.
(d) In considering any connection charge for a corner property, the Village
will allow a deduction or exemption where a connection charge has
previously been paid for the same improvement in an abutting street.
§ 70-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-52
1:397
(e) The Village Clerk will maintain a docket identifying properties which
are subject to future connection charges. The Village Clerk will make
such docket available to property owners, prospective purchasers,
abstracters and title companies.
(f) Any property owner subject to a connection charge may pay for said
connection charge in installments identical to those set forth in
§ 70-51(o) provided that either connection to the public infrastructure
occurs or a property owner elects to begin installment payments within
12 months the property owner is mailed a copy of the resolution
pursuant to Subsection (f)(1).
(1) The Village Board shall notify property owners of the payment
installment option in Subsection (f) by resolution. The Resolution
shall be mailed to each property owner subject to a connection
charge informing the property owner of the availability of the
payment installment option in Subsection (f).
§ 70-52 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 70-52
1:398
Chapter 74
SUBDIVISIONS
§ 70-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-52
1:399

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 74-1. Authority. [Code 1993, § 18.01(1)]
This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. Ch. 236.
§ 74-2. Purpose. [Code 1993, § 18.01(3)]
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the division of land within the
Village in order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare;
further the orderly layout and use of land; prevent the overcrowding of
land; lessen congestion in the streets and highways; provide for adequate
light and air; facilitate adequate provision for water, sewerage and other
public requirements; provide for proper ingress and egress; and promote
proper monumenting of land subdivided and conveyancing by accurate legal
description. The approvals to be obtained by the subdivider, as required
in this chapter, are based on requirements designed to accomplish such
purposes.
§ 74-3. Abrogation and greater restrictions. [Code 1993, § 18.01(4)]
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued
pursuant to law. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
§ 74-4. Interpretation. [Code 1993, § 18.01(5)]
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter, such
provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the Village, and shall not be deemed a limitation or
repeal of any other power granted by statute.
§ 74-5. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 18.02; Ord. No. 13-2006,
11-27-2006]
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AGENCIES, ADVISORY — Agencies which, for the purpose of this
chapter, include the state department of natural resources, Village Plan
Commission, stormwater drainage district no. 1, sewer commission,
park commission and Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning.
Commission, affected water, electric or gas utilities or any other
agencies able to advise the subdivider or the approving and objecting
authorities.
§ 74-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-5
1:401
ALLEY — A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve
as secondary access to the side or rear of the properties of which the
principal frontage is a street.
AUTHORITIES, APPROVING —
AUTHORITIES, OBJECTING — The authorities defined in Wis. Stats.
Ch. 236, which have limited powers to object to a subdivision plat,
including the department of development, the department of
transportation (for plats that abut or adjoin a state trunk highway)
or streets that form a connecting link between segments of a state
trunk highway) and the department of commerce (to review plats not
served by a public sewer according to the rules relating to lot size and
elevation necessary for proper sanitary conditions).
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of
streets, and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines
or waterways, municipal boundary lines, villageship lines or county
lines.
BUILDING — Any structure built, used, designed or intended for the
support, shelter, protection or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels
or property of any kind and which is permanently affixed to the land.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line parallel to a lot line and at a
distance from the lot line to comply with the yard requirements set
forth in Chapter 90 of this Code.
CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP — The division of land by the owner or
subdivider, in compliance with the Chapter 90 of this Code, resulting in
the creation of not more than four parcels or building sites, of any size.
(See the definition of the term "Subdivision," for five or more parcels.)
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — An extensively developed plan, also called
a master plan, including proposals for future land use, transportation,
urban development and public facilities. The Village plan was
developed jointly with surrounding municipalities, and is known as
the Racine Urban District Plan, prepared under Wis. Stats. § 62.23. A
seven-county regional plan also exists, and was prepared and adopted
The Village Board; however, if the plat is within an area, the
annexation of which is being legally contested, the governing
bodies of both the annexing municipality and the Village shall
approve.
(1)
If the plat is within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of
a municipality:
a. The Village Board.
The governing body of the municipality if by July 1, 1958, or
thereafter if it adopted a subdivision code or an official map.
See also the definition of the terms "Agencies, advisory" and
"Authorities, objecting."
b.
(2)
§ 74-5 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-5
1:402
by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission. Devices
for the implementation of these plans include zoning ordinances,
jurisdictional highway system plans, land division control ordinances
and capital improvement programs.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room, or group of rooms, forming a single
habitable unit, with facilities that are used, or intended to be used, for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTRATERRITORIAL PLAT APPROVAL JURISDICTIONAL AREA — The
unincorporated area within 1 1/2 miles of a fourth class city or Village
and within three miles of all other cities.
FLOODLANDS — Lands, including the floodplains, floodways and
channels, subject to inundation by the 100-year recurrent interval flood,
or where such data is not available, the maximum flood of record.
(See studies by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service/Federal Emergency
Management Agency and Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission.)
FRONTAGE — The total dimension of a lot abutting a public street,
measured along the street right-of-way line.
HIGH WATER ELEVATION — The average annual high water level of
a pond, stream, lake, flowage or wetland, referred to an established
datum plan or, where such elevation is not available, the elevation of
the line up to which the presence of the water is so frequent as to leave
a distinct mark by erosion, change in, or destruction of, vegetation,
or other easily recognized topographic, geologic or vegetative
characteristic.
IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC — Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, open
channel, water main, roadway, park, parkway, public access, sidewalk,
pedestrian way, bicycle way, planting strip or other facility for which
the local municipality may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation.
JURISDICTIONAL HIGHWAY SYSTEM — A plan showing the level and
agency of government assuming responsibility for construction,
maintenance and operation of each segment of the total street and
highway system within the county.
LANDS, OPEN SPACE — Lands that are undeveloped or that are not
used for buildings or structures, transportation, communication or
utility facilities, or any other type of stationary or fixed development,
so as to be both physically and psychologically open in relation to
other adjacent land uses. Undeveloped woodlands, wetlands, marshes,
prairies, wildlife habitat areas, agricultural lands, lakes, rivers, streams
and their associated shorelands and floodlands are examples of open
space lands. Other types of open space lands include parks, parkways,
golf courses and green spaces, such as urban squares or plazas.
LOT — A contiguous parcel of land having frontage on a public street
or approved access thereto, occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a
§ 74-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-5
1:403
principal structure or use and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot
frontage, lot area, yard, parking area and other open space provisions
of Chapter 90 of this Code.
LOT WIDTH — The width of a parcel of land, measured at the rear of
a specified street yard or otherwise, as defined in Chapter 90 of this
Code.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting two or more streets at their
intersection, provided that the corner of such intersection shall have an
angle of 135° or less, measured on the lot side.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE AND REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot which
has a pair of opposite lot lines along two substantially parallel streets
and which is not a corner lot. On such lot, both street lines shall be
deemed front lot lines, but in the case of two or more continuous lots,
there shall be a common front lot line.
MEAN SEA LEVEL DATUM — The mean sea level datum, 1929
adjustment, as established by the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey.
MUNICIPALITY, LOCAL — For purposes of this chapter only, any form
of jurisdictional government, including towns, cities, Villages, counties,
sanitary sewer district commissions, stormwater commissions, farm
drainage districts, etc.
NATIONAL MAP ACCURACY STANDARDS — Standards governing the
horizontal and vertical accuracy of topographic maps and specifying
the means for testing and determining such accuracy, endorsed by
all federal agencies having surveying and mapping functions and
responsibilities. Such standards have been fully reproduced in appendix
D of the SEWRPC Technical Report No. 7, Horizontal and Vertical
Survey Control in Southeastern Wisconsin.
OUTLOT — A parcel of land, other than a lot or block, designated as
such on the plat. The intended use of an outlot shall be specified on the
plat.
PARK, COMMUNITY — An outdoor recreation site of between 10 and 40
acres in size, serving several neighborhoods, and generally containing
more open space and natural resource oriented areas than standard
neighborhood parks. Recreational activities include baseball and
softball, tennis, basketball, picnicking, swimming and various
recreational trails. Community parks serve people of all ages and have
an effective service radius of between one-half and three miles.
PARK, NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood park providing space and
facilities primarily for active and intensive recreational activities, such
as softball, tennis and basketball. Recreational activities are primarily
non-resource-oriented and available for all ages within a given
neighborhood. An ideal neighborhood park site is scenic, and contains
some natural resource areas for passive recreation. A neighborhood
park site is usually located a maximum of one-fourth mile from the
§ 74-5 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-5
1:404
primary users thereof. The suggested minimum size of a neighborhood
park is one acre.
PARKWAY and RECREATION CORRIDOR — A network of linear,
elongated lands that are primarily natural resource oriented, often
being closely associated with the elements of the natural resource
base that comprise environmental corridors. A parkway or recreation
corridor primarily accommodates trail oriented recreation, such as
hiking, nature study, biking, horseback riding, snowmobiling and cross
country skiing. Parkways or recreation corridors often function as
physical links between existing and proposed parks and open space
sites.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A map showing all required information of a
proposed subdivision, submitted for purposes of official consideration,
as regulated by Wis. Stats. Ch. 236 and this chapter. Under this chapter,
such a map can also be provided for divisions other than subdivisions.
PUBLIC WAY — Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, drainageway or
other public thoroughfare.
REPLAT — The process of changing the map or plat, which changes
the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat, or part thereof. The legal
dividing of a large block, lot or outlot within a recorded subdivision plat
without changing exterior boundaries of such block, lot or outlot is not
a replat. (See Wis. Stats. § 236.36.)
RESERVE STRIP — A strip of land, also called a spite strip, intended
by one private land owner to prevent another land owner access to the
street. Such strips are not permitted under this chapter.
SHORELANDS — Lands in the unincorporated areas of the county lying
within the following distances:
STREAM, NAVIGABLE — Any stream capable of floating any boat,
skiff or canoe of the shallowest draft used for recreational purposes.
The final determination shall be made by the department of natural
resources.
STREET, ARTERIAL — A street used, or intended to be used, primarily
for through traffic rather than for land access service. (See the county
jurisdictional highway plan for further subclassifications of arterials.)
Arterials should not ordinarily be residential streets, but do connect
residential areas to institutional, retail and employment areas of the
community. Arterials normally are continuous routes and must be
designed for higher peak hour or average daily motor vehicle traffic
volumes.
One thousand feet from the high water elevation of navigable lakes,
ponds and flowages; or
(1)
Three hundred feet from the high water elevation of navigable
streams or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever is
greater.
(2)
§ 74-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-5
1:405
§ 74-6. Jurisdiction. [Code 1993, § 18.03]
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street used, or intended to be used, to carry
traffic from local streets to the system or arterial highways.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A local street closed at one end, with a
turnaround provided for vehicular traffic.
STREET, FRONTAGE — A local street auxiliary to, and located on, the
side of an arterial street for access and utility service to the abutting
development.
STREET, LOCAL — A street used, or intended to be used, primarily for
access to abutting properties.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm or corporation, or any agent thereof,
dividing or proposing to divide land, resulting in a subdivision, certified
survey map or replat.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, outlot, parcel or tract of land by
the owner thereof or his agent for the purpose of transfer of ownership
or building development, where the act of division creates five or more
parcels or building sites of any size, by successive division within a
period of five years. (See the certified survey map for other divisions.)
SURETY BOND — A bond guaranteeing performance of a contract or
obligation through forfeiture of the bond if such contract or obligation
is unfulfilled by the subdivider.
WETLANDS — Areas in which the water table is at, near or above
the existing land surface and are characterized by hydric soils, such
as peats, mucks, other organic and mineral soils, and by the growth
of hydrophytes, such as sedges, cattails, red osier dogwoods and
tamaracks. Wetlands function as nutrient and sediment traps
contributing to the maintenance of good water quality and reducing
the threat of flooding. Wetlands protect shoreland areas from erosion
by absorbing storm impact and diminishing the scouring action of
currents. Wetlands also provide essential breeding, nesting, resting,
feeding grounds and predator escape cover for many species of fish and
wildlife.
WISCONSIN ADMINISTRATIVE CODE (WIS. ADMIN. CODE) — The
rules of administrative agencies having rule making authority in the
state, published in a looseleaf, continual revision system as directed
by Wis. Stats. § 35.93 and Wis. Stats. Ch. 227, including subsequent
amendments to such rules.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The office designated by the Village
Board to administer this chapter.
(a) Jurisdiction of the regulations set forth in this chapter shall include all
lands and waters within the Village. The provisions of this chapter, as it
applies to divisions of tracts of land, shall not apply to:
(1) Transfer of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order.
§ 74-5 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-6
1:406
§ 74-7. Compliance required. [Code 1993, § 18.04]
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or easements.
(3) Sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
property, if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots
resulting are not reduced below the minimum size required by this
chapter, the Chapter 90 of this Code or other applicable laws or
ordinances.
(4) Cemetery plats made under Wis. Stats. § 157.07.
(5) Assessors' plats made under Wis. Stats. § 70.27, but such
assessors' plats shall comply with Wis. Stats. § 236.15(1)(a) — (g),
(2)(a) — (e).
(a) No person shall divide any land located within the jurisdictional limits
of the regulations set forth in this chapter, which results in a
subdivision, certified survey map or replat, and no such subdivision,
certified survey map or replat shall be entitled to be recorded, and no
street shall be laid out or improvements placed therein without
compliance with all requirements of this chapter and the following:
(1) The provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 236, which are incorporated into
this chapter by reference.
(2) The rules of the department of commerce, division of health,
regulating lot size and lot elevation, if the land to be subdivided is
not served by a public sewer and provisions for such service have
not been made, or any other agency as designated by the state to
enforce the regulations.
(3) The rules of the department of transportation, division of highways,
relating to safety of access and the preservation of the public
interest and investment in the highway system, if the land owned or
controlled by the subdivider abuts on a state trunk highway or
connecting street.
(4) The rules of the department of natural resources, division of
environmental protection, setting water quality standards
preventing and abating pollution and regulating development
within floodland, wetland and shoreland areas.
(5) The comprehensive plan, or components of such plans, prepared by
state, regional, county or municipal agencies and duly adopted by
the Village Plan Commission.
(6) Village and county ordinances, including zoning, sanitary, building,
highway width map and official mapping ordinances.
§ 74-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-8
1:407
§ 74-8. Violations; penalties. [Code 1993, § 18.25]
Unless otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-15.
§ 74-9. through § 74-40. (Reserved)
§ 74-8 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-9
1:408
ARTICLE II
Administration And Enforcement
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 74-41. Compliance required. [Code 1993, § 18.09]
No person shall divide, convey or record any land in violation of this chapter
or Wis. Stats. Ch. 236, nor be issued a zoning permit, building permit
or sanitary permit authorizing the building on, or improvement of, any
lot or any part of any subdivision, certified survey map or replat within
the jurisdiction of this chapter, not of record as of the effective date of
the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, until the provisions and
requirements of this chapter have been fully met.
§ 74-42. Dedication and reservation of lands. [Code 1993, § 18.05;
Ord. No. 17-2005, 11-14-2005]
(a) The following provisions are established in order that adequate public
lands and open space sites may be properly located and preserved as
the Village develops:
(1) Donated land. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.29, when any plat is
certified, signed, acknowledged and recorded as prescribed in such
chapter of the statutes, every donation of land to the public
intended for streets, alleys, ways, commons or other public uses, as
designated on such plat, shall be deemed sufficient conveyance to
vest the fee simple title with the public.
(2) Reservation for future dedication. Where it is not practical or
desirable, in the judgment of the Village, to require the dedication
to the public of a road right-of-way, or other site for public use at
the time of platting, a reservation may be entered on the plat
showing the future location of such a dedication, subject to the
following conditions:
a. The reservation is drawn and described on the plat with the
same accuracy as required in this chapter for a dedication and
the intended purpose of the reserved area after future
dedication is shown (for example, reserved for future
dedication to public road purposes).
b. Provision is made for the acceptance of the reservation by the
Village Board in the same manner as acceptance of a
dedication.
c. Financial responsibility for installing required improvements
at the time of dedication is established in the reservation
acceptance resolution and recorded on the title of affected lots
or outlots.
§ 74-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-42
1:409
d. Authority to unilaterally require conversion of the reservation
to a dedication is vested in the Village Board by the acceptance
resolution. With Village Board approval in the acceptance
resolution, such authority may also be vested in any one of the
adjacent or underlying owners to the reserved area.
e. Setbacks and other yards for building and uses under Chapter
90 of this Code treat the reservation as if already dedicated,
which treatment shall also be recorded with the titles of
affected lots and outlots.
f. Vacations of reservations shall be made in the same manner as
provided in Wis. Stats. Ch. 236.
(3) Park sites. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.45, this subsection is
intended to make provision for public parks in developing
neighborhoods where vacant land is being converted to urban uses
and to ensure that such provision is in appropriate proportion to
the need created by the addition of development and is coordinated
with the locational goals of the Village's park and land use plans.
a. Consistency and approval. The design and layout of plats shall
be consistent with the Village's land use, neighborhood, and
park and open space plans, with the specific terrain and
related use characteristics of the site, park design standards
and reasonable public access needs. Upon preliminary
approval by the park and planning commissions of the general
site plan and prior to approval of a final plat, a determination
shall be made as to the specific method whereby such areas
shall be preserved. Public access shall be provided to all
navigable streams or lakeshores.
b. Village park fee(s). The subdivider or overlay planned
development project sponsor shall pay a park fee of $1,000 for
each single-family residential lot and each multifamily
residential dwelling unit at time of building permit. The park
fee shall not be paid prior to submission of a complete and
accurate building permit.
c. Acceptance of land in lieu of park fees. The Village has an
option to accept a voluntary dedication of land from the
developer sufficient for park purposes in lieu of payment of
park fees. It shall be within the sole discretion of the Village as
to whether the developer's request for a voluntary dedication
in lieu of park fees is sufficient to meet the intent of this
section. In the event the Village accepts a voluntary dedication
of lands from the developer, Subsection (a)(3)b of this section
shall be inapplicable.
d. Monies received. Monies received under Subsection (a)(3)b of
this section shall be placed in a separate and segregated
nonlapsing Village account established for the park service
§ 74-42 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-42
1:410
§ 74-43. Reservation of lands for public acquisition. [Code 1993,
§ 18.06]
Where a plat embraces all or part of a site designated for public ownership,
and for which the subdivider is not obligated by this chapter or Wis. Stats.
Ch. 236, to dedicate such lands to the public without compensation, the
subdivider shall nevertheless make such lands a part of the plat design,
assuming the lands will be purchased by the public, and reserve such lands
for public purchase for a period of up to three years from the date of
recording of the plat. To allow for the possibility that after the reservation
period the public might not acquire the land, the plat design may be such
that the reserved lands may be subdivided or otherwise put to a useful
private purpose consistent with the layout in the balance of the plat.
§ 74-44. Improvements. [Code 1993, § 18.07]
Before approval of any final plat, but based on an approved preliminary plat
and under Village inspection, the subdivider may install street, utility and
other public improvements as are required under Wis. Stats. § 236.13(2)(b)
and (c), and § 74-45. However, changes in installed improvements resulting
from changes in the final plat by the subdivider from the preliminary
plat are responsibilities of the subdivider. If such improvements are not
installed, as required at the time that the final plat is submitted for
approval, the subdivider shall, before recording the final plat, enter into a
contract with the Village agreeing to install the required improvements and
shall file with such contract a financial surety, satisfactory to the Village, as
a guarantee that such improvements will be completed by the subdivider or
his subcontractors within a reasonable time as agreed in the contract.
§ 74-45. Land suitability warning. [Code 1993, § 18.08]
district. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "park
service district" includes any park site within the Village
established for the Village to use in the part service district.
Such monies shall be used exclusively for site acquisition and/
or development of park lands which will serve the Village.
(a) No subdivision or building lot shall be created where the land is held by
the Village Board to be wholly or partially unsuitable for its proposed
use until there shall first be placed on the face of the plat a notation to
the affected areas that the specified conditions do or may exist, as a
warning to all future owners of this lot or nearby lots.
(b) Before applying the provisions of this section, the Village Board shall, in
writing, recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion
that the land is not suitable for a proposed use and afford the subdivider
an opportunity to present evidence regarding such unsuitability, if he so
desires. Thereafter, the Village Board may affirm, modify or withdraw
its determination of unsuitability. The following are the only factors
§ 74-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-45
1:411
which the Village Board, upon recommendation of the Plan
Commission, may consider under this section:
(1) Inadequate drainage of floodlands. Included within this category
may be lands not presently subject to flooding, but which may flood
in future years if the drainage basin develops further.
(2) Lands made, altered or filled. Lands made, altered or filled with
earth and nonearth materials.
(3) Bedrock. Lands having bedrock within six feet of the natural
undisturbed surface.
(4) Percolation rate. Soils having a percolation rate slower than 60
minutes per inch shall be noted where a soil absorption sewage
disposal system is contemplated.
(5) Soil types. The following soil types, as shown on the operational soil
survey maps prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, which have very severe limitations, shall not
be divided into building sites having an on-site soil absorption
sewage disposal system, unless such division is in conformance
with state sanitary regulations:
Soil Name
Map
Symbol Field Sheet Symbol
Adrian Ac 452-A and B and 453-A and B
Alluvial land Am, Ww 7W, 10-A, 10-W, 11-A and B and 11 WA
and B
Ashkum AtA 298-A and B, 300-A, 338-A and 398-A
Aztalan AuA, AzA,
AzB
72z, 37z, 38z, 51-A, B and C, 52-B,
53-A and B, 369-A and B, 369-z,
370-A and B, and 371-B
Beecher BcA 3361-A and B
Blount BIA 299-A and B
Colwood Cw 28-A, 29-A and B, 30-A, 48-A and B,
76V-A and B, 80V, 181V, 290-A and
291-A
Conover CyA 164-A, 178-A and B, 179-C, 188-A and
B, 189-B, 278-B and 364-B
Darroch DaA 26-A and B, 37-A and B, 203V, 250V
and 346V
Drummer Dt 126-A and B, 216Y, 326-A and B,
326Z-A and B and 339-A
Elliott EtA, EtB 3351-A and B, BM and C
§ 74-45 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-45
1:412
Soil Name
Map
Symbol Field Sheet Symbol
Fabius FaA 102-A and B, 174-A, B and C, 175-A
and B, and 182-A and B
Granby Gf, Gm,
GnA
49-A, 49Y, 66-A, 67-A, 180V-A, 250-A
and B, 251-A and B, 386-A and B, and
386Y
Houghton Ht 450-A and B, 451-A, B and C, and
462-A
Kane KaA 124-A and B, 332-A and B, and 346-A
and B
Lawson Lp 5-A, 23-A and B, and 54-A and B
Marsh Mf 4
Martinton MgA 41-A and B, and 42-A, B and C
Matherton MkA, MIA 42Y, 87-A and B, 87z, 109Y-A and B,
109-z-A and B, 203-A and B, 203Y-A
and B, 203z-A and B,233-A and B,
233Y-A and B, 233z-A and B, and
234-A, B and C
Montgomery Mzc 217-A and B, 217Y and 218-A and B
Mundelein MzfA 27-A and B, 38-A and B, 124V, 233v-A
and B, and 332v-A and B
Muskego Mzg 461-A
Mussey MzK 176-A and B, 180-A, 181-A, B and C,
and 290x
Navan Na 28z, 29z, 329-A, 330-A and B, 340-A
and B, 340z and 386z
Ogden Oc 456-A and B, and 457-A, B and C
Palms Pa 454-A and B, and 455
Pella Ph 63-A, B and C, 212-A and B, 213-A
and B, 214-A and B, 215-A, 216-A,
231-A and B, and 232-A
Radford RaA 328-A and B
Rollin Rt 228-A and B, 302, 458-A and B, 459-A
and 460-A
Sawmill Sg 5W-A and B
Sebewa Sm, So 76-A, 76Y-A and B, 76Z-A and B,
80-A, B and C, 80Y, 80Z, 81A and
181Z
Wallkill Wa 327-A and B
§ 74-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-45
1:413
§ 74-46. Variances. [Code 1993, § 18.10]
§ 74-47. Appeals. [Code 1993, § 18.11]
Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or a failure to approve
a plat may first appeal from such decision to the Village Board, if the
Village is involved, following the provisions of Wis. Stats. Ch. 68. If such
appeal is not granted or, if the objection or failure to approve is from some
other authority, the persons aggrieved may appeal from such rejection as
provided in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)10 — 15 and Wis. Stats. § 236.13(5), to
the court of record, within 30 days of notification of the rejection of the plat.
Where failure to approve is based on an unsatisfied objection, the agency
making the objection shall be made a party to the action. The court shall
direct that the plat be approved if it finds that the action of the approving
or objecting authorities is arbitrary, unreasonable or discriminatory.
§ 74-48. through § 74-70. (Reserved)
Soil Name
Map
Symbol Field Sheet Symbol
Wasepi WmA,
WnA
352, 59-A and B, 59Z-A and B, 60-A
and B, 60Z, 77-A and B, 78-A, 250Y,
25OZ-A and B, 251Y, and 215Z-A and
B
Yahara YaA 35-A and B, 36-A and B, 45-A, 46-A
and B, and 263
a. Land drained. Land drained by farm drainage title or farm
ditch systems, unless an alternate drainage improvement is
planned to serve the area.
b. Groundwater. Lands having evidence of groundwater within six
feet of the surface.
(a) The Village Board may waive or modify the requirements of this
chapter, to the extent deemed just and proper, where, in the judgment
of the Village Board, it would be inappropriate to literally apply the
provisions of this chapter.
(b) When such relief is granted, it shall be without detriment to the public
good and without impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter or of
adopted Village plans. A simple majority vote of the entire Village Board
membership present and voting shall be required to grant any
modifications to the provisions of this chapter and the reasons for such
decision shall be entered into the minutes of the meeting.
§ 74-45 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-48
1:414
DIVISION 2
Preliminary Plats
§ 74-71. Required. [Code 1993, § 18.12(1); Ord. No. 13-2006,
11-27-2006]
A preliminary plat shall be filed and approved prior to filing a final
subdivision plat. All subdivision plats shall be served by municipal sanitary
sewer and water prior to the acceptance of public roads and/or building
permits.
§ 74-72. Preapplication consultation. [Code 1993, § 18.12(2)]
Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat or
certified survey map, it is recommended that the subdivider consult with all
affected utilities, the Village Zoning Administrator or Plan Commission and
the county planning and zoning department in order to obtain advice and
assistance. Such consultation is not formal, but is intended to inform the
subdivider of the purpose and objectives of the regulations of this chapter,
the adopted regional, county or Village comprehensive plans and other
relevant ordinances, and to otherwise assist the subdivider in planning
his development. In so doing, both the subdivider and the Village may
reach mutual conclusions regarding the general program and objectives
of the proposed development and its possible effects on the neighborhood
and Village, and the subdivider will gain a better understanding of the
subsequent required procedures.
§ 74-73. Approval. [Code 1993, § 18.12(3)]
(a) Prior to submitting a final plat for approval, the subdivider shall submit,
for approval, a preliminary plat, accompanied by a letter of application.
The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter
and the subdivider shall file at least 15 copies of the plat and the cover
letter with the county planning and zoning department, along with the
proper receipt of payment of the fees in accordance with Article V of
this chapter. The planning and zoning department, acting as a clearing
house for approving and objecting authorities, shall, within two work
days after filing, submit, with a cover letter and the letter of application,
four copies to the county land use committee; two copies to the director
of planning functions of the state department of development; two
additional copies to the director of planning functions for
retransmission to the state department of transportation, if the
subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway or connecting street,
the state department of commerce, if a subdivision is not served by a
public sewer and provision for such service has not been made; six
copies to the Clerk-Treasurer; six copies to the Clerk of each adjoining
city or Village, if the subdivision lies within the extraterritorial plat
approval jurisdiction of such city or Village; and one copy to the school
board with jurisdiction. Additional copies may be required by approving
and objecting agencies.
§ 74-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-73
1:415
(b) In accordance with Wis. Stats. § 236.10, approving agencies are the
Village Board, the county land use committee and each adjoining city or
Village in whose extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction the
subdivision lies.
(c) The state department of development, state department of
transportation and state department of commerce shall be referred to
in this division as the "objecting agencies."
(d) Upon receipt from the county of the preliminary plat copies and
application, the Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately transmit the
materials to the Zoning Administrator, who shall immediately refer the
plat to the Village Plan Commission and other appropriate commissions
and staff for review and recommendation.
(e) The Zoning Administrator, in transmitting a copy of the preliminary plat
to all affected Village commissions or departments for their review and
recommendations concerning matters within their jurisdiction, shall
specify a time limit in which they must respond. Such time limit shall
ensure that the Plan Commission can make a recommendation
encompassing its own and all other recommendations to the Village
Board so the Village Board can act within 65 days of the date of the
original filing of the plat with the county clearinghouse. The Plan
Commission shall have principal responsibility for review of the plat for
its conformance to this chapter and to all related ordinances, rules and
adopted comprehensive plans.
(f) Within 20 days of the date of receiving their copies of the preliminary
plat, the objecting agencies shall notify the subdivider and all other
approving and objecting agencies of any objections. If there are no
objections, such agencies shall so certify on the face of the copy of the
plat and shall return that copy to the Village.
(g) If any objecting agency fails to act within 20 days, it shall be deemed to
have no objections to the plat.
(h) The Village Board shall approve, approve conditionally or reject such
plat within 65 days of the date of filing a preliminary plat with the
county planning and zoning department, unless the time is extended by
agreement with the subdivider. One copy of the plat shall thereupon be
returned to the subdivider, with the date and action endorsed thereon
and, if approved conditionally or rejected, a letter setting forth the
conditions of approval or the detailed reasons for rejections shall
accompany the plat. Reasons of rejections shall be clear enough to
direct the subdivider how a new plat can receive approval. Copies of the
Village's action shall also be filed with the county.
(i) Failure of the Village Board to act within 65 days of the date of filing, or
within the time extended by agreement with the subdivider, shall
constitute an approval.
§ 74-73 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-73
1:416
§ 74-74. Required information. [Code 1993, § 18.12(4), (5); Ord. No.
13-2006, 11-27-2006]
(j) Where a plat is approved conditionally, which conditions call for layout
changes, the subdivider shall provide the county planning and zoning
department with corrected copies of the preliminary plat for county
distribution to each approving and objecting authority for their files and
possible further comment.
(k) If the approving authorities shall approve a preliminary plat subject to
certain conditions, and such conditions shall not be identical, then the
more restrictive conditions shall apply. If the subdivider or any one of
the approving authorities shall deem it unclear as to which conditions
apply, the subdivider or the approving authority may request a joint
meeting of the subdivider and the other approving authorities for the
purpose of clarifying or, if need be, amending the conditions so as to
clarify the applicable conditions.
(l) Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not
constitute automatic approval of the final plat, except that, if the final
plat is submitted within two years of preliminary plat approval and
conforms substantially to the preliminary plat layout, as provided under
Wis. Stats. § 236.11(1)(b), the final plat shall be entitled to approval
with respect to such layout.
(a) A preliminary plat shall be based upon a survey by a registered land
surveyor and prepared on tracing cloth or paper, of good quality, at a
scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, and shall correctly show the
following information on the face of such plat:
(1) Title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded.
(2) Location of the proposed subdivision by government lot, quarter
section, section, township, range, county and state.
(3) Date, graphic scale and north point.
(4) Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider and land surveyor
preparing the plat.
(5) Entire area contiguous to the proposed plat which is owned or
controlled by the subdivider, even if only a portion of such area is
proposed for immediate development. The Village Plan Commission
may waive this requirement where it is unnecessary to fulfill the
purpose and intent of this chapter and undue hardship would result
from strict application thereof.
(6) Length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed
subdivision referenced to a corner established in the U.S. Public
Land Survey and the total acreage encompassed thereby.
§ 74-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-74
1:417
(7) Location of all existing property boundary lines, structures, drives,
streams and watercourses, wetlands, rock outcrops, wooded areas,
railroad tracks, bridges and other similar significant features
within the tract being subdivided or immediately adjacent thereto.
(8) Location, right-of-way width and names of all existing streets,
alleys or other public ways, easements, railroad and utility rightsof-
way, and all section and quarter section lines within the exterior
boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto.
(9) Location and name of any adjacent subdivisions, parks and
cemeteries and owners of record of abutting unplatted lands.
(10) Type, width and elevation of any existing street pavements within
the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto,
together with any legally established center line elevations, all
referenced to mean sea level datum.
(11) Location, size and invert elevations of existing sanitary or storm
sewers, culverts and drain pipes; the locations of manholes, catch
basins, hydrants, electric and communication facilities, whether
overhead or underground; and the location and size of any existing
water and gas mains within the exterior boundaries of the plat or
immediately adjacent thereto. If no sewers or water mains are
located on, or immediately adjacent to, the tract, the nearest such
sewers or water mains which shall be extended to serve the tract
shall be indicated by their direction and distance from the tract,
size and invert elevations.
(12) Corporate limit lines within the exterior boundaries of the plat or
immediately adjacent thereto.
(13) Existing zoning on, and adjacent to, the proposed subdivision.
(14) Existing contours within the exterior boundaries of the plat and
extending to the center line of adjacent public streets to National
Map Accuracy Standards, based upon mean sea level datum, at
vertical intervals of not more than two feet. At least two permanent
benchmarks shall be located in the immediate vicinity of the plat,
together with their elevations, referenced to mean sea level datum
and the monumentation of the benchmarks clearly and completely
described. The one inch equals 200 feet scale topographic maps for
the county may be used as a source of information.
(15) High water elevations of all ponds, streams, lakes flowages and
wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the plat or located
within 100 feet therefrom, referenced to mean sea level datum.
(16)Water elevations of all streams, ponds, lakes, flowages and
wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the plat or located
within 100 feet therefrom at the date of the survey, based on mean
sea level datum.
§ 74-74 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-74
1:418
§ 74-75. Protective covenants. [Code 1993, § 18.12(6)]
The Zoning Administrator may receive, and keep on file for reference, a
draft of protective covenants whereby the subdivider intends to regulate
land use in the proposed subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed
development, including solar access.
§ 74-76. Affidavit. [Code 1993, § 18.12(7)]
The surveyor preparing the preliminary plat shall certify, on the face of the
plat, that it is a correct representation of all existing land divisions and
features, and that he has fully complied with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 74-77. through § 74-100. (Reserved)
(17) Floodland and shoreland boundaries and the contour lines lying a
vertical distance of two feet above the elevation of the 100-year
recurrence interval flood or, where such data is not available, five
feet above the elevation of the maximum flood of record within the
exterior boundaries of the plat or located within 100 feet
therefrom.
(18) Soil types and their boundaries within the exterior boundaries of
the plat, as shown on the operational soil survey maps prepared by
the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
(19) Locations, widths and names of all proposed streets and public
rights-of-way, such as alleys and easements.
(20) Approximate dimensions and areas of all lots, together with
proposed lot and block numbers.
(21) Location and approximate dimensions of any sites to be reserved or
dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways or public use, or
which are to be used for group housing, shopping centers, church
sites or other nonpublic uses not requiring platting.
(22) Approximate radii of all curves.
(23) Any proposed land or stream access, with a small drawing clearly
indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to
such access.
(24) Any proposed navigable lake and stream improvement or
relocation, and notice of application for approval by the division of
environmental protection of the state department of natural
resources, when applicable.
(25) Any additional information required by the Village Zoning
Administrator, Village engineer or Village Board.
§ 74-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-77
1:419

DIVISION 3
Final Plats
§ 74-101. Approval and recording. [Code 1993, § 18.13(intro); Ord.
No. 13-2006, 11-27-2006]
The approval and recording of a final plat shall take place before the
subdivision of any land, and shall be in conformance with the preliminary
plat and include an agreement on necessary improvements. All subdivision
plats shall be served by municipal sanitary sewer and water prior to
acceptance of public roads and/or building permits.
§ 74-102. State review. [Code 1993, § 18.13(3)]
§ 74-103. Approving authorities. [Code 1993, § 18.13(2)]
The Village Board, the county land use committee and each adjoining
city or Village in which the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction the
subdivision lies are designated approving authorities.
§ 74-104. Objecting agencies. [Code 1993, § 18.13(3)]
The state department of development and state department of commerce
shall be referred to in this division as the "objecting agencies." The state
(a) The subdivider or his agent shall submit the original plat, before any
other approvals of the final plat are made, to the director of the
planning function of the state department of development, who shall
forward copies to the state department of transportation, if the
subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway or a connecting
street, and to the state department of commerce, if the subdivision is
not served by a public sewer and provision for such service has not
been made.
(b) After approval by the director of the planning function and the other
state departments, the subdivider shall file at least 15 copies of the final
plat and a cover letter with the county planning and zoning department,
along with the proper fees in accordance with Article V of this chapter.
The planning and zoning department, acting in a clearinghouse
function, shall, within two working days after such filing, with a cover
letter and letter of application, transmit four copies of the final plat to
the county land use committee; four copies to the Clerk-Treasurer; six
copies to the Clerk of each adjoining city or Village, if the subdivision
lies within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of such city or
Village; and one copy to the school board with jurisdiction. The
subdivider shall supply additional copies, if requested by approving or
objecting agencies.
(c) The Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately refer the plat to the Zoning
Administrator, who shall refer the plat to the same departments and
agencies who acted on the preliminary plat.
§ 74-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-104
1:421
department of natural resources may be an advising agency where
shorelands are involved.
§ 74-105. Filing time line. [Code 1993, § 18.13(4)]
If the final plat is not submitted within two years of the date of approval of
the preliminary plat, the approving authorities may refuse to approve the
plat for cause. Extensions may be granted upon mutual agreement of all
approving authorities. The final plat may, if permitted by the Village Board,
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to record at that time. Approval of a final plat for only
a portion of the preliminary plat shall extend approval for the remaining
portion of the preliminary plat for two years from the date of such final
approval.
§ 74-106. Action by objecting agencies. [Code 1993, § 18.13(5)]
Within 20 days of the date of receiving their copies of the final plat, the
objecting agencies shall notify the subdivider and all other approving and
objecting agencies of any objections. If there are no objections, they shall
so certify on the face of the copy of the plat and shall return that copy
to county, which shall notify the Village. If an objecting agency fails to act
within 20 days, it shall be deemed to have no objections to the plat.
§ 74-107. Village Board action. [Code 1993, § 18.13(6)]
Upon recommendation of the departments and agencies who reviewed the
preliminary plat, the Village Board shall examine the final plat as to its
conformance with the approved preliminary plat and conditions of approval
of the preliminary plat, this chapter and all related ordinances, rules or
regulations. If the final plat substantially conforms to the preliminary plat
as approved, including any conditions of such approval, it is entitled to
approval.
§ 74-108. Time of action. [Code 1993, § 18.13(7)]
Within 40 days of the date of filing of the final plat, the Village Plan
Commission and all other departments and agencies shall recommend
approval or rejection of the plat and shall transmit the final plat, along with
their recommendations, to the Village Board. Within 60 days of the date
of filing the original plat, the Village Board shall approve or reject such
plat, unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivision. If the
plat is rejected, the reasons for such rejection shall be clearly stated in the
minutes of the meeting and a written statement of the reasons forwarded to
the subdivision and surveyor. Such statement shall specify what corrections
would result in approval.
§ 74-104 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-109
1:422
§ 74-109. Failure of the Village Board to act. [Code 1993,
§ 18.13(8)]
If the Village Board fails to act within 60 days, assuming the time has not
been extended and no unsatisfied objections have been filed, the plat shall
be approved.
§ 74-110. Recordation. [Code 1993, § 18.13(9)]
After the final plat has been approved by the Village Board and
improvements, as required by the Village, have been installed or a contract
agreed and sureties insuring their installation are filed, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the plat attesting to such approval
to be duly executed and the plat returned to the subdivider for recording
with the county register of deeds. The register of deeds cannot record the
plat unless it is offered within 30 days from date of last approval or six
months from first approval. The subdivider shall notify the county, which
shall notify all approving agencies, if the plat is not recorded within six
months from first approval.
§ 74-111. Copies. [Code 1993, § 18.13(10)]
The subdivider shall file 10 copies of the final plat, as recorded with the
planning and zoning department, for distribution to the Clerk-Treasurer,
county Treasurer, county highway commissioner, county surveyor, county
Zoning Administrator and other affected agencies for their files.
§ 74-112. Replat. [Code 1993, § 18.13(11)]
When it is proposed to replat a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, so
as to change the boundaries of a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, the
subdivider or person wishing to replat shall vacate or alter the recorded
plat as provided in Wis. Stats. §§ 236.40 — 236.44. The subdivider or person
wishing to replat shall then proceed as specified in §§ 74-7 and 74-42.
§ 74-113. Preparation; compliance required. [Code 1993,
§ 18.13(12)]
A final plat prepared by a registered land surveyor shall be required for all
subdivisions. Such plat shall comply in all respects with the requirements of
Wis. Stats. § 236.20, and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 74-114. Additional information. [Code 1993, § 18.13(13); Ord. No.
13-2006, 11-27-2006]
(a) In addition to the information required in Wis. Stats. § 236.20, the final
plat shall correctly show the following information on its face:
(1) Exact street width along the line of any obliquely intersecting
street.
(2) Railroad rights-of-way within, and abutting, the plat.
§ 74-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-114
1:423
§ 74-115. Surveying and monumenting requirements. [Code 1993,
§ 18.13(14)]
All final plats shall meet all of the surveying and monumenting
requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.15.
§ 74-116. State plane coordinate system. [Code 1993, § 18.13(15)]
Where the plat is located within a quarter section, the corners of which
have been relocated, monumented and placed on the state plan coordinate
system by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission or
the county, the plat shall be tied directly to one of the section or quarter
corners so relocated, monumented and coordinated. The exact grid bearing
and distance of such tie shall be determined by field measurements, and
the material and state plane coordinates of the monument marking the
relocated section or quarter corner to which the plat is tied shall be
indicated on the plat. All distances and bearings shall be referred to the
state plane coordinate system. The grid bearing and distance of the tie shall
be determined by a closed survey meeting the error of closure specified in
this article for the survey of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision.
(3) Additional setback lines or yards required by the subdivider, which
are more restrictive than the zoning district in which the plat is
located, are to be included in recorded covenants.
(4) Reserved.
(5) Floodland and shoreland boundaries and the contour line lying a
vertical distance of two feet above the elevation of the 100-year
recurrent interval flood or, where such data is not available, five
feet above the elevation of the maximum flood of record within the
exterior boundaries of the plat or located within 100 feet
therefrom.
(6) All lands reserved for future public acquisition, dedication or the
common use of property owners within the plat. If property
reserved for common use is located within the subdivision,
provisions and plans for its use and maintenance shall be submitted
with the plat.
(7) Special restrictions required by the Village Board and any other
approving or objecting agency relating to access control along
public ways, the provision of planting strips or the treatment of
shorelands and floodlands.
(8) Any other necessary information required by the Village to correct
or clarify the plat.
§ 74-114 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-117
1:424
§ 74-117. Certificates. [Code 1993, § 18.13(16)]
All final plats shall provide all the certificates required by Wis. Stats.
§ 236.21, and, in addition, the surveyor shall certify that he has fully
complied with all provisions of this chapter.
§ 74-118. Covenants. [Code 1993, § 18.13(17)]
The Zoning Administrator may receive copies for reference of any
protective covenants whereby the subdivider intends to regulate land use in
the proposed subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development,
including solar access covenants.
§ 74-119. Utility amendments during construction to final plat.
[Ord. No. 12-2005, 6-27-2005]
Following recordation of the final plat and prior to the Village accepting
reservations for roadways, etc., the Village Administrator or his designee
may allow minor adjustments of the placement of utilities within platted
easements. Said minor adjustments to the final plat must be accompanied
by a proper fully executed affidavit of correction by the developer within
seven days of any approval by the administrator or his designee at any
minor adjustment to said plat. After review by the Village Administrator
or his designee, the developer shall record the affidavit of correction and
demonstrate proof thereof to the Village within seven days of the
administrator or designee's review and approval. The Village Administrator
or his designee may not in conjunction with any amendment to a final
plat during construction amend or change any lot including outlots in
size or configuration. The Village may withhold approval and acceptance
of roadways until the developer fully complies with proper affidavits of
correction delineating any amendments made pursuant to this section.
§ 74-120. through § 74-140. (Reserved)
§ 74-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-120
1:425

DIVISION 4
Certified Survey Maps
§ 74-141. Preliminary map required. [Code 1993, § 18.14(1); Ord.
No. 13-2006, 11-27-2006]
Prior to the filing of a final certified survey map, a preliminary map shall be
filed and approved. Such map shall show the information listed in § 74-148,
and include a letter of application. All certified survey maps shall be served
by municipal sanitary sewer and water if such infrastructure is within
350 feet of the parent property being subdivided. The 350 feet shall be
measured from the closest distance to the existing municipal sanitary sewer
and water, not property lines.
§ 74-142. Preapplication review. [Code 1993, § 18.14(2)]
Prior to the filing of a preliminary certified survey map, it is recommended
that a preapplication review be conducted in conformance with chapter
74-72.
§ 74-143. Use. [Code 1993, § 18.14(3)]
Lands to be divided which do not constitute a subdivision are regulated by
this division and include the division of land into not more than four parcels
or building sites, any one of which is 35 acres or less in size, or when it
is proposed to divide a block, lot or outlot within a recorded subdivision
plat into not more than four parcels or building sites without changing the
boundaries of such block, lot or outlot, the subdivider shall divide by use of
a certified survey map. The certified survey map shall include all parcels of
land 35 acres or less in size and may, at the owner's discretion, include any
other parcels containing more than 35 acres. The subdivider shall prepare
the certified survey map in accordance with § 74-148 and shall file six copies
of the map and a letter of application with the county planning and zoning
department with the appropriate receipts of fees from the Village.
§ 74-144. Recording. [Code 1993, § 18.14(4)]
All certified survey maps shall be recorded pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.34,
as amended.
§ 74-145. Action of Village Board. [Code 1993, § 18.14(5)]
Within 30 days from the date of filing of the certified survey map, the Village
Board shall recommend approval, conditional approval or rejection of the
map. If the map is rejected, the reason for such rejection shall be stated
in the minutes of the meeting and a clear written statement forwarded to
the subdivider indicating what must be done to gain approval. If the map is
approved, the Village Board shall cause the Clerk-Treasurer to certify such
approval on the face of the original map and return the original map to the
subdivider.
§ 74-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-146
1:427
§ 74-146. Improvement agreement. [Code 1993, § 18.14(6)]
All improvement requirements specified for a final subdivision plat, or the
execution of an agreement and financial surety for such plat, shall be met
for a certified survey map as part of the approval process.
§ 74-147. Final filing time line. [Code 1993, § 18.14(7)]
Where a preliminary certified survey map has been approved, all the
provisions regarding the length of time to file a final subdivision plat in
conformance to such preliminary plat in this chapter shall apply as well to
this division; however, the Village Board may waive the requirement of a
separate preliminary certified survey map submittal and allow simultaneous
filing of the preliminary and final maps in uncomplicated cases where a
preliminary approval serves no useful purpose. A final certified survey
map, in conformance to an approved preliminary certified survey map, is
entitled to approval under the same terms as applied by this chapter to final
subdivision plats.
§ 74-148. Required information. [Code 1993, § 18.14(8); Ord. No.
13-2006, 11-27-2006]
(a) A map prepared by a land surveyor registered in the state shall be
required for all certified surveys. Such map shall comply in all respects
with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34. The certified survey shall
also comply with the design standards set forth in § 74-44 and with the
improvement requirements set forth in § 74-45. In addition to the
information required by Wis. Stats. § 236.34, the final map shall
correctly show the following on its face:
(1) Date of map.
(2) Graphic scale, location map and north point.
(3) Name and address of the owner, subdivider and surveyor.
(4) All existing buildings, watercourses, drainage ditches and other
features pertinent to proper division, including topography, if the
land is undeveloped.
(5) Names of adjoining streets, highways, parks, cemeteries,
subdivisions, ponds, streams, lakes, flowages and wetlands.
(6) Additional building setback lines or yards required by the
subdivider, which are more restrictive than the zoning district in
which the plat is located and are to be included in the recorded
covenants.
(7) Locations and results of percolation and soil boring tests on all
maps to be served by on-site sanitary systems in cases where
municipal sanitary sewer mains are more than 350 feet from the
parent property being subdivided. The 350 feet shall be measured
§ 74-146 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-148
1:428
§ 74-149. State plane coordinate system. [Code 1993, § 18.14(9)]
Where the certificate survey map is located within a quarter section, the
corners of which have been relocated, monumented and placed on the state
plane coordinate system by the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission or the county, the map shall be tied directly to one of the
section or quarter corners so coordinated. The exact grid bearings and
distance of such tie shall be determined by field measurements, and the
material and state plane coordinates of the monument marking the section
of the quarter corner to which the map is tied shall be indicated on the map.
All distances and bearings shall be referenced to the state plane coordinate
system.
§ 74-150. Certificates. [Code 1993, § 18.14(10)]
The final certified survey map shall provide all of the certificates required of
Wis. Stats. §§ 236.34 and 236.21, and, in addition, the surveyor shall certify
that he has fully complied with this chapter.
§ 74-151. Recordation. [Code 1993, § 18.14(11)]
The certified survey map shall only be recorded with the county register
of deeds after certificates of the approving authorities, the surveyor and
all other required certificates accompany the map. The register of deeds
shall record the certified survey in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 236.34(2).
The subdivider shall furnish the certificate of recordation and copies of the
certified survey map as recorded to all approving authorities within 30 days
after recording.
§ 74-152. through § 74-180. (Reserved)
from the closest distance to the existing municipal sanitary sewer
and water, not property boundaries. Such tests shall be conducted
in accordance with Wis. Admin. Code. Ch. Comm. 85, and be taken
at the location and depth at which the soil absorption waste
disposal system is to be installed. The results of such tests shall be
submitted on an accompanying document.
(8) All lands reserved for future public acquisition or dedication.
(9) Floodland and shoreland boundaries and the contour line lying at a
vertical distance of two feet above the elevation of the 100-year
recurrent interval flood or, where such data is not available, five
feet above the elevation of the maximum flood of record within the
exterior boundaries of the map or located within 100 feet
therefrom.
(10) Any additional information required by the approving authorities.
§ 74-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-152
1:429

ARTICLE III
Design Standards
§ 74-181. Street layouts. [Code 1993, § 18.15(1)]
In any new subdivision, the street layouts shall take into account the
arrangement, width and location indicated on the county jurisdictional
highway system plan, official width map and comprehensive plan or
component neighborhood plan, if any, of the Village or county. In areas for
which detailed neighborhood plans have not been completed, the street
layout shall conform to the functional classification of the various types
of streets, and shall be developed and located in proper relationship to
existing and proposed streets, to the topography, to such natural features
as streams and tree growth, to further the public convenience and safety,
to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets, to existing
or planned utilities and to the most advantageous development of adjoining
areas. The subdivision shall be designed so as to provide each lot with
satisfactory access to a public street or approved way.
§ 74-182. Arterial street arrangement. [Code 1993, § 18.15(2)]
(a) Arterial streets shall be platted with greater right-of-way widths and
built with flatter vertical curvature to accommodate their planned
heavier traffic volumes, including possible transit service; be properly
integrated and continuous with the existing and proposed system of
arterials; and often will be restricted as to the location and amount of
direct access to be provided to adjacent lands. In order to protect the
traffic-carrying capacity and safety of arterials, and to provide some
shielding of adjacent residential uses from the adverse impacts of
arterial traffic, whenever the proposed land division contains, or is
adjacent to, an arterial highway or major collector street, design of the
street and lot layout shall take the following into account:
(1) In the case of nonresidential land uses, the proliferation of many
high volume access points shall be discouraged in favor of fewer
planned openings that are shared or that provide service through
an internal street system.
(2) In the case of residential land uses with high vehicle density, the
minimum access for nonresidential uses shall be observed or use
made of the reversed frontage access approach, both with
consideration for screening of the uses from arterial traffic impact.
(3) In the case of residential uses with lower vehicle densities, direct
access to the arterials shall be limited to the lowest density
residences with encouragement of deeper lots and greater
setbacks, and all other residential uses shall be arranged on
internal streets or ways, including reversed frontage shielded
toward the arterial by a screening area consisting of earth mounds
or plantings. The width of side lots and the depth of reversed lots
§ 74-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-182
1:431
§ 74-183. Collector street arrangement. [Code 1993, § 18.15(3)]
Collector streets may be platted with a width somewhat greater than the
local streets they serve and a somewhat flatter gradient, in order to convey
the traffic from residential areas to the arterial street and highway system,
and to accommodate possible transit routes or bicycle/pedestrian paths.
Collector streets may also contain along their routes neighborhood or
subcommunity retail, school or other institutional facilities. Although access
is usually not restricted between a collector street and any abutting parcels,
when the amount of traffic volume is expected to be sufficiently high,
residential uses desirably should take their primary access from the feeder
local streets rather than from the collector streets. Collector streets should
also be positioned with respect to topography to permit an efficient design
for storm and sanitary sewers.
§ 74-184. Local street arrangement. [Code 1993, § 18.15(4)]
with such screening shall be adequate to accommodate a screening
area no less than 20 feet in width.
(a) Local streets are primarily for the purpose of providing access to
property and should, therefore, be designed to avoid, as much as
possible, any through traffic or any fast movement of vehicles. The
emphasis should instead be on the safety of pedestrians and bicyclists,
fitting the local street and lot pattern to topography to achieve good
building sites and to permit efficient water, storm and sanitary utility
service. Achieving such criteria will involve emphasis on shorter streets
and avoiding excessive widths or straightness, both of which can
contribute to high speeds and accidents. Three subcategories of local
streets are as follows:
(1) Subcollector. A subdivision street having limited through traffic,
usually only the amount originating or destined within that
subdivision. In order to both keep the limited through traffic at
slower speeds and to provide an aesthetically pleasing and
functional placement for building sites, the rights-of-way should be
gently curving, avoiding straightness. Rights-of-way and paving
width for subcollectors shall be sufficient to accommodate their
subsidiary role of handling limited through traffic; however, the
width shall still be less than for collector streets in recognition of
the dominant purpose of access to parcels and the need for
pedestrian and bicycle safety.
(2) Lane. Serving somewhat less traffic than the subcollector, being
either a longer cul-de-sac or loop street, or providing access to a
series of short places branching off the lane. Rights-of-way and
pavement widths should be kept limited, consistent with providing
space for underground utility needs and expected on-street parking
or snow storage, rather than traffic volume.
§ 74-182 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-184
1:432
§ 74-185. Adjacent properties. [Code 1993, § 18.15(5)]
Proposed streets intended to serve or extend to the boundary lines of the
tract being subdivided shall normally be extended as part of platting, unless
such extension is prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or
unless the approving authorities find that such extension is not necessary
or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision or the
advantageous development of the adjacent tracts.
§ 74-186. Reserve strips. [Code 1993, § 18.15(6)]
Reserve strips (spite strips) shall not be permitted on any plat to prohibit
access to streets, alleys or other public property.
§ 74-187. Alleys. [Code 1993, § 18.15(7)]
Alleys may be provided in all subdivisions for off-street loading and service
access, subject to approval of the approving authorities. Dead-end alleys
shall be provided with an adequate turnaround. Alleys shall not normally
connect to an arterial street or highway.
§ 74-188. Street names. [Code 1993, § 18.15(8)]
Proposed streets which are in alignment with, or join, an existing and
named street, shall normally bear the name of the existing street. Names
of new streets shall not duplicate or be similar to existing street names.
The use of the suffix "street," "avenue," "boulevard," "drive," "place," "court"
or a similar description shall not be a sufficient distinction to constitute
compliance with this subsection. All proposed street names shall be
approved by the Plan Commission.
§ 74-189. Limited access highway and railroad right-of-way
treatment. [Code 1993, § 18.15(9)]
(3) Place, court and circle. A short dead-end street, such as a cul-desac
or loop street, where the total volume of traffic will be quite
low, both because of the limited number of traffic generating
parcels on the street and the total absence of through traffic. The
rights-of-way and paving widths can be the least of any of the local
streets, with such requirements set more by the expected amount
of on-street parking and snow storage space, or the need for
underground utilities or vehicle turnaround space, rather than
traffic volume.
(a) Whenever a proposed subdivision contains, or is adjacent to, a railroad
right-of-way or limited access highway (a highway where right-ofaccess
has been purchased by a unit of government or restricted as
provided by Wis. Stats. Ch. 84), the design shall provide the following
treatment:
§ 74-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-189
1:433
§ 74-190. Streets, highways and alleys. [Code 1993, § 18.15(10)]
(1) When residential lots within the proposed subdivision back upon
the right-of-way of an existing or proposed limited access highway
or railroad, a planting strip at least 30 feet in depth shall be
provided adjacent to the highway or railroad, in addition to the
normal lot depth. The strip shall be a part of the platted lots, but
shall have the following restriction lettered on the face of the plat:
"This strip is reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs, and
the building of all structures on this strip, except public or private
utility structures, is prohibited."
(2) On each side of the limited access highway or railroad right-of-way,
business and industrial districts shall have frontage roads adjacent
to the right-of-way, or streets approximately parallel to, and at a
suitable distance from, such highway or railroad for the
appropriate use of the land between such streets and highway or
railroad, but not less than 200 feet from such street or railroad.
(3) Streets parallel to a limited access highway or railroad right-of-way,
when intersecting an arterial street, highway or collector street
which crosses such railroad or limited access highway, shall
normally be located at a minimum distance of 200 feet from such
railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. Such distance,
where desirable and practicable, shall be determined with due
consideration of the minimum distance required for further
separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
(a) All proposed streets, highways and alleys shall conform to the minimum
right-of-way width as specified by Chapter 70 of this Code, the county
jurisdictional highway system plan, the comprehensive plan,
comprehensive plan component, neighborhood development plan or the
official county highway width map. Design of the streets for a proposed
subdivision should be such that every parcel is provided with adequate
access to a public right-of-way or approved way. The location and
design of such streets shall consider their relationship to existing and
planned streets, topographic conditions, natural features, public
convenience and safety.
(1) Urban and rural arterial streets. Urban and rural arterial streets
shall be designed in accordance with standard engineering
practices, based on state and/or county criteria. The minimum
right-of-way to be dedicated shall be as shown in the county
jurisdictional highway system plan. Adequate site distances for safe
stopping, as recommended by the county highway department,
should be provided on both vertical and horizontal curves.
Alignment between control points should be as high a standard as
is commensurate with topography, terrain, design traffic and the
reasonable obtainable right-of-way.
§ 74-189 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-190
1:434
§ 74-191. Maximum street grades. [Code 1993, § 18.15(11)]
§ 74-192. Culs-de-sac. [Code 1993, § 18.15(12)]
§ 74-193. Half streets. [Code 1993, § 18.15(13)]
Where an existing dedicated or platted half street is adjacent to the tract
being subdivided, the other half of the street shall be dedicated to the
Village. The platting of half streets should be avoided, wherever possible.
§ 74-194. Temporary termination of streets. [Code 1993,
§ 18.15(14)]
Temporary termination of streets at the boundary of a subdivision intended
to be extended at a later date, and where five or more dwelling units have
driveway access to such streets, or when the distance from the nearest
(2) Minimum center line radius of curves. When a continuous street
center line deflects at any one point by more than 5°, a horizontal
curve shall be introduced, having a radius of curvature on such
center line of 300 feet plus (arterials), and 150 feet plus (collector
or less). Reverse curves shall be separated by a tangent section of
at least 200 feet (arterials) and 100 feet (collectors/locals).
Adjustment in superelevation design runoff may be needed for
smooth riding, surface drainage and good appearance.
(a) Unless necessitated by exceptional topography, the maximum street
grade shall be five to 12% for pedestrian ways, 10% for alleys, eight to
10% for local streets, 8% for collectors and 6% for arterials. The grade
of any street shall in no case be less than 1/2 of 1%.
(b) Street grades shall be established, wherever practicable, so as to avoid
excessive grading, the unnecessary removal of ground cover and tree
growth, and the general leveling of the topography.
(c) All changes on street grades shall be connected by vertical curves of
sufficient length to provide adequate stopping sight distance over the
vertical curve. As an absolute minimum, a length equivalent in feet to
30 times the algebraic difference in the rates of grade for collector
streets and one-half this minimum for all local streets shall be used.
(a) Streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall terminate in
a circular turnaround as prescribed by Chapter 70 of this Code.
(b) Culs-de-sac in residential developments shall normally be designed to
accommodate a maximum of 64 residential units or 800 feet, whichever
is more restrictive.
(c) Culs-de-sac in commercial and/or industrial developments should be
adequately designed to provide sufficient turnaround area for the type
of vehicles expected to be making deliveries and/or pickups to the
business or industries located on the culs-de-sac.
§ 74-190 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-194
1:435
intersection to the boundary of the subdivision is greater than 140 feet,
shall be accomplished with a temporary cul-de-sac in accordance with the
standards set forth in § 74-192, or by the construction of a temporary T
turnaround within the street right-of-way as prescribed by Chapter 70 of
this Code.
§ 74-195. Roadway elevations in floodplains. [Code 1993,
§ 18.15(15)]
§ 74-196. New and replacement bridges and culverts in floodplains.
[Code 1993, § 18.15(16)]
§ 74-197. Bicycle routes. [Code 1993, § 18.15(17)]
On road bicycle routes or paved and marked bicycle lanes along arterial
and collector streets, as proposed by the adopted county master bike route
development plan or adopted local plan, may be required by the Village
Board.
§ 74-198. Street intersections. [Code 1993, § 18.15(18)]
(a) Elevations of roadways passing through floodplain areas shall be
designed in the following manner:
(1) Freeways shall be designed so they will not be overtopped by the
100-year recurrent interval flood.
(2) Arterial highways shall be designed so they will not be overtopped
by the fifty-year recurrent interval flood.
(3) Collectors and local streets shall be designed so they will not be
overtopped by the 100-year recurrent interval flood.
(a) All new and replacement bridges and culverts over perennial
waterways, including pedestrian and other minor bridges, in addition to
meeting other applicable requirements, shall be designed so as to
accommodate the 100-year recurrent interval flood event, without
raising the peak stage, either upstream or downstream, more than 0.1
foot above the peak stage for the 100-year recurrent interval flood, as
established in the adopted Federal Emergency Management Agency's
Flood Insurance Study (October 1981). However, larger permissible
flood stage increases may be acceptable for reaches having topographic
land use conditions which could accommodate the increased stage
without creating additional flood damage potential upstream or
downstream of the proposed structure. Such bridges and culverts shall
be designed and constructed so as to facilitate the passage of ice floes
and other debris.
(b) All new and replacement bridges shall be constructed in accordance
with all applicable statutes and codes, and may be submitted to the
department of natural resources for its advice.
§ 74-194 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-198
1:436
§ 74-199. Blocks. [Code 1993, § 18.15(19)]
§ 74-200. Lots. [Code 1993, § 18.15(20)]
(a) Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles to each other as
topography and other limiting factors of good design permit. Angles
less than 75° are prohibited. In addition:
(1) The number of streets converging at one intersection shall be
reduced to a minimum, preferably not more than two.
(2) The number of intersections along arterial streets and highways
shall be minimized. Wherever practicable, the distance between
such intersections shall not be less than 1,000 feet.
(3) On all streets where sidewalks are required, ramps or openings to
accommodate handicapped individuals or their vehicles shall be
provided in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.616.
(4) Collector and local streets shall not necessarily continue across
arterials or collector streets, but, if the center line of such
intersecting streets approach the arterial or collector streets from
opposite sides within 120 feet of each other, measured along the
center line of the arterial or collector, the location shall be adjusted
so that the alignment across the arterial or collector street is
continuous and a jog is avoided.
(a) The widths, lengths and shapes of blocks shall be suited to the planned
use of the land, zoning requirements, need for convenient access,
control and safety of street traffic and topography.
(1) Lengths. Blocks in residential areas shall not, as a general rule, be
more than 1,500 feet in length, unless otherwise dictated by
exceptional topography or other limiting factors of good design.
(2) Pedestrian ways. Pedestrian ways, of not less than 12 feet in width,
may be required near the center and entirely across any block over
900 feet in length, where deemed essential by the Village Board, to
provide adequate pedestrian circulation or access to streams,
lakeshores, parkways, park lands, schools, shopping centers,
churches or transportation facilities.
(3) Widths. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of
lots of appropriate depth, except where otherwise required to
separate residential development from through traffic.
(a) The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development
contemplated. All lots shall conform to the applicable requirement of
Chapter 90 of this Code. The lots should be designed to provide an
aesthetically pleasing building site and a proper architectural setting
for the building contemplated, including consideration of solar access.
§ 74-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-200
1:437
§ 74-201. Easements. [Code 1993, § 18.15(21)]
(1) Side lots lines. Side lot lines, where practicable, shall be at right
angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines on
which the lots face. Side lot lines shall follow municipal boundary
lines rather than cross them.
(2) Double and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse
frontage lots shall be prohibited, except where necessary to
provide separation of residential development from through traffic
or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation.
(3) Access. Every lot shall front or abut on a public street or other
officially approved means of access.
(4) Area and dimension. The area and dimension of all lots shall
conform to the requirements of Chapter 90 of this Code. Building
sites not served by a public sanitary sewer system or other
approved system shall be of a sufficient size to permit the use of an
on-site soil absorption sewage disposal system designed in
accordance with the county sanitary ordinance.
(5) Resubdivision of oversized lots. Whenever a tract is subdivided into
parcels more than twice the minimum lot area required for the
zoning district in which such parcel is located, the Village Board
may require such parcels to be arranged and dimensioned to allow
future resubdivision of any such parcels in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and in conformance with Chapter 90 of
this Code.
(6) Depth. Lots shall normally have a minimum average depth of 120
feet. Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided, and a
proportion of two to one shall be considered a desirable ratio,
under normal conditions.
(7) Depth and width. Depth and width of lots of parcels reserved or laid
out for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide
for off-street service and parking required by the use contemplated
and the zoning restrictions for such use.
(8) Meander line and water's edge. Lands lying between the meander
line and the water's edge, and any otherwise unplattable lands
which lie between a proposed subdivision and the water's edge,
shall be included as part of lots, outlots or public dedications in any
plat abutting a stream or lake. Consideration shall be given to the
location of lot lines to facilitate shoreline protection and
maintenance of intended water access.
(9) Corner lots. In blocks where extra footage above zoning
requirements for lot width is available, the width of corner lots
shall be enlarged.
§ 74-200 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-201
1:438
§ 74-202. Public sites and open spaces. [Code 1993, § 18.15(22)]
§ 74-203. through § 74-230. (Reserved)
(a) The Village Board may require easements of widths deemed adequate
for the intended purpose on the property side of front lot lines, on each
side of all rear lot lines, on each side of all side lot lines or across lots,
where absolutely necessary, for electric power and communication
facilities, open drainage, storm and sanitary sewers, street trees and
gas, water and other utility lines. All easements shall be noted on the
final plat, followed by a reference to the uses for which they are
intended.
(b) An adequate easement shall be provided where a subdivision or
certified survey map is traversed by a drainageway or stream. The
location, width, alignment and improvement of such drainage or
easement shall be subject to the approval of the Village, and parallel
streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith. Where
necessary, stormwater drainage shall be maintained by landscaped
open channels of an adequate size and grade to hydraulically
accommodate maximum potential volumes of flow, subject to review
and approval by the drainage district.
(a) In the design of the plat, due consideration shall be given to the
reservation of suitable sites of adequate area for future schools, parks,
playgrounds, drainageways and other public purposes. If designated on
the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan component, official map
or component neighborhood development plan, if any, such areas shall
be made a part of the plat, as stipulated in § 74-42(a)(3). If such
designation is not made, consideration shall be given to the location of
such sites at the time of preliminary plat design and review.
(b) Public access to all navigable streams or lake shores shall be provided
as required by Wis. Stats. Ch. 236.
§ 74-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-203
1:439

ARTICLE IV
Required Improvements
§ 74-231. Generally. [Code 1993, § 18.16]
(a) Installation; subdivider's agreement.
(1) The subdivider shall install the improvements set forth in this
section, established by the Village Board, as reasonably necessary
to the approved plat. The improvements shall be set forth in plans
and specifications approved by the Village and in a standard form
written agreement between the Village and the subdivider to be
known as the "subdivider's agreement."
(2) Such agreement shall also establish that the subdivider shall:
a. Follow the approved plans and specifications, including a
performance time schedule;
b. Permit Village inspection of the subdivision;
c. Provide acceptable sureties that all required work shall be
completed; and
d. Warranty work and materials for one year after adoption of a
resolution of acceptance by the Village Board.
(3) Such agreement shall also establish that the Village:
a. Shall perform its inspections in a timely manner;
b. May allow reduction in sureties in proportion to work
inspected and tentatively accepted;
c. Shall, upon negotiation and mutual agreement with the
subdivider, contribute toward oversize, on-site improvements
or, in lieu thereof, assure the developer's right of recovery of
his expenditures for oversize, on-site improvements or
necessary off-site improvements, as shall be negotiated. A
specific repayment schedule by the Village shall be included.
Where data cannot be established, events related to repayment
shall be identified, such as the levying and collecting of special
assessments from other owners, issuance of revenue or
general obligation bonds or the receipt of certain taxes or user
fees.
(b) Survey monuments.
(1) The subdivider shall install survey monuments, placed in
accordance with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.15, and as
may be required by the Village.
§ 74-231 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-231
1:441
(2) The Village Board may waive the placing of monuments required
under Wis. Stats. § 236.15(1)(b), (c) and (d), for a reasonable time,
on the condition that the subdivider execute a financial surety
pursuant to § 74-232(d) to ensure the placing of such monuments
within the time required. The financial surety, pursuant to such
section, shall be at a rate of $100 per lot, with a minimum of $500.
The bond or certified check shall be written to the Village.
(c) Road and lot grading. Cut and filled lands shall be graded to a maximum
slope of four to one or the soil's angle of repose, whichever is the lesser,
and seeded for permanent vegetation. Where steeper slopes are
appropriate, the plans and specifications for such slopes shall be
submitted for approval.
(1) After the installation of temporary block corner monuments by the
subdivider and approval of street grades by the Village engineer,
the subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of all
streets proposed to be dedicated in accordance with plans and
standard specifications approved by the Village engineer. The
subdivider shall grade the roadbeds in the street right-of-way to
subgrade.
(2) Where utility facilities are to be installed underground by other a
person than the subdivider, the utility easements shall be graded to
within six inches of final grade by the subdivider prior to the
installation of such facilities, and earth fill, piles or mounds of soil
or construction materials shall not be stored on such easement
areas.
(d) Paving of streets and bicycle or pedestrian paths. Paving of streets and
bicycle or pedestrian paths shall be in accordance with the following:
(1) The subdivider shall install base course material over the approved
subgrade, and finish surface paving in one or more courses, in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications. The
subdivider shall assume the entire cost for such pavings within the
subdivision, except in the case of dual facilities required by the
Village Board. The developer shall be responsible for payment of
only one side of a required dual facility. The added cost for streets
wider than 24 feet, measured exclusive of the shoulder in rural
style cross section, or 40 feet in an urban style cross section
measured face-of-curb to face-of-curb, shall be the responsibility of
the Village. If the subdivider wishes to install dual lane facilities,
which may not be required by the Village, the total cost of such
improvements shall be borne by the subdivider.
(2) The Village Board may require the subdivider to construct
pedestrian paths on one side of all frontage streets and on one or
both sides of all other streets within the subdivision. The location,
type of material and construction of all pedestrian paths shall be in
accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the
§ 74-231 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-231
1:442
Village Board. The subdivider shall assume the entire cost of such
installations within the subdivision, unless additional agreements
are reached between the subdivider and the Village Board.
(e) Road shoulders, ditches or curb and gutter.
(1) The subdivider shall install road shoulder material and the adjacent
ditch or swale, both to finished grades in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications. The subdivider shall be
responsible for installing all necessary culverts at intersections
and, if required, mulch, sod or surface ditch inverts to prevent
erosion and sedimentation.
(2) The subdivider shall assume the entire costs of the road ditch
within the subdivision, except that in dual roadways required by
the Village, the inside or boulevard portion shall be borne by the
Village.
(f) Sewage disposal facilities. The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers,
manholes and laterals and other appurtenances so as to provide service
to each parcel within the subdivision. The subdivider shall also provide
trunk service to areas outside the subdivision which are tributary to the
sewers within the subdivision. This shall be determined in the plans and
specifications, which shall have the approval of the sewer commission.
The subdivider shall assume the full cost of the sanitary system within
such subdivision, except that where a trunk line located within the
development serving other areas creates an excess cost to the
subdivider, as determined by the sewer commission, such excess cost
shall be borne by the Village. In addition to the costs within the
subdivision as set forth in this subsection, the subdivider may be
required to pay any pro rata connection charge to the trunk interceptor
system, or a pro rata charge for previously furnished adjacent sewers or
laterals providing service to the subject subdivision, as determined by
the sewer commission.
(g) Stormwater drainage facilities. The subdivider shall construct
stormwater drainage facilities which are adequate to serve the
subdivision, which may include curbs and gutters, catch basins and
inlets, storm sewers, road ditches, open channels, water retention
structures or detention basins and settling basins. All such facilities
shall be of an adequate size and grade to hydraulically accommodate
the design volumes of flow as required by the Village drainage district.
(1) Farm drainage tiles. The subdivider shall reconstruct, replace or
reroute all farm drainage tiles encountered or damaged during
subdivision construction to provide equal or better farm drainage.
The subdivider shall provide to the Village drainage district a
permanent record of such reconstruction, replacement or
rerouting.
(2) Shoreland drainage facilities. Drainage facilities in shoreland
floodplain areas also fall under the jurisdiction of the county. Such
§ 74-231 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-231
1:443
shoreland drainage facilities shall, if required, include water
retention structures and settling basins to prevent erosion and
sedimentation where such facilities discharge into streams or
lakes. The design of all stormwater drains and sewers, invert and
erosion control, and/or sodding of open channels and unpaved road
ditches proposed to be constructed, or other acceptable erosion
methods, shall be in accordance with the plans and standard
specifications approved by the county.
(3) Cost of installation. The subdivider shall assume the cost of
installing all stormwater facilities within the proposed subdivision,
except for the added cost of installing stormwater facilities,
including sewers over 36 inches in diameter which are necessary to
serve tributary drainage areas lying outside of the proposed
subdivision. In addition, the subdivider shall pay to the drainage
district a stormwater facilities drainage charge, as the district
commission shall establish, based on the added cost of installing
drainage facilities serving the subdivision's total drainage area,
which shall be pro rated in proportion to the ration which the total
area of the proposed plat is to the total drainage area to be served
by such larger sewers, as established by the drainage commission.
(h) Water supply facilities. The subdivider shall cause water supply and
distribution facilities to be installed in a manner so as to make adequate
water service available to each lot within the subdivision. If municipal
water service is not available, the subdivider shall make provisions for
adequate potable common water systems as required by the Village
Board in accordance with the standards of the state department of
commerce or the county water utility. Where the existence of potable
water is questionable, the Village may require the subdivider to provide
evidence of an adequate, safe water supply.
(1) The size, type and installation of all public water mains proposed to
be constructed shall be in accordance with the plans and standard
specifications approved by the Village engineer and water utility.
(2) The subdivider shall assume the cost of installing all water mains,
water laterals and water system appurtenances within the
proposed subdivision, except for the added cost of installing water
mains greater than 12 inches in diameter, which shall be borne by
the water utility.
(i) Other utilities.
(1) The subdivider shall cause electrical power and telephone facilities
to be installed in a manner so as to make adequate service available
to each lot in the subdivision, and gas for heating, if it is available.
All new electric or communication lines from which lots are
individually served shall be installed underground within all newly
platted subdivisions or certified survey maps in all residential
districts shown on the zoning map, unless the approving authorities
§ 74-231 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-231
1:444
§ 74-232. Construction. [Code 1993, § 18.17]
shall find, after study, that the location, topography, soil, stands
of trees or other physical barriers would make underground
installation unreasonable or impracticable, or that the lots to be
served by such facilities can be served directly from existing
overhead facilities. Associated equipment and facilities which are
appurtenant to underground electric and communications systems,
including, but not limited to, substations, pad mounted
transformers, pad mounted sectionalizing switches and pedestal
mounted terminal boxes, may be located above the ground. Any
landscape screening plan required for such above the ground
equipment shall be submitted for the affected utilities approval.
(2) A plan indicating the proposed location of all gas, electrical power
and communication distribution and transmission facilities
required to service the plat shall be approved by the Village
engineer for coordination with the location of Village utilities.
(j) Streetlamps. The Village may require the subdivider to install
streetlamps at street intersections.
(k) Street name signs. At the intersection of all streets, the subdivider shall
install a street name sign of a design specified by the Village.
(l) Soil and water conservation. Upon determining from a review of the
plat that the soil, slope, vegetation and drainage characteristics of the
site are such as to require substantial cutting, clearing, grading or
other earth moving operations in the development of the subdivision, or
to otherwise entail an erosion hazard, the Village engineer shall require
the subdivider to provide soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures to be included in the plans and specifications for the
subdivision.
(a) Commencement. No construction or installation of improvements to be
dedicated to the public shall commence in connection with an approved
preliminary or final plat, or approved preliminary or final certified
survey map, until adequate plans and specifications have been
approved by the Village Board, upon the advice of the Village engineer,
and until adequate financial guarantees or completion are given to the
Village Board, including warranties of the work. Execution of a
subdivider's agreement shall constitute authorization to the subdivider
to proceed.
(b) Plans, specifications and engineering data. The following plans and
accompanying construction specifications and engineering data shall
be provided by the subdivider, at his own expense, and approved by the
Village engineer and appropriate commissions before construction or
installation of improvements is authorized.
§ 74-231 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-232
1:445
(1) Streets. Street plans and profiles, showing existing and proposed
grades, elevations and cross sections of the required
improvements.
(2) Sanitary sewer. Sanitary sewer plans and profiles, showing the
locations, grades, sizes, elevations and materials of required
facilities for approval by the sewer commission.
(3) Storm sewers, open channels and basins. Storm sewer, open
channel and detention or retention basin plans and profiles,
showing the locations, grades, sizes, cross sections, elevations and
materials of facilities, as required and approved by the drainage
commission.
(4) Water main. Water main plans and profiles, showing the locations,
sizes, elevations and materials of required facilities.
(5) Erosion and sedimentation control. Erosion and sedimentation
control plans, showing the structures or methods of construction
required to retard the rate of runoff water, and the grading and
excavating practices that will prevent erosion and sedimentation,
including the following:
a. Trees. Trees are to be protected and preserved during
construction, in accordance with sound conservation practices
recommended by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in Home
and Garden Bulletin, No. 104, Protecting Shade Trees During
Home Construction, U.S. Government Printing Office.
b. Vegetation and mulching. Temporary vegetation and mulching
shall be used to protect critical areas and permanent
vegetation shall be installed as soon as practical.
c. Construction area. Construction, at any given time, shall be
confined to the smallest practical area and for the shortest
practical period of time.
d. Sediment basins. Sediment basins shall be installed and
maintained at all drainageways to trap, remove and prevent
sediment and debris from being washed outside the area being
developed.
(6) Lot grading. Lot grading plans of proposed elevations of all lot
corners shall be provided in mean sea level datum to ensure proper
drainage.
(7) Lake Michigan shore erosion hazard areas. Erosion hazard
abatement plans shall be prepared for any lands which are
proposed to be divided and are subject to Lake Michigan erosion
hazards, indicating the precautions which will be taken to prevent
or retard future erosion hazard situations. The plan shall indicate
that permanent structures will be located outside of identified
§ 74-232 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-232
1:446
erosion hazard areas or, alternatively, indicate the types of shore
protection measures that will be installed to justify a smaller
setback. Such erosion hazard areas and the required erosion
hazard setbacks shall be shown on the land division plat and
certified survey maps.
(8) Additional plans. Additional special plans or information as
required by the Village engineer shall be provided.
(c) Inspections. Prior to commencing any work within the subdivision, the
subdivider shall make arrangements with the Village authorities having
jurisdiction to provide for adequate inspections. The approving
authorities having jurisdiction or their representative shall inspect and
approve all completed work, prior to the release of the sureties.
(d) Financial sureties.
(1) Financial sureties furnished to the Village by subdividers to ensure
performance of obligations and guarantees, under the terms of this
chapter, shall only be in a form which the Village deems secure, and
may include certified checks, corporate bonds, irrevocable letters
of credit in a form approved by the Village or performance bonds.
The initial amount of the surety shall not be less than the full
amount as estimated by the Village engineer of the obligation being
ensured, nor for a period of time less than the work is scheduled to
be completed; however, the Village, upon request of the subdivider,
may consider reductions in the amount of the surety in proportion
to the amounts of the obligations as they are fulfilled. In a dispute
over the amount of a surety, the estimate prepared by the Village
engineer shall be given greater weight by the Village.
(2) Where sureties are given to cover the cost of work to be performed
by a person other than the subdivider or his contractors, at an
unspecified time in the future, the form of surety shall be such as to
bear interest, which shall accrue to the surety account to help
defray increases in costs beyond those used to establish the
present surety amount. Where the work is performed in less than
seven years and costs are less than the surety, plus accrued
interest, the difference shall be refunded to the subdivider, his
heirs or assigns. Where the work is performed after seven years
and costs are less than the surety, plus accrued interest, no refund
shall be required and any such surplus shall flow to the general
fund. The subdivider shall not, in any case, be obligated to make up
any shortages between the surety, plus accrued interest, and the
cost of the work once he submits the surety amount established by
the Village.
(e) Permits.
(1) No building, zoning or sanitary permits shall be issued for erection
of a structure on any lot of record at the time of adoption of the
§ 74-232 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-232
1:447
§ 74-233. Post-construction storm water management. [Amended
4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 07-2016]
ordinance from which this chapter is derived until all of the
requirements of this chapter have been met.
(2) The proper authority, as designated by the Village, shall have
access to premises and structures during reasonable hours to make
the inspections deemed necessary by him to ensure compliance
with this chapter. If, however, he is refused entry after presentation
of his identification, he shall procure a special inspection warrant
in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0119, except in cases of
emergency, when he shall have the right of immediate entry.
(a) Authority.
(1) This section is adopted by the Village of Mt. Pleasant under the
authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 61.354. This section supersedes
all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under Wis. Stats.
§ 61.35, that relate to storm water management regulations.
Except as otherwise specified in Wis. Stats. § 61.354, Wis. Stats.
§ 61.35 applies to this section and to any amendments to this
section.
(2) The provisions of this section are deemed not to limit any other
lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body.
(3) The Village Board of trustees hereby designates the Village of Mt.
Pleasant to administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
(4) The requirements of this section do not preempt more stringent
storm water management requirements that may be imposed by
any of the following:
a. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative
rules, permits or approvals including those authorized under
Wis. Stats. §§ 281.16 and 283.33.
b. Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated
in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 151.004.
c. Village of Mt. Pleasant approved or adopted storm water
management plans for specific areas or watersheds.
(b) Findings of fact. The Village Board of trustees finds that uncontrolled,
post-construction runoff has a significant impact upon water resources
and the health, safety and general welfare of the community and
diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural resources.
Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff can:
(1) Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank
erosion, increasing streambed scour, diminishing groundwater
§ 74-232 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:448
recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream
temperature.
(2) Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic
life, recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant
loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals,
bacteria, pathogens and other urban pollutants.
(3) Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by
increasing pollutant loads.
(4) Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading.
(5) Threaten public health, safety, property and general welfare by
overtaxing storm sewers, drainage ways, and other minor drainage
facilities.
(c) Purpose and intent.
(1) Purpose. The general purpose of this section is to establish longterm,
post-construction runoff management requirements that will
diminish the threats to public health, safety, welfare and the
aquatic environment. Specific purposes are to:
a. Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
b. Prevent and control the adverse effects of storm water; prevent
and control soil erosion; prevent and control water pollution;
protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve
ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic
growth.
c. Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage
facilities and receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel
erosion; control increases in the scouring and transportation of
particulate matter.
d. Minimize the amount of pollutants discharged from the
separate storm sewer to protect the waters of the state.
(2) Intent. It is the intent of the Village Board of Trustees that this
section regulates post-construction storm water discharges to
waters of the state. This section may be applied on a site-by-site
basis. The Village Board of trustees recognizes, however, that the
preferred method of achieving the storm water performance
standards set forth in this section is through the preparation and
implementation of comprehensive, systems-level storm water
management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as
watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may
prescribe regional storm water devices, practices or systems, any
of which may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site
prior to discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:449
conformance with the performance standards developed under
Wis. Stats. § 281.16, for regional storm water management
measures and have been approved by the Village Board of trustees,
it is the intent of this section that the approved plan be used to
identify post-construction management measures acceptable for
the community.
(d) Applicability and jurisdiction.
(1) Applicability.
a. Except as provided under Subsection (b), this ordinance
applies to a post-construction site whereupon one acre or more
of land disturbing construction activity occurs during
construction.
b. A site that meets any of the criteria in this paragraph is exempt
from the requirements of this ordinance:
1. A post-construction site with less than 10% connected
imperviousness, based on the area of land disturbance,
provided the cumulative area of all impervious surfaces is
less than one acre. However, the exemption of this
paragraph does not include exemption from the protective
area standard of this ordinance.
2. Agricultural facilities and practices.
3. Underground utility construction, but not including the
construction of any above ground structures associated
with utility construction.
c. Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection
(d)(1)a, this section applies to post-construction sites of any
size that, in the opinion of the Village of Mt. Pleasant, are likely
to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing
drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes
undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by
scouring or the transportation of particulate matter.
(2) Jurisdiction. This section applies to post-construction sites within
the boundaries and jurisdiction of the Village of Mt. Pleasant.
(3) Exclusions. This section is not applicable to activities conducted by
a state agency, as defined under Wis. Stats. § 227.01(1).
(e) Definitions.
(1) ADEQUATE SOD, OR SELF-SUSTAINING VEGETATIVE COVER —
Maintenance of sufficient vegetation types and densities such that
the physical integrity of the streambank or lakeshore is preserved.
Self-sustaining vegetative cover includes grasses, forbs, sedges
and duff layers of fallen leaves and woody debris.
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:450
(2) ADMINISTERING AUTHORITY — A governmental employee, or a
regional planning commission empowered under Wis. Stats.
§ 61.354, that is designated by the Village Board of trustees to
administer this section.
(3) AGRICULTURAL FACILITIES AND PRACTICES — Has the meaning
given in Wis. Stats. § 281.16.
(4) ATLAS 14 — The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) Atlas 14 Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Volume 8 (Midwestern States), published in 2013.
(5) AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A typical calendar year of
precipitation as determined by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources for users of models such as WinSLAMM, P8 or
equivalent methodology. The average annual rainfall is chosen from
a department publication for the location closest to the
municipality.
(6) BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP — Structural or
nonstructural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed
to avoid or minimize sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to
waters of the state.
(7) BUSINESS DAY — A day the offices of the Village hall is routinely
and customarily open for business.
(8) CEASE AND DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt land
disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the
required permit or in violation of a permit issued by the
administering authority.
(9) COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM — A system for conveying both
sanitary sewage and storm water runoff.
(10)CONNECTED IMPERVIOUSNESS — An impervious surface
connected to the waters of the state via a separate storm sewer, an
impervious flow path, or a minimally previous flow path.
(11) DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm
characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall
intensity, return frequency, and total depth of rainfall.
(12)DEVELOPMENT — Residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional land uses and associated roads.
(13) DIRECT CONDUITS TO GROUNDWATER — Wells, sinkholes,
swallets, fractured bedrock at the surface, mine shafts, nonmetallic
mines, tile inlets discharging to groundwater, quarries, or
depressional groundwater recharge areas over shallow fractured
bedrock.
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:451
(14) EFFECTIVE INFILTRATION AREA — The area of the infiltration
system that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area
used for site access, berms or pretreatment.
(15) EROSION — The process by which the land's surface is worn away
by the action of the wind, water, ice or gravity.
(16) EXCEPTIONAL RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in Wis.
Admin. Code § NR 102.11.
(17) FILTERING LAYER — Soil that has at least a three-foot deep layer
with at least 20% fines; or at least a five-foot deep layer with at
least 10% fines; or an engineered soil with an equivalent level of
protection as determined by the regulatory authority for the site.
(18) FINAL STABILIZATION — That all land disturbing construction
activities at the construction site have been completed and that a
uniform, perennial, vegetative cover has been established, with a
density of at least 70% of the cover, for the unpaved areas and
areas not covered by permanent structures, or employment of
equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
(19) FINANCIAL GUARANTEE — A performance bond, maintenance
bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar
guarantees submitted to the Village of Mt. Pleasant by the
responsible party to assure that requirements of the ordinance are
carried out in compliance with the storm water management plan.
(20)GOVERNING BODY — The Village Board of trustees.
(21) IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff all or a
large portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen
soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, gravel or paved parking lots
and streets are examples of areas that typically are impervious.
(22) IN-FILL — An undeveloped area of land located within an existing
urban sewer service area, surrounded by development or
development and natural or man-made features where
development cannot occur.
(23) INFILTRATION — The entry of precipitation or runoff into or
through the soil.
(24) INFILTRATION SYSTEM — A device or practice such as a basin,
trench, rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage
infiltration, but does not include natural infiltration in pervious
surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto
lawns or minimal infiltration from practices, such as swales or road
side channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only.
(25)LAND DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the
topography or existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover, that
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:452
may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and
movement of sediment into waters of the state. Land disturbing
construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition,
excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities.
(26)LANDOWNER — Any person holding fee title, an easement or other
interest in property, which allows the person to undertake
cropping, livestock management, land disturbing construction
activity or maintenance of storm water BMPs on the property.
(27)MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legal document that provides
for long-term maintenance of storm water management practices.
(28)MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — The highest level of
performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a
performance standard identified in this ordinance as determined in
accordance with Subsection (em) of this ordinance.
(29)NEW DEVELOPMENT — Development resulting from the
conversion of previously undeveloped land or agricultural land
uses.
(30)NRCS MSE3 or MSE4 DISTRIBUTION — A specific precipitation
distribution developed by the United States Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, using
precipitation data from Atlas 14.
(31)OFF-SITE — Located outside the property boundary described in
the permit application.
(32) ON-SITE — Located within the property boundary described in the
permit application.
(33)ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — Has the meaning given in Wis.
Admin. Code § NR 115.03(6).
(34)OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS — Waters listed in Wis.
Admin. Code § NR 102.10.
(35)PERCENT FINES — The percentage of a give sample of soil, which
passes through a # 200 sieve.
(36)PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or
practice.
(37) PERMIT — A written authorization made by the Village of Mt.
Pleasant to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction
activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the
state.
(38) PERMIT ADMINISTRATION FEE — A sum of money paid to the
Village of Mt. Pleasant by the permit applicant for the purpose of
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:453
recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in administering
the permit.
(39) PERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff a small
portion of the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks,
forests or other similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces
that typically are pervious.
(40) POLLUTANT — Has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 283.01(13).
(41) POLLUTION — Has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.01(10).
(42) POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE — A construction site following the
completion of land disturbing construction activity and final site
stabilization.
(43) PRE-DEVELOPMENT CONDITION — The extent and distribution
of land cover types present before the initiation of land disturbing
construction activity, assuming that all land uses prior to
development activity are managed in an environmentally sound
manner.
(44)PREVENTATIVE ACTION LIMIT — Has the meaning given in Wis.
Admin. Code § NR 140.05(17).
(45) PROTECTIVE AREA — An area of land that commences at the top
of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated
boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following
widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or
delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface.
(46)REDEVELOPMENT — Areas where development is replacing older
development.
(47) RESPONSIBLE PARTY — The landowner or any other entity
performing services to meet the requirements of this ordinance
through a contract or other agreement.
(48)RUNOFF — Storm water or precipitation including rain, snow or
ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or
channelized flow.
(49) SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of
conveyances including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutter, ditches, constructed channels or storm
drains, which meets all of the following criteria:
a. Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
b. Is not part of a combined sewer system.
c. Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works
that provides secondary or more stringent treatment.
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:454
d. Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
(50) SILVICULTURE ACTIVITY — Activities including tree nursery
operations, tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning,
prescribed burning, and pest and fire control. Clearing and
grubbing of an area of a construction site is not a silviculture
activity.
(51) SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land
on which the land disturbing construction activity occurred.
(52) STOP WORK ORDER — An order issued by the Village of Mt.
Pleasant which requires that all construction activity on the site be
stopped.
(53)STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan
designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from storm water,
after the site has under gone final stabilization, following
completion of the construction activity.
(54)STORM WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — Is a
comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and
pollutants from hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale.
(55) TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design,
predicted performance and operation and maintenance
specifications for a material, device or method.
(56) TOP OF THE CHANNEL — An edge, or point on the landscape,
landward from the ordinary high-water mark of a surface water of
the state, where the slope of the land begins to be less than 12%
continually for at least 50 feet. If the slope of the land is 12% or less
continually for the initial 50 feet, landward from the ordinary highwater
mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary high-water mark.
(57) TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD or TMDL — The amount of
pollutants specified as a function of one or more water quality
parameters, that can be discharged per day into a water quality
limited segment and still ensure attainment of the applicable water
quality standard.
(58) TP-40 — Technical Paper No. 40, Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the
United States, published in 1961.
(59) TR-55 — The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation
Service), Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Second Edition,
Technical Release 55, June 1986, which is incorporated by
reference for this chapter.
(60)TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — A highway, a railroad, a public
mass transit facility, a public-use airport, a public trail or any other
public work for transportation purposes such as harbor
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:455
improvements under s. 85.095 (1)(b), Wis. Stats. "Transportation
facility" does not include building sites for the construction of
public buildings and buildings that are places of employment that
are regulated by the Department pursuant to s. 281.33, Wis. Stats.
(61) TSS — Total suspended solids.
(62) TYPE II DISTRIBUTION — A rainfall type curve as established in
the "United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, Technical Paper 149, published 1973".
(63)WATERS OF THE STATE — Includes those portions of Lake
Michigan and Lake Superior within the boundaries of this state,
and all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells,
impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage systems
and other surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public
or private, within this state or its jurisdiction.
(em) Applicability of maximum extent practicable. Maximum extent
practicable applies when a person who is subject to a performance
standard of this ordinance demonstrates to the [administering
authority]'s satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable
and that a lower level of performance is appropriate. In making the
assertion that a performance standard is not achievable and that a level
of performance different from the performance standard is the
maximum extent practicable, the responsible party shall take into
account the best available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic
features, and other competing interests such as protection of public
safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources,
and preservation of historic properties.
(f) Technical standards. The following methods shall be used in designing
the water quality, peak discharge, and infiltration components of storm
water practices needed to meet the water quality standards of this
ordinance:
(1) Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Wis. Admin.
Code Ch. NR 151, Subch. V.
(2) Where technical standards have not been identified or developed
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other technical
standards may be used provided that the methods have been
approved by the Village of Mt. Pleasant.
(3) Technical engineering standards administered and/or approved by
the Village of Mt. Pleasant.
(4) Technical standards described in "The Wisconsin Storm Water
Manual," WDNR for Wet Detention Basins.
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:456
(5) In this section, the following year and location has been selected as
average annual rainfall: Milwaukee 1969 (Mar. 28 — Dec. 6).
(g) Performance standards.
(1) Responsible party. The responsible party shall comply with this
section.
(2) Storm Water Management Plan. A written storm water
management plan in accordance with Subsection (i) shall be
developed and implemented for each post-construction site.
(3) Maintenance of effort. For redevelopment sites where the
redevelopment will be replacing older development that was
subject to post-construction performance standards of NR 151 in
effect on or after October 1, 2004, the responsible party shall meet
the total suspended solids reduction, peak flow control, infiltration,
and protective areas standards applicable to the older development
or meet the redevelopment standards of this ordinance, whichever
is more stringent.
(4) Requirements. The storm water management plan required under
Subsection (g)(2) shall include the following:
a. Total suspended solids. BMPs shall be designed, installed and
maintained to control total suspended solids carried in runoff
from the post-construction site as follows:
1. BMPs shall be designed in accordance with Table 1 or to
the maximum extent practicable as provided in Subsection
(g)(4)a2. The design shall be based on an average annual
rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls.
Table 1. TSS Reduction Standards
Development Type TSS Reduction
New Development 80%
In-fill development 80%
Redevelopment 40% of load from parking
areas and roads
2. Maximum extent practicable. If the design cannot meet a
total suspended solids reduction performance standard of
Table 1, the storm water management plan shall include a
written, site-specific explanation of why the total
suspended solids reduction performance standard cannot
be met and why the total suspended solids load will be
reduced only to the maximum extent practicable.
3. Off-site drainage. When designing BMPs, runoff draining
to the BMP from off-site shall be taken into account in
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:457
determining the treatment efficiency of the practice. Any
impact on the efficiency shall be compensated for by
increasing the size of the BMP accordingly.
b. Peak discharge.
1. By design, BMP's for all areas outside of the Des Plaines
River Watershed shall be employed to maintain or reduce
the one-year, twenty-four-hour; and the two-year, twentyfour-
hour post-construction peak runoff discharge rates to
the one-year, twenty-four-hour; and the two-year, twentyfour-
hour pre-development peak runoff discharge rates
respectively and shall be employed to reduce the 100-year,
twenty-four-hour, post-construction runoff rate to the tenyear,
twenty-four-hour, pre-development runoff rate, or to
the maximum extent practicable. Storm water
management practices within the Des Plaines River
Watershed shall be employed to reduce the 100-year,
twenty-four-hour, post-construction rate to 0.3 cfs per
acre. The post-construction two-year, twenty-four-hour,
rate shall be reduced to 0.04 cfs per acre. The runoff curve
numbers in Table 2 shall be used to represent the actual
pre-development conditions. Peak discharges shall be
calculated using TR-55 runoff curve number methodology,
Atlas 14 precipitation depths, and the appropriate NRCS
Wisconsin MSE3 or MSE4 precipitation distribution. On a
case-by-case basis, the [administering authority] may
allow the use of TP-40 precipitation depths and the Type II
distribution
Table 2. Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve
Numbers
Hydrologic Soil Group
Runoff
Curve
Number A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Grassland 39 61 71 78
Cropland 55 69 78 83
2. By design, storm water management practices shall be
employed to meet peak discharge requirements of Village
adopted storm water management plans for specific areas
or watersheds where applicable.
3. This Subsection (g)(3)b does not apply to any of the
following:
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:458
[a] A post-construction site where the discharge is
directly into a lake over 5,000 acres or a stream or
river segment draining more than 500 square miles.
[b] Except as provided in (g)(3), a redevelopment postconstruction
site, if the impervious surface area of the
redevelopment is not increased from existing
conditions.
[c] An in-fill development area less than five acres, unless
determined otherwise by the Village per Subsection
(d)(1)c.
c. Infiltration.
1. Best management practices. BMPs shall be designed,
installed, and maintained to infiltrate runoff in accordance
with the following or to the maximum extent practicable:
[a] Low imperviousness. For development up to 40%
connected imperviousness, such as parks, cemeteries,
and low density residential development, infiltrate
sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development
infiltration volume shall be at least 90% of the predevelopment
infiltration volume, based on an average
annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate
infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more
than 1% of the post-construction site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
[b] Moderate imperviousness. For development with
more than 40% and up to 80% connected
imperviousness, such as medium and high density
residential, multi-family development, industrial and
institutional development, and office parks, infiltrate
sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development
infiltration volume shall be at least 75% of the predevelopment
infiltration volume, based on an average
annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate
infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more
than 2% of the post-construction site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
[c] High imperviousness. For development with more
than 80% connected imperviousness, such as
commercial strip malls, shopping centers, and
commercial downtowns, infiltrate sufficient runoff
volume so that the post-development infiltration
volume shall be at least 60% of the predevelopment
infiltration volume, based on an average annual
rainfall. However, when designing appropriate
infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:459
than 2% of the post-construction site is required as an
effective infiltration area.
2. Pre-development. The pre-development condition shall be
the same as specified in Table 2 of the Peak Discharge
section of this ordinance.
3. Source areas.
[a] Prohibitions. Runoff from the following areas may not
be infiltrated and may not qualify as contributing to
meeting the requirements of this section unless
demonstrated to meet the conditions identified in
Subsection (g)(4)(c)6:
[i] Areas associated with a tier one industrial facility
identified in s. NR 216.21 (2)(a), including
storage, loading and parking. Rooftops may be
infiltrated with the concurrence of the regulatory
authority.
[ii] Storage and loading areas of a tier 2 industrial
facility identified in s. NR 216.21 (2)(b).
[iii] Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Runoff
from rooftops of fueling and vehicle maintenance
areas may be infiltrated with the concurrence of
the regulatory authority.
[b] Exemptions. Runoff from the following areas may be
credited toward meeting the requirement when
infiltrated, but the decision to infiltrate runoff from
these source areas is optional:
[i] Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000
square feet for commercial development.
[ii] Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000
square feet for industrial development not subject
to the Prohibitions under par a.
[iii] Except as provided under Subsection (g)(3),
redevelopment post-construction sites.
[iv] In-fill development areas less than five acres.
[v] Roads on commercial, industrial and institutional
land uses, and arterial residential roads.
4. Location of practices.
[a] Prohibitions. Infiltration practices may not be located
in the following areas:
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:460
[i] Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100
feet downgradient of direct conduits to
groundwater.
[ii] Areas within 400 feet of a community water
system well as specified in s. NR 811.16(4) or
within the separation distances listed in s. NR
812.08 for any private well or noncommunity well
for runoff infiltrated from commercial, including
multi-family residential, industrial and
institutional land uses or regional devices for oneand
two-family residential development.
[iii] Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined
in s. NR 720.03(2), are present in the soil through
which infiltration will occur.
[b] Separation distances.
[i] Infiltration practices shall be located so that the
characteristics of the soil and the separation
distance between the bottom of the infiltration
system and the elevation of seasonal high
groundwater or the top of bedrock are in
accordance with Table 3:
Table 3. Separation Distances and Soil
Characteristics
Source Area
Separation
Distance
Soil
Characteristics
Industrial,
Commercial,
Institutional
Parking Lots and
Roads
5 feet or
more
Filtering Layer
Residential
Arterial Roads
5 feet or
more
Filtering Layer
Roofs Draining to
Subsurface
Infiltration
Practices
1 foot or
more
Native or
Engineered
Soil with
Particles Finer
than Coarse
Sand
Roofs Draining to
Surface
Infiltration
Practices
Not
Applicable
Not Applicable
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:461
Table 3. Separation Distances and Soil
Characteristics
Source Area
Separation
Distance
Soil
Characteristics
All Other
Impervious
Source Areas
3 feet or
more
Filtering Layer
[ii] Notwithstanding Subsection (g)(4)c4[b],
applicable requirements for injection wells
classified under Ch. NR 815 shall be followed.
[iii] Infiltration rate exemptions. Infiltration practices
located in the following areas may be credited
toward meeting the requirements under the
following conditions, but the decision to infiltrate
under these conditions is optional:
[A] Where the infiltration rate of the soil
measured at the proposed bottom of the
infiltration system is less than 0.6 inches per
hour using a scientifically credible field test
method.
[B] Where the least permeable soil horizon to five
feet below the proposed bottom of the
infiltration system using the U.S. Department
of Agriculture method of soils analysis is one
of the following: sandy clay loam, clay loam,
silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay.
5. Alternate use. Where alternate uses of runoff are
employed, such as for toilet flushing, laundry, or irrigation
or storage on green roofs where an equivalent portion of
the runoff is captured permanently by rooftop vegetation,
such alternate use shall be given equal credit toward the
infiltration volume required by this section.
6. Groundwater standards.
[a] Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this
section shall, to the extent technically and
economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants
infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain
compliance with the preventive action limit at a point
of standards application in accordance with Ch. NR
140. However, if site specific information indicates
that compliance with a preventive action limit is not
achievable, the infiltration BMP may not be installed
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:462
or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the
maximum extent practicable.
[b] Notwithstanding Subsection (g)(4)c6[a], the discharge
from BMPs shall remain below the enforcement
standard at the point of standards application.
7. Pretreatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment
shall be required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from
new road construction in commercial, industrial and
institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system.
The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the
infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled
maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in
accordance with Subsection (g)(4)c6. Pretreatment
options may include, but are not limited to, oil and grease
separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales
or filter strips.
8. Maximum Extent Practicable. Where the conditions of
Subsection (g)(4)c3 and 4 limit or restrict the use of
infiltration practices, the performance standard of
Subsection (g)(4)c shall be met to the maximum extent
practicable.
d. Protective areas. The following are minimum standards for
protective areas; however, the Village may impose greater
limits based on site specific information:
1. Definition. In this section, "protective area" means an area
of land that commences at the top of the channel of lakes,
streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of
wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths,
as measured horizontally from the top of the channel or
delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious
surface. However, in this section, "protective area" does
not include any area of land adjacent to any stream
enclosed within a pipe or culvert, so that runoff cannot
enter the enclosure at this location.
[a] For outstanding resource waters and exceptional
resource waters, 75 feet.
[b] For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a
U.S. Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topographic
map, or a county soil survey map, whichever is more
current, 50 feet.
[c] For lakes, 50 feet.
[d] For wetlands not subject to Subsection (g)(4)d1[e] or
[f], 50 feet.
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:463
[e] For highly susceptible wetlands, 75 feet. Highly
susceptible wetlands include the following types:
calcareous fens, sedge meadows, open and coniferous
bogs, low prairies, coniferous swamps, lowland
hardwood swamps, and ephemeral ponds.
[f] For less susceptible wetlands, 10% of the average
wetland width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than
30 feet. Less susceptible wetlands include: degraded
wetland dominated by invasive species such as reed
canary grass; cultivated hydric soils; and any gravel
pits, or dredged material or fill material disposal sites
that take on the attributes of a wetland.
[g] In Subsection (g)(4)d1[d] to [f], determinations of the
extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands
shall be made on the basis of the sensitivity and runoff
susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with the
standards and criteria in s. NR 103.03.
[h] Wetland boundary delineation shall be made in
accordance with s. NR 103.08 (1m). This paragraph
does not apply to wetlands that have been completely
filled in compliance with all applicable state and
federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands
that have been partially filled in compliance with all
applicable state and federal regulations shall be
measured from the wetland boundary delineation
after a fill has been placed. Where there is a legally
authorized wetland fill, the protective area standard
need not be met in that location.
[i] For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas
greater than 130 acres, 10 feet.
[j] Notwithstanding Subsection (g)(4)d1[a] to [i], the
greatest protective area width shall apply where
rivers, streams, lakes and wetlands are contiguous.
2. Applicability. This section applies to post-construction
sites located within a protective area, except those areas
exempted pursuant to Subsection (g)(4)d4.
3. Requirements. The following requirements shall be met:
[a] Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective
area entirely or to the maximum extent practicable. If
there is no practical alternative to locating an
impervious surface in the protective area, the storm
water management plan shall contain a written, sitespecific
explanation.
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:464
[b] Where land disturbing construction activity occurs
within a protective area, adequate sod or selfsustaining
vegetative cover of 70% or greater shall be
established and maintained where no impervious
surface is present. The adequate sod or self-sustaining
vegetative cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank
stability, maintenance of fish habitat, and filtering of
pollutants from upslope overland flow areas under
sheet flow conditions. Non-vegetative materials, such
as rock riprap, may be employed on the bank as
necessary to prevent erosion such as on steep slopes
or where high velocity flows occur.
[c] BMPs such as filter strips, swales, or wet detention
ponds, that are designed to control pollutants from
non-point sources, may be located in the protective
area.
4. Exemptions. This section does not apply to any of the
following:
[a] Except as provided under sec. (g)(3), redevelopment
post-construction sites.
[b] In-fill development areas less than five acres.
[c] Structures that cross or access surface water such as
boat landings, bridges, and culverts.
[d] Structures constructed in accordance with s. 59.692
(1v), Stats.
[e] Areas of post-construction sites from which the runoff
does not enter the surface water, including wetlands,
without first being treated by a BMP to meet the local
ordinance requirements for total suspended solids and
peak flow reduction, except to the extent that
vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain bank
stability.
e. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Fueling and vehicle
maintenance areas shall have BMPs designed, installed, and
maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, so that the
runoff that enters waters of the state contains no visible
petroleum sheen, or to the maximum extent practicable.
f. Swale treatment for transportation facilities.
1. Requirement. Except as provided in Subsection (g)(4)f2,
transportation facilities that use swales for runoff
conveyance and pollutant removal are exempt from the
requirements of local ordinance requirements for peak
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:465
flow control, total suspended solids control, and
infiltration, if the swales are designed to do all of the
following or to the maximum extent practicable:
[a] Swales shall be vegetated. However, where
appropriate, non-vegetative measures may be
employed to prevent erosion or provide for runoff
treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or check
dams.
[b] Swales shall comply with Sections V.F. (Velocity and
Depth) and V.G. (Sale Geometry Criteria) with a swale
treatment length as long as that specified in Section
V.C. (Pre-Treatment) of the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources technical standard 1005
"Vegetated Infiltration Swales", dated May 2007, or a
superseding document. Transportation facility swale
treatment does not have to comply with other sections
of technical standard 1005.
2. Other requirements.
[a] Notwithstanding Subsection (g)(4)f1, the
administering authority may, consistent with water
quality standards, require that other requirements, in
addition to swale treatment, be met on a
transportation facility with an average daily traffic
rate greater than 2,500 and where the initial surface
water of the state that the runoff directly enters is one
of the following:
[i] An outstanding resource water.
[ii] An exceptional resource water.
[iii] Waters listed in Section 303 (d) of the Federal
Clean Water Act that are identified as impaired in
whole or in part, due to non-point source impacts.
[iv] Water where targeted performance standards are
developed pursuant to s. NR 151.004, Wis. Adm.
Code.
[b] The transportation facility authority shall contact the
administering authority to determine if additional
BMPs beyond a water quality swale are needed under
this subsection.
g. Storm sewers and culverts.
1. Storm sewers and culverts shall be designed for a ten-year
storm event as defined by the Southeastern Wisconsin
Planning Commission (SEWRPC).
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:466
2. Storm sewers shall be designed to be self-cleaning with a
minimum velocity of two feet per second and a maximum
velocity of 12 feet per second.
(5) General considerations for storm water management measures.
The following considerations shall be observed in on-site and offsite
runoff management:
a. Natural topography and land cover features such as natural
swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity,
and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be preserved
and used, to the extent possible, to meet the requirements of
this section.
b. Emergency overland flow for all storm water facilities shall be
provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of downstream
drainage facilities and prevent endangerment of downstream
property or public safety.
(6) BMP Location.
a. To comply with the performance standards required under sec.
(g) of this ordinance, BMPs may be located on-site or off-site as
part of a regional storm water device, practice or system, but
shall be installed in accordance with s. NR 151.003, Wis. Adm.
Code.
b. The administering authority may approve off-site management
measures provided that all of the following conditions are met:
1. The administrating authority determines that the postconstruction
runoff is covered by a storm water
management system plan that is approved by the Village of
Mt. Pleasant and that contains management requirements
consistent with the purpose and intent of this ordinance.
2. The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
[a] The facility is in place.
[b] The facility is designed and adequately sized to
provide a level of storm water control equal to or
greater than that which would be afforded by on-site
practices meeting the performance standards of this
ordinance.
[c] The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible
for its long-term operation and maintenance.
c. Where a regional treatment option exists such that the
administering authority exempts the applicant from all or part
of the minimum on-site storm water management
requirements, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:467
amount determined in negotiation with the administering
authority. In determining the fee for post-construction runoff,
the administering authority shall consider an equitable
distribution of the cost for land, engineering design,
construction, and maintenance of the regional treatment
option.
(7) Additional Requirements. The administering authority may
establish storm water management requirements more stringent
than those set forth in this ordinance if the administering authority
determines that the requirements are needed to control storm
water quantity or control flooding, comply with federally approved
total maximum daily load requirements, or control pollutants
associated with existing development or redevelopment.
(h) Permitting requirements, procedures and fees.
(1) Permit required. No responsible party may undertake a land
disturbing construction activity without receiving a postconstruction
runoff permit from the Village of Mt. Pleasant prior to
commencing the proposed activity.
(2) Permit application and fees. Unless specifically excluded by this
section, any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the
Village of Mt. Pleasant a permit application made on a form
provided by the Village of Mt. Pleasant for that purpose.
a. Unless otherwise excepted by this section, a permit application
must be accompanied by a storm water management plan, a
maintenance agreement and a nonrefundable permit
administration fee.
b. The storm water management plan shall be prepared to meet
the requirements of Subsections (g) and (i), the maintenance
agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of
Subsection (j), the financial guarantee shall meet the
requirements of Subsection (k), and fees shall be those
established by the Village of Mt. Pleasant as set forth in
Subsection (1).
(3) Review and approval of permit application. The Village of Mt.
Pleasant shall review any permit application that is submitted with
a storm water management plan, maintenance agreement, and the
required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used:
a. Within 20 business days of the receipt of a complete permit
application, including all items as required by Subsection
(h)(2), above, the Village of Mt. Pleasant shall inform the
applicant whether the application, plan and maintenance
agreement are approved or disapproved based on the
requirements of this section.
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:468
b. If the storm water permit application, plan and maintenance
agreement are approved, or if an agreed upon payment of fees
in lieu of storm water management practices is made, the
Village of Mt. Pleasant shall issue the permit.
c. If the storm water permit application, plan or maintenance
agreement is disapproved, the Village of Mt. Pleasant shall
detail in writing the reasons for disapproval.
d. The Village of Mt. Pleasant may request additional information
from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the
Village of Mt. Pleasant shall have 20 business days from the
date the additional information is received to inform the
applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either
approved or disapproved.
e. Failure by the Village of Mt. Pleasant to inform the permit
applicant of a decision within 30 business days of a required
submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal
and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued.
(4) Permit requirements. All permits issued under this section shall be
subject to the following conditions, and holders of permits issued
under this section shall be deemed to have accepted these
conditions. The Village of Mt. Pleasant may suspend or revoke a
permit for violation of a permit condition, following written
notification of the responsible party. An action by the Village of Mt.
Pleasant to suspend or revoke this permit may be appealed in
accordance with Subsection (n).
a. Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible
party of the responsibility to comply with other applicable
federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
b. The responsible party shall design and install all structural and
nonstructural storm water management measures in
accordance with the approved storm water management plan
and this permit.
c. The responsible party shall notify the Village of Mt. Pleasant at
least five business days before commencing any work in
conjunction with the storm water management plan, and
within five business days upon completion of the storm water
management practices. If required as a special condition under
Subsection (h)(5) below, the responsible party shall make
additional notification according to a schedule set forth by the
Village of Mt. Pleasant so that practice installations can be
inspected during construction.
d. Practice installations required as part of this section shall be
certified "as built" or "record" drawings by a licensed
professional engineer. Completed storm water management
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:469
practices must pass a final inspection by the Village of Mt.
Pleasant or its designee to determine if they are in accordance
with the approved storm water management plan and
ordinance. The Village of Mt. Pleasant or its designee shall
notify the responsible party in writing of any changes required
in such practices to bring them into compliance with the
conditions of this permit.
e. The responsible party shall notify the Village of Mt. Pleasant of
any significant modifications it intends to make to an approved
storm water management plan. The Village of Mt. Pleasant
may require that the proposed modifications be submitted for
approval prior to incorporation into the storm water
management plan and execution by the responsible party.
f. The responsible party shall maintain all storm water
management practices in accordance with the storm water
management plan until the practices either become the
responsibility of the Village of Mt. Pleasant, or are transferred
to subsequent private owners as specified in the approved
maintenance agreement.
g. The responsible party authorizes the Village of Mt. Pleasant to
perform any work or operations necessary to bring storm
water management measures into conformance with the
approved storm water management plan, and consents to a
special assessment or charge against the property as
authorized under Wis. Stats. Ch. 66, Subch. VII, or charge such
costs against the financial guarantee posted under Subsection
(k).
h. If so directed by the Village of Mt. Pleasant, the responsible
party shall repair at the responsible party's own expense all
damage to adjoining municipal facilities and drainage ways
caused by runoff, where such damage is caused by activities
that are not in compliance with the approved storm water
management plan.
i. The responsible party shall permit property access to the
Village of Mt. Pleasant or its designee for the purpose of
inspecting the property for compliance with the approved
storm water management plan and this permit.
j. Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in
direction, increases in peak rate and/or total volume of runoff
from a site, the Village of Mt. Pleasant may require the
responsible party to make appropriate legal arrangements
with affected property owners concerning the prevention of
endangerment to property or public safety.
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:470
k. The responsible party is subject to the enforcement actions and
penalties detailed in Subsection (m), if the responsible party
fails to comply with the terms of this permit.
(5) Permit conditions. Permits issued under this subsection may
include conditions established by the Village of Mt. Pleasant in
addition to the requirements needed to meet the performance
standards in Subsection (g) or a financial guarantee as provided for
in Subsection (k).
(6) Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid
from the date of issuance through the date the Village of Mt.
Pleasant notifies the responsible party that all storm water
management practices have passed the final inspection required
under Subsection (h)(4)d, above.
(i) Storm water management plan.
(1) Plan requirements. The storm water management plan required
under Subsection (h)(2) shall contain at a minimum the following
information:
a. Name, address, and telephone number for the following or
their designees: landowner; developer; project engineer for
practice design and certification; person(s) responsible for
installation of storm water management practices; and
person(s) responsible for maintenance of storm water
management practices prior to the transfer, if any, of
maintenance responsibility to another party.
b. A proper legal description of the property proposed to be
developed, referenced to the U.S. Public Land Survey system
or to block and lot numbers within a recorded land subdivision
plat.
c. Predevelopment site conditions, including:
1. One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet. The site maps shall show the following:
site location and legal property description; predominant
soil types and hydrologic soil groups; existing cover type
and condition; topographic contours of the site at a scale
not to exceed 100 feet; topography and drainage network
including enough of the contiguous properties to show
runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site;
watercourses that may affect or be affected by runoff from
the site; flow path and direction for all storm water
conveyance sections; watershed boundaries used in
hydrology determinations to show compliance with
performance standards; lakes, streams, wetlands,
channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and
immediately adjacent to the site; limits of the 100-year
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:471
floodplain; location of wells and wellhead protection areas
covering the project area and delineated pursuant to Wis.
Admin. Code § NR 811.16.
2. Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed
to show compliance with performance standards. All major
assumptions used in developing input parameters shall be
clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the
required map(s).
d. Post-development site conditions, including:
1. Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural
topography and land cover features to minimize changes
in peak flow runoff rates and volumes to surface waters
and wetlands.
2. Explanation of any restrictions on storm water
management measures in the development area imposed
by wellhead protection plans and ordinances.
3. One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet showing the following: post-construction
pervious areas including vegetative cover type and
condition; impervious surfaces including all buildings,
structures, and pavement; post-construction topographic
contours of the site at a scale not to exceed 100 feet; postconstruction
drainage network including enough of the
contiguous properties to show runoff patterns onto,
through, and from the site; locations and dimensions of
drainage easements; locations of maintenance easements
specified in the maintenance agreement; flow path and
direction for all storm water conveyance sections; location
and type of all storm water management conveyance and
treatment practices, including the on-site and off-site
tributary drainage area; location and type of conveyance
system that will carry runoff from the drainage and
treatment practices to the nearest adequate outlet such as
a curbed street, storm drain, or natural drainage way;
watershed boundaries used in hydrology and pollutant
loading calculations and any changes to lakes, streams,
wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on
and immediately adjacent to the site.
4. Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed
to show compliance with performance standards. The
computations shall be made for each discharge point in the
development, and the geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross-referenced to the
required map(s).
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:472
5. Results of investigations of soils and groundwater required
for the placement and design of storm water management
measures. Detailed drawings including cross-sections and
profiles of all permanent storm water conveyance and
treatment practices.
e. A description and installation schedule for the storm water
management practices needed to meet the performance
standards in Subsection (g).
f. A maintenance plan developed for the life of each storm water
management practice including the required maintenance
activities and maintenance activity schedule.
g. Cost estimates for the construction, operation, and
maintenance of each storm water management practice.
h. Other information requested in writing by the Village of Mt.
Pleasant to determine compliance of the proposed storm water
management measures with the provisions of this section.
i. All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and
drawings shall be certified by a licensed Wisconsin
professional engineer to be prepared in accordance with
accepted engineering practice and requirements of this
section.
(2) Alternate requirements. The Village of Mt. Pleasant may prescribe
alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an
exemption to on-site storm water management performance
standards under Subsection (g)(5).
(j) Maintenance agreement.
(1) Filing of agreement. The maintenance agreement required under
Subsection (h)(2) for storm water management practices shall be
an agreement between the Village of Mt. Pleasant and the
responsible party to provide for maintenance of storm water
practices beyond the duration period of this permit. The
maintenance agreement shall be filed with the Racine County
Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding
upon all subsequent owners of the land served by the storm water
management practices.
(2) Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain
the following information and provisions and be consistent with the
maintenance plan required by Subsection (i)(1)f.:
a. Identification of the storm water facilities and designation of
the drainage area served by the facilities.
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:473
b. A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the storm
water management system consistent with the storm water
management plan required under Subsection (h)(2).
c. Identification of the responsible party(s), organization or city,
county, or Village responsible for long term inspection and
maintenance of the storm water management practices
identified in the storm water management plan required under
Subsection (h)(2).
d. Requirement that the responsible party(s), organization or city,
county, or Village shall maintain storm water management
practices in accordance with the schedule included in
Subsection (j)(2)b hereinabove.
e. Authorization for the Village of Mt. Pleasant to access the
property to conduct inspections of storm water management
practices as necessary to ascertain that the practices are being
maintained and operated in accordance with the agreement.
f. A requirement on the Village of Mt. Pleasant to maintain public
records of the results of the site inspections, to inform the
responsible party responsible for maintenance of the
inspection results, and to specifically indicate any corrective
actions required to bring the storm water management
practice into proper working condition.
g. Agreement that the party designated under Subsection (j)(2)c
hereinabove, as responsible for long term inspection and
maintenance of the storm water management practices, if
notified by the Village of Mt. Pleasant of maintenance problems
which require correction, undertake corrective within a
reasonable time frame as set by the Village of Mt. Pleasant.
h. Authorization of the Village of Mt. Pleasant to perform the
corrected actions identified in the Village notification under
Subsection (j)(2)f, hereinabove, if the responsible party
designated under Subsection c, hereinabove, does not make
the required corrections in the specified time period. The
Village of Mt. Pleasant shall enter the amount due on the tax
rolls and collect the money as a special charge against the
property pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 66, Subchapter VII.
(k) Financial guarantee.
(1) Establishment of the guarantee. The Village of Mt. Pleasant may
require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of
which shall be acceptable to the Village of Mt. Pleasant. The
financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the Village
of Mt. Pleasant to be the estimated cost of construction and the
estimated cost of maintenance of the storm water management
practices during the period which the designated party in the
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:474
maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The
financial guarantee shall give the Village of Mt. Pleasant the
authorization to use the funds to complete the storm water
management practices, or restore the project site as deemed fit by
the Village, if the responsible party defaults or does not properly
implement the approved storm water management plan, upon
written notice to the responsible party by the administering
authority that the requirements of this section have not been met.
(2) Conditions for release. Conditions for the release of the financial
guarantee are as follows:
a. The Village of Mt. Pleasant shall release the portion of the
financial guarantee established under this section, less any
costs incurred by the Village of Mt. Pleasant to complete
installation of practices, upon submission of "as built plans" or
"record" drawings by a licensed professional engineer. The
Village of Mt. Pleasant may make provisions for a partial prorata
release of the financial guarantee based on the completion
of various development stages.
b. The Village of Mt. Pleasant shall release the portion of the
financial guarantee established under this section to assure
maintenance of storm water practices, less any costs incurred
by the Village of Mt. Pleasant, at such time that the
responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on to another
entity via an approved maintenance agreement.
(l) Fee schedule. The fees referred to in other sections of this section shall
be established by the Village of Mt. Pleasant and may from time to time
be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the
Village of Mt. Pleasant shall be available for review in the Village hall.
(m) Enforcement.
(1) Any land disturbing construction activity or post-construction
runoff initiated after the effective date of this section by any
person, firm, association, or corporation subject to the ordinance
provisions shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
(2) The Village of Mt. Pleasant shall notify the responsible party by
certified mail of any noncomplying land disturbing construction
activity or post-construction runoff. The notice shall described the
nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule of
remedial action, and additional enforcement action which may be
taken.
(3) Upon receipt of written notification from the Village of Mt. Pleasant
under Subsection (m)(2), the responsible party shall correct work
that does not comply with the storm water management plan or
other provisions of this permit. The responsible party shall make
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-233
1:475
corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and schedule
set forth by the Village of Mt. Pleasant in the notice.
(4) If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this section are
likely to result in damage to properties, public facilities, or waters
of the state, the Village of Mt. Pleasant may enter the land and take
emergency actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs
incurred by the Village of Mt. Pleasant plus interest and legal costs
shall be billed to the responsible party.
(5) The Village of Mt. Pleasant is authorized to post a stop work order
on all land disturbing construction activity that is in violation of this
section, or to request the municipal attorney to obtain a cease and
desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
(6) The Village of Mt. Pleasant may revoke a permit issued under this
section for noncompliance with ordinance provisions.
(7) Any permit revocation, stop work order, or cease and desist order
shall remain in effect unless retracted by the Village of Mt. Pleasant
or by a court with jurisdiction.
(8) The Village of Mt. Pleasant is authorized to refer any violation of
this section, or of a stop work order or cease and desist order
issued pursuant to this section, to the municipal attorney for the
commencement of further legal proceedings in any court with
jurisdiction.
(9) Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply
with the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of
not less than $500 or more than $1,000 per offense, together with
the costs of prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
(10) Compliance with the provisions of this section may also be enforced
by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary
to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before
resorting to injunctional proceedings.
(11) When the Village of Mt. Pleasant determines that the holder of a
permit issued pursuant to this section has failed to follow practices
set forth in the storm water management plan, or has failed to
comply with schedules set forth in said storm water management
plan, the Village of Mt. Pleasant or a party designated by the
Village of Mt. Pleasant may enter upon the land and perform the
work or other operations necessary to bring the condition of said
lands into conformance with requirements of the approved plan.
The Village of Mt. Pleasant shall keep a detailed accounting of the
costs and expenses of performing this work. These costs and
expenses shall be deducted from any financial security posted
pursuant to Subsection (k) of this section. Where such a security
has not been established, or where such a security is insufficient to
§ 74-233 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-233
1:476
§ 74-234. Construction site erosion and sediment control.
[Amended 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 07-2016]
cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be entered on the
tax roll as a special charge against the property and collected with
any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the work is
completed.
(n) Appeals.
(1) Board of appeals. The Board of Appeals of the Village of Mt.
Pleasant, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.354(4)(b), shall hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order,
decision or determination made by the Village of Mt. Pleasant in
administering this section. The board shall also use the rules,
procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing
and deciding appeals. Upon appeal, the board may authorize
variances from the provisions of this section that are not contrary
to the public interest, and where owing to special conditions a
literal enforcement of the ordinance will result in unnecessary
hardship.
(2) Who may appeal. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by
any aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board or bureau
of the Village of Mt. Pleasant affected by any decision of the Village
of Mt. Pleasant.
(o) Severability. If a court of competent jurisdiction Judges any section,
clause, provision or portion of this ordinance unconstitutional or
invalid, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be
affected by such judgment.
(a) Authority.
(1) This section is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats.
§ 61.354, for Villages. This section supersedes all provisions of an
ordinance previously enacted under Wis. Stats. § 61.35, that relate
to construction site erosion control. Except as otherwise specified
in Wis. Stats. § 61.354, Wis. Stats. § 61.35, applies to this section
and to any amendments to this section.
(2) The provisions of this section are deemed not to limit any other
lawful regulatory powers of the same governing body.
(3) The Village Board of trustees hereby designates the Village of Mt.
Pleasant to administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
(4) The requirements of this section do not preempt more stringent
erosion and sediment control requirements that may be imposed by
any of the following:
§ 74-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-234
1:477
a. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative
rules, permits or approvals including those authorized under
Wis. Stats. §§ 281.16 and 283.33.
b. Targeted nonagricultural performance standards promulgated
in rules by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
under Wis. Admin. Code § NR 151.004.
(b) Findings of fact. The Village of Mt. Pleasant finds that runoff from land
disturbing construction activity carries a significant amount of
sediment and other pollutants to the waters of the state in the Village of
Mt. Pleasant.
(c) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to further the maintenance of
safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution;
prevent and control soil erosion and sediment discharge; protect
spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites,
placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and
scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth, by minimizing the
amount of sediment and other pollutants carried by runoff or
discharged from land disturbing construction activity to waters of the
state in the Village of Mt. Pleasant.
(d) Applicability and jurisdiction.
(1) Applicability.
a. Except as provided under Subsection (b), this ordinance
applies to any construction site as defined under Subsection
(e)(6).
b. This section does not apply to the following:
1. Transportation facilities, except transportation facility
construction projects that are part of a larger common
plan of development such as local roads within a
residential or industrial development.
2. A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes
or regulations from the requirement to have a national
pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued
under chapter 40, Code of Federal Regulations, part 122,
for land disturbing construction activity.
3. Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and
practices.
4. Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
5. Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of
land disturbance if performed to maintain the original line
and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of the
facility.
§ 74-234 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-234
1:478
c. Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection
(d)(1)a, this section applies to construction sites of any size
that, as determined by the Village of Mt. Pleasant, are likely to
result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing
drainage facilities or receiving body of water, that causes
undue channel erosion, or that increases water pollution by
scouring or transporting of particulate.
(2) Jurisdiction. This section applies to land disturbing construction
activity on construction sites located within the boundaries and
jurisdiction of the Village of Mt. Pleasant.
(3) Exclusions. This section is not applicable to activities conducted by
a state agency, as defined under Wis. Stats. § 227.01(1).
(e) Definitions.
(1) Administering authority means a governmental employee, or a
regional planning Commission empowered under Wis. Stats.
§ 61.354, that is designated by the Village of Mt. Pleasant to
administer this section.
(2) Agricultural facilities and practices has the meaning in Wis. Stats.
§ 281.16(1).
(3) Best management practice or BMP means structural or
nonstructural measures, practices, techniques or devices employed
to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to
waters of the state.
(4) Business day means a day the office of the Village Hall is routinely
and customarily open for business.
(5) Cease and desist order means a court-issued order to halt land
disturbing construction activity that is being conducted without the
required permit or in violation of a permit issued by the Village of
Mt. Pleasant.
(6) Construction site means an area upon which one or more land
disturbing construction activities occur, including areas that are
part of a larger common plan of development or sale where
multiple separate and distinct land disturbing construction
activities may be taking place at different times on different
schedules but under one plan. A long-range planning document
that describes separate construction projects, such as a twentyyear
transportation improvement plan, is not a common plan of
development.
(7) Design storm means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm
characterized by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall
intensity, return frequency and total depth of rainfall.
§ 74-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-234
1:479
(8) Erosion means the process by which the land's surface is worn
away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
(9) Erosion and sediment control plan means a comprehensive plan
developed to address pollution caused by erosion and
sedimentation of soil particles or rock fragments during
construction.
(10) Final stabilization means that all land disturbing construction
activities at the construction site have been completed and that a
uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established, with a
density of at least 70% of the cover, for the unpaved areas and
areas not covered by permanent structures, or that employ
equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
(11) Governing body means county board of supervisors, city council,
Village Board of trustees or Village council.
(12) Land disturbing construction activity means any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the
topography or existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover, that
may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and
movement of sediment into waters of the state Land disturbing
construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition,
excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities.
(13) Landowner means any person holding fee title, an easement or
other interest in property, which allows the person to undertake
cropping, livestock management, land disturbing construction
activity or maintenance of storm water BMPs on the property.
(14)MEP or maximum extent practicable means the highest level of
performance that is achievable but is not equivalent to a
performance standard identified in this ordinance as determined in
accordance with sec. (em) of this ordinance.
(15) Performance standard means a narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or
practice.
(16) Permit means a written authorization made by the Village of Mt.
Pleasant to the applicant to conduct land disturbing construction
activity or to discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the
state.
(17) Pollutant has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 283.01(13).
(18) Pollution has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 281.01(10).
(19) Responsible party means the landowner or any other entity
performing services to meet the requirements of this ordinance
through a contract or other agreement.
§ 74-234 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-234
1:480
(20) Runoff means storm water or precipitation including rain, snow or
ice melt or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or
channelized flow.
(21) Sediment means settleable solid material that is transported by
runoff, suspended within runoff or deposited by runoff away from
its original location.
(22) Silviculture activity means activities including tree nursery
operations, tree harvesting operations, reforestation, tree thinning,
prescribed burning, and pest and fire control. Clearing and
grubbing of an area of a construction site is not a silviculture
activity.
(23) Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the
land on which the land disturbing construction activity is proposed
in the permit application.
(24) Stop work order means an order issued by the Village of Mt.
Pleasant which requires that all construction activity on the site be
stopped.
(25) Technical standard means a document that specifies design,
predicted performance and operation and maintenance
specifications for a material, device or method.
(26) Transportation facility means a highway, a railroad, a public mass
transit facility, a public-use airport, a public trail or any other
public work for transportation purposes such as harbor
improvements under s. 85.095 (1)(b), Wis. Stats. "Transportation
facility" does not include building sites for the construction of
public buildings and buildings that are places of employment that
are regulated by the Department pursuant to s. 281.33, Wis. Stats.
(27)Waters of the state includes those portions of Lake Michigan and
Lake Superior within the boundaries of this state, and all lakes,
bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs,
marshes, watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water
or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within this
state or its jurisdiction.
(em) Applicability of maximum extent practicable. Maximum extent
practicable applies when a person who is subject to a performance
standard of this ordinance demonstrates to the [administering
authority]'s satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable
and that a lower level of performance is appropriate. In making the
assertion that a performance standard is not achievable and that a level
of performance different from the performance standard is the
maximum extent practicable, the responsible party shall take into
account the best available technology, cost effectiveness, geographic
features, and other competing interests such as protection of public
§ 74-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-234
1:481
safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources,
and preservation of historic properties.
(f) Technical standards. All BMPs required to comply with this section shall
meet the design criteria, standards and specifications based on any of
the following:
(1) Design guidance and technical standards identified or developed
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under
Subchapter V of Chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) Soil loss prediction tools (such as the Universal Soil Loss Equation
(USLE)) when using an appropriate rainfall or runoff factor (also
referred to as the R factor) or an appropriate design storm and
precipitation distribution, and when considering the geographic
location of the site and the period of disturbance.
(3) Technical standards and methods approved by the Village of Mt.
Pleasant.
(g) Performance standards for construction sites of one acre or more.
(1) Responsible party. The responsible party shall comply with this
section and implement an erosion and sediment control plan,
developed in accordance with Subsection (i).
(2) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. A written plan shall be
developed in accordance with Subsection (i) and implemented for
each construction site.
(3) Erosion and other pollutant control requirements. The plan
required under Subsection (g)(2) shall include the following:
a. Erosion and Sediment Control Practices. Erosion and sediment
control practices at each site where land disturbing
construction activity is to occur shall be used to prevent or
reduce all of the following:
1. The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by
vehicles.
2. The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into onsite
storm water inlets.
3. The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into
adjacent waters of the state.
4. The discharge of sediment from drainage ways that flow
off the site.
5. The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities.
6. The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles
existing for more than seven days.
§ 74-234 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-234
1:482
7. The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets
and in downstream channels.
8. The transport by runoff into waters of the state of
chemicals, cement, and other building compounds and
materials on the construction site during the construction
period. However, projects that require the placement of
these materials in waters of the state, such as constructing
bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited by
this subdivision.
9. The transport by runoff into waters of the state of
untreated wash water from vehicle and wheel washing.
b. Sediment performance standards. In addition to the erosion
and sediment control practices under Subsection (g)(3)a, the
following erosion and sediment control practices shall be
employed:
1. BMPs that, by design, discharge no more than five tons per
acre per year, or to the maximum extent practicable, of the
sediment load carried in runoff from initial grading to final
stabilization.
2. No person shall be required to employ more BMPs than
are needed to meet a performance standard in order to
comply with maximum extent practicable. Erosion and
sediment control BMPs may be combined to meet the
requirements of this paragraph. Credit may be given
toward meeting the sediment performance standard of this
paragraph for limiting the duration or area, or both, of
land disturbing construction activity, or for other
appropriate mechanisms.
3. Notwithstanding Subsection (g)(3)b1, if BMPs cannot be
designed and implemented to meet the sediment
performance standard, the erosion and sediment control
plan shall include a written, site-specific explanation of
why the sediment performance standard cannot be met
and how the sediment load will be reduced to the
maximum extent practicable.
c. Preventive Measures. The erosion and sediment control plan
shall incorporate all of the following:
1. Maintenance of existing vegetation, especially adjacent to
surface waters whenever possible.
2. Minimization of soil compaction and preservation of
topsoil.
§ 74-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-234
1:483
3. Minimization of land disturbing construction activity on
slopes of 20% or more.
4. Development of spill prevention and response procedures.
d. Location. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be
located so that treatment occurs before runoff enters waters of
the state.
(4) Implementation. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall
be implemented as follows:
a. Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or
installed before land disturbing construction activities begin in
accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan
developed in Subsection (g)(2).
b. Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained
until final stabilization.
c. Final stabilization activity shall commence when land
disturbing activities cease and final grade has been reached on
any portion of the site.
d. Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when land
disturbing activities have temporarily ceased and will not
resume for a period exceeding 14 calendar days.
e. BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment
control shall be removed by the responsible party.
(h) Permitting requirements, procedures and fees.
(1) Permit required. No responsible party may commence a land
disturbing construction activity subject to this section without
receiving prior approval of an erosion and sediment control plan for
the site and a permit from the Village of Mt. Pleasant.
(2) Permit application and fees. The responsible party that will
undertake a land disturbing construction activity subject to this
section shall submit an application for a permit and an erosion and
sediment control plan that meets the requirements of Subsection (i)
and shall pay an application fee as required in Subsection (j) to the
Village of Mt. Pleasant. By submitting an application, the applicant
is authorizing the Village of Mt. Pleasant to enter the site to obtain
information required for the review of the erosion and sediment
control plan.
(3) Review and approval of permit application. The Village of Mt.
Pleasant shall review any permit application that is submitted with
an erosion and sediment control plan, and the required fee. The
following approval procedure shall be used:
§ 74-234 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-234
1:484
a. Within 20 business days of the receipt of a complete permit
application, as required by Subsection (h)(2) above, the Village
of Mt. Pleasant shall inform the applicant whether the
application and plan are approved or disapproved based on the
requirements of this section.
b. If the permit application and plan are approved, the Village of
Mt. Pleasant shall issue the permit.
c. If the permit application or plan is disapproved, the Village of
Mt. Pleasant shall state in writing the reasons for disapproval.
d. The Village of Mt. Pleasant may request additional information
from the applicant. If additional information is submitted, the
Village of Mt. Pleasant shall have 20 business days from the
date the additional information is received to inform the
applicant that the plan is either approved or disapproved.
e. Failure by the Village of Mt. Pleasant to inform the permit
applicant of a decision within 30 business days of a required
submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of the submittal
and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued.
(4) Surety bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit,
the Village of Mt. Pleasant may require the applicant to deposit a
surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith
execution of the approved erosion control plan and any permit
conditions.
(5) Permit requirements. All permits shall require the responsible
party to:
a. Notify the Village of Mt. Pleasant within 48 hours of
commencing any land disturbing construction activity.
b. Notify the Village of Mt. Pleasant of completion of any BMPs
within 14 days after their installation.
c. Obtain permission in writing from the Village of Mt. Pleasant
prior to any modification pursuant to Subsection (i)(3) of the
erosion and sediment control plan.
d. Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and
sediment control plan.
e. Maintain all road drainage systems, storm water drainage
systems, BMPs and other facilities identified in the erosion and
sediment control plan.
f. Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjacent lands and
drainage ways resulting from land disturbing construction
activities and document repairs in a site erosion control log.
§ 74-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-234
1:485
g. Inspect the BMPs within 24 hours after each rain of 0.5 inches
or more which results in runoff during active construction
periods, and at least once each week make needed repairs and
document the findings of the inspections in a site erosion
control log with the date of inspection, the name of the person
conducting the inspection, and a description of the present
phase of the construction at the site.
h. Allow the Village of Mt. Pleasant to enter the site for the
purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion and
sediment control plan or for performing any work necessary to
bring the site into compliance with the control plan. Keep a
copy of the erosion and sediment control plan at the
construction site.
(6) Permit conditions. Permits issued under this section may include
conditions established by the Village of Mt. Pleasant in addition to
the requirements set forth in Subsection (h)(5) above, where
needed to assure compliance with the performance standards in
Subsection (g).
(7) Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid for
a period of 180 days, or the length of the building permit or other
construction authorizations, whichever is longer, from the date of
issuance. The Village of Mt. Pleasant may extend the period one or
more times for up to an additional 180 days cumulatively. The
Village of Mt. Pleasant may require additional BMPs as a condition
of the extension if they are necessary to meet the requirements of
this section.
(8) Maintenance. The responsible party throughout the duration of the
construction activities shall maintain all BMPs necessary to meet
the requirements of this section until the site has undergone final
stabilization.
(i) Erosion and sediment control plan, statement, and amendments.
(1) Erosion and sediment control plan statement. For each
construction site identified under sec. (d)(1)(c), an erosion and
sediment control plan statement shall be prepared. This statement
shall be submitted to the Village of Mt. Pleasant. The erosion and
sediment control plan statement shall briefly describe the site, the
development schedule, and the BMPs that will be used to meet the
requirements of the ordinance. A site map shall also accompany the
erosion and sediment control plan statement.
(2) Erosion and sediment control plan.
a. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared and
submitted to the Village of Mt. Pleasant.
§ 74-234 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-234
1:486
b. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed to
meet the performance standards in Subsection (g) and other
requirements of this section.
c. The erosion and sediment control plan shall address pollution
caused by soil erosion and sedimentation during construction
and up to final stabilization of the site. The erosion and
sediment control plan shall include, at a minimum, the
following items:
1. The name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of
the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant, together with the name of the applicant's
principal contact at such firm. The application shall also
include start and end dates for construction.
2. Description of the construction site and nature of the land
disturbing construction activity, including representation
of the limits of land disturbance on a United States
Geological Service 7.5 minute series topographic map.
3. Description of the intended sequence of major land
disturbing construction activities for major portions of the
construction site, including stripping and clearing; rough
grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and
buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing
shall identify the expected date on which clearing will
begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas,
areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and
sediment control measures, and establishment of
permanent vegetation.
4. Estimates of the total area of the construction site and the
total area of the construction site that is expected to be
disturbed by land disturbing construction activities.
5. Calculations to show the compliance with the performance
standard is sec. (g)(3)(b)1.
6. Existing data describing the surface soil as well as
subsoils.
7. Depth to groundwater, as indicated by Natural Resources
Conservation Service soil information where available.
8. Name of the immediate named receiving water from the
United States Geological Service 7.5 minute series
topographic maps.
d. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include a site map.
The site map shall include the following items and shall be at a
§ 74-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-234
1:487
scale not greater than 100 feet per inch and at a contour
interval not to exceed five feet.
1. Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and
engineered drainage systems, roads and surface waters.
Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other
watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site shall
be shown. Any identified 100-year flood plains, flood
fringes and floodways shall also be shown.
2. Boundaries of the construction site.
3. Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated
after major grading activities.
4. Areas of soil disturbance.
5. Location of major structural and nonstructural controls
identified in the plan.
6. Location of areas where stabilization BMPs will be
employed.
7. Areas which will be vegetated following land disturbing
construction activities.
8. Area(s) and location(s) of wetlands on the construction site
and locations where storm water is discharged to a surface
water or wetland within one-quarter mile downstream of
the construction site.
9. Areas(s) used for infiltration of post-construction storm
water runoff.
10. An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the entire
construction site map.
e. Each erosion and sediment control plan shall include a
description of appropriate control BMPs that will be installed
and maintained at the construction site to prevent pollutants
from reaching waters of the state. The erosion and sediment
control plan shall clearly describe the appropriate erosion and
sediment control BMPs for each major land disturbing
construction activity and the timing during the period of land
disturbing construction activity that the erosion and sediment
control BMPs will be implemented. The description of erosion
and sediment control BMPs shall include, when appropriate,
the following minimum requirements:
1. Description of interim and permanent stabilization
practices, including a BMP implementation schedule. Site
plans shall ensure that existing vegetation is preserved
§ 74-234 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-234
1:488
where attainable and that disturbed portions of the site
are stabilized.
2. Description of structural practices to divert flow away
from exposed soils, store flows or otherwise limit runoff
and the discharge of pollutants from the site. Unless
otherwise specifically approved in writing by the Village of
Mt. Pleasant, structural measures shall be installed on
upland soils.
3. Management of overland flow at all areas of the
construction site, unless otherwise controlled by outfall
controls.
4. Trapping of sediment in channelized flow.
5. Staging land disturbing construction activities to limit
exposed soil areas subject to erosion.
6. Protection of downslope drainage inlets where they occur.
7. Minimization of tracking at all vehicle and equipment
entry and exit locations of the construction site.
8. Clean up of off-site sediment deposits.
9. Proper disposal of building and waste material.
10. Stabilization of drainage ways.
11. Installation of permanent stabilization practices as soon as
possible after final grading.
12. Minimization of dust to the maximum extent practicable.
f. The erosion and sediment control plan shall require that
velocity dissipation devices be placed at discharge locations
and along the length of any outfall channel, as necessary, to
provide a nonerosive flow from the structure to a water course
so that the natural physical and biological characteristics and
functions are maintained and protected.
(3) Erosion and sediment control plan amendments. The applicant
shall amend the erosion and sediment control plan if any of the
following occur:
a. There is a change in design, construction, operation or
maintenance at the site which has the reasonable potential for
the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state and which has
not otherwise been addressed in the plan.
b. The actions required by the erosion and sediment control plan
fail to reduce the impacts of pollutants carried by construction
site runoff.
§ 74-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-234
1:489
c. The Village of Mt. Pleasant notifies the applicant of changes
needed in the erosion and sediment control plan.
(j) Fee schedule. The fees referred to in other sections of this section shall
be established by the Village of Mt. Pleasant and may from time to time
be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the
Village of Mt. Pleasant shall be available for review in the Village hall.
(k) Inspection. If land disturbing construction activities are occurring
without a permit required by this section, the Village of Mt. Pleasant
may enter the land pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0119(1), (2), and (3).
(l) Enforcement.
(1) The Village of Mt. Pleasant may post a stop-work order if any of the
following occurs:
a. Land disturbing construction activity regulated under this
section is being undertaken without a permit.
b. The erosion and sediment control plan is not being
implemented in good faith.
c. The conditions of the permit are not being met.
(2) If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a
stop-work order posted under this section or fails to comply with
the erosion and sediment control plan or permit conditions, the
Village of Mt. Pleasant may revoke the permit.
(3) If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued or the
permit has been revoked, does not cease the activity after being
notified by the Village of Mt. Pleasant, or if a responsible party
violates a stop-work order posted under Subsection (l)(1), the
Village of Mt. Pleasant may request the Village Attorney to obtain a
cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
(4) The Village of Mt. Pleasant may retract the stop-work order issued
under Subsection (l)(1), or the permit revocation under Subsection
(I)(2).
(5) After posting a stop-work order under Subsection (I)(1), the Village
of Mt. Pleasant may issue a notice of intent to the responsible party
of its intent to perform work necessary to comply with this section.
The Village of Mt. Pleasant may go on the land and commence the
work after issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work
performed under this subsection by the Village of Mt. Pleasant,
plus interest at the rate authorized by Village of Mt. Pleasant shall
be billed to the responsible party. In the event a responsible party
fails to pay the amount due, the Clerk shall enter the amount due
on the tax rolls and collect as a special assessment against the
property pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 66, Subch. VII.
§ 74-234 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-234
1:490
§ 74-235. through § 74-260. (Reserved)
(6) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000
and the costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(7) Compliance with the provisions of this section may also be enforced
by injunction in any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary
to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and desist order before
resorting to injunctional proceedings.
(m) Appeals.
(1) Board of appeals. The Board of Appeals of the Village of Mt.
Pleasant:
a. Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is
error in any order, decision or determination made by the
Village of Mt. Pleasant in administering this section except for
cease and desist orders obtained under Subsection (1)(3).
b. May authorize variances from the provisions of this section
which are not contrary to the public interest and where owing
to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of
the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship; and
c. Shall use the rules, procedures, duties and powers authorized
by statute in hearing and deciding appeals and authorizing
variances.
(2) Who may appeal. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by
any aggrieved person or by any office, department, board, or
bureau of the Village of Mt. Pleasant affected by any decision of the
Village of Mt. Pleasant.
(n) Severability. If a court of competent jurisdiction judges any section,
clause, provision or portion of this ordinance unconstitutional or
invalid, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be
affected by such judgment.
§ 74-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-235
1:491

ARTICLE V
Fees
§ 74-261. Purpose. [Code 1993, § 18.18(1)]
The subdivider shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer all fees required by this
chapter and at the time specified. The purpose of such fees is to assist in
defraying the cost of review by the Village.
§ 74-262. Preliminary subdivision plat review. [Code 1993,
§ 18.18(2)]
§ 74-263. Certified survey map review. [Code 1993, § 18.18(3)]
The subdivider shall pay a fee as set by the Village Board to the Clerk-
Treasurer at the time of application for approval of a preliminary map, and
another fee as set by the Village Board at the time of submittal of the final
map.
§ 74-264. Improvement review and inspection. [Code 1993,
§ 18.18(4)]
§ 74-265. Final plat review. [Code 1993, § 18.18(5)]
(a) The subdivider shall pay to the Village a fee as set by the Village Board,
plus a fee as set by the Village Board for each lot or parcel within the
preliminary subdivision plat.
(b) A reapplication fee as set by the Village Board shall accompany any plat
at the time of reapplication for approval of any preliminary plat which
has previously been reviewed.
(a) The subdivider shall pay fees based upon estimates or equal to the
actual cost, legal work, administration, plan, review inspections and
engineering review of plans for any subdivision. Such fees shall be paid
to the Clerk-Treasurer at the times specified in the subdivider's
agreement.
(b) Fees may be recomputed, upon demand of the subdivider or Village,
after completion of improvement construction in accordance with the
actual cost of services provided and the difference, if any, shall be paid
by, or remitted to, the subdivider.
(a) The subdivider shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer a fee as set by the
Village Board, plus a fee as set by the Village Board for each lot or
parcel within the final plat.
(b) A reapplication fee as set by the Village Board shall be paid to the Clerk-
Treasurer at the time of a reapplication for approval of any final plat
which has previously been reviewed.
§ 74-261 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-265
1:493
Chapter 78
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
§ 74-265 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 74-265
1:494
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 78-1. State traffic laws adopted. [Code 1993, § 7.01]
§ 78-2. Official traffic signs and signals. [Code 1993, § 7.08]
§ 78-3. Abandoned vehicles. [Code 1993, § 7.06(8)]
(a) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all provisions
of Wis. Stats. Chs. 340 — 348, describing and defining regulations with
respect to vehicles and traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture only,
including penalties to be imposed and procedures for prosecution, are
adopted by reference and made a part of this section as if fully set forth
in this section. Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any
statute incorporated in this section by reference is required or
prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions or
modifications of statutes incorporated in this section are intended to be
made part of this section in order to secure uniform statewide
regulation of traffic on the highways, streets and alleys.
(b) In addition to the sections of the Wisconsin Statutes previously
adopted, there is also adopted in its entirety Wis. Admin. Code Ch.
Trans. 305, entitled "Standards for Motor Vehicle Equipment," as it may
be amended from time to time.
(a) Direction of procurement, erection and maintenance. The Village
Administrator or designee shall direct the procurement, erection and
maintenance of appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and
markings conforming to the rules of the state department of
transportation giving such notice of the provisions of this chapter as
required by law. Signs shall be erected in such locations and manner as
the Village Board shall determine will best effect the purposes of this
chapter and give adequate warning to users of the streets, roads,
highways or alleys in question.
(b) Removal of illegal signs, signals, markings and devices. The Village
shall have the authority granted by Wis. Stats. § 349.09, and is hereby
directed to order the removal of a sign, signal, marking or device
placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this chapter or Wis.
Stats. § 346.41. Any charge imposed on a premises for removal of such
an illegal sign, signal, marking or device shall be reported to the Village
Board for review and certification at its next regular meeting.
(a) Prohibited.
(1) No person shall leave any unattended motor vehicle, trailer,
semitrailer, mobile home or boat parked upon any public highway,
or private or public property for such time and under such
circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have
been abandoned. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
§ 78-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-3
1:495
whenever any vehicle has been left unattended in the Village for
more than 48 hours, without the permission of the property owner,
the vehicle is deemed parked and abandoned and constitutes a
public nuisance. A motor vehicle shall not be considered a parked
and abandoned motor vehicle when it is out of ordinary public view
or when designated as not abandoned by an authorized Village
official.
(2) No person shall leave any unattended motor vehicle, trailer,
semitrailer, mobile home or boat parked or stopped upon any public
highway or public property in such a manner as to jeopardize
public safety.
(b) Impoundment. Any vehicle in violation of this section shall be
impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of under Subsection (c) of
this section, except that if it is deemed by an authorized Village
representative that the cost of towing and storage charges for the
impoundment would exceed the value of the vehicle, the vehicle may be
junked or sold by the Village prior to expiration of the impoundment
period upon a determination by the Chief of Police that the vehicle is
not stolen or otherwise wanted for evidence or other reason.
(c) Removal and disposition.
(1) Any Village police officer or patrolman who discovers any motor
vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, mobile home or boat in violation of this
section shall cause the vehicle to be removed to a suitable place of
impoundment. Upon removal of the vehicle, the officer shall notify
the Chief of Police of the location of the impounded vehicle.
(2) The owner of any vehicle in violation of this section is responsible
for the vehicle and all costs of impounding and disposing of the
vehicle. Costs not recovered from the sale of the vehicle may be
recovered in a civil action by the Village against the owner.
Whether or not the Village recovers the cost of towing and
enforcement, the Village shall be responsible to the towing service
for requisitional towing service and reasonable charges for
impoundment. Any amounts recovered in excess of the costs of
impounding and disposing of the vehicle, including any citations
issued, shall be considered a forfeiture and shall be retained by the
Village.
(3) Any vehicle which is in violation of this section and not disposed of
under Subsection (b) of this section shall be retained in storage for
a minimum period of 10 days after certified mail notice has been
sent to the owner and lienholders of record to permit reclamation
of the vehicle after payment of accrued charges. Such notice shall
set forth the year, make, model and serial number of the motor
vehicle, the place where the vehicle is being held and shall inform
the owner or any lienholders of their right to reclaim the vehicle.
The notice shall state that the failure of the owner or lienholders to
§ 78-3 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 78-3
1:496
§ 78-4. Vehicle impoundment for evidentiary purposes. [Code 1993,
§ 7.06(9)]
exercise their rights to reclaim the vehicle under this subsection
shall be deemed a waiver of all rights, title and interest in the
vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle. Each retained
vehicle not reclaimed by its owner or lienholder may be sold. The
Village may dispose of the vehicle by sealed bid or auction sale.
If there are more than two such vehicles being offered for sale,
such vehicles shall be sold by sealed bid to the highest bidder
for all of the vehicles. If the sale is by auction, the highest bid
for any such motor vehicle shall be accepted unless the bid is
deemed inadequate by an authorized Village representative, in
which event, all bids may be rejected. If all bids are rejected
or no bids are received, the Village may either readvertise the
sale, adjourn the sale to a definite date, sell the motor vehicle
at a private sale or junk the vehicle. Any interested person may
offer bids on the vehicles to be sold pursuant to the provisions of
this subsection. Upon the sale of such vehicle, the Village shall
supply the purchaser with a completed form designated by the
Police Department, enabling the purchaser to obtain a regular
certificate of title for the vehicle. The purchaser shall have 10
days to remove the vehicle from the storage area, but shall pay a
reasonable storage fee established by the Village Board for each
day the vehicle remains in storage after the second business day
subsequent to the sale date. Ten days after the sale, the purchaser
shall forfeit all interest in the vehicle and the vehicle shall be
deemed to be abandoned and may be sold again. Any listing of
vehicles to be sold by the Village shall be made available to any
interested person or organization which makes a written request
for such list. The Village may charge a fee as set by the Village
Board for the list.
(4) Within five days after the sale or disposal of a vehicle as provided in
this Subsection (c) or Subsection (b) of this section, the Village
shall advise the department of transportation of the sale or
disposition upon a form supplied by the department of
transportation.
(d) Application of state traffic violation and vehicle registration program. In
addition to the remedies provided in Subsection (c) of this section, the
Village may enforce the provisions of § 78-6 relating to the state traffic
violation and vehicle registration program.
(a) Owners of any vehicle which has been impounded subsequent to an
official police investigation and is then released as evidence shall be
sent a notice by certified mail. The notice shall contain the year, make,
model and serial number of the vehicle, the place where the vehicle is
being held and shall inform the owner of his right to reclaim the vehicle.
§ 78-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-4
1:497
§ 78-5. Railroad trains, locomotive and cars obstructing highways.
[Code 1993, § 7.11]
No person shall stop any railroad train, locomotive or car upon or across
any highway or street crossing within the Village outside of cities or leave
such train, locomotive or car standing upon such crossing for a period of
time longer than 10 minutes, except in the case of an accident, and any
conductor, engineer, brakeman or other person in charge or responsible for
such train, locomotive or car, who shall violate this section, shall be subject
to a forfeiture of not more than $25.
§ 78-6. State traffic violation and vehicle registration program.
[Code 1993, § 7.12]
§ 78-7. Violations; penalties. [Code 1993, § 7.15; amended
1-13-2014 by Ord. No. 05-2014]
(b) If the owner does not appear within 48 hours of receipt of such notice,
the procedure under § 78-3(c) shall apply.
(a) Participation. The Village is a participant in the State of Wisconsin
Traffic Violation and Vehicle Registration Program relating to unpaid or
otherwise unsatisfied nonmoving traffic citations or any judgments
relating thereto which remain unpaid.
(b) Authorized agency. The Police Department is the agency designated by
the Village as the entity authorized to submit unpaid citation and
satisfaction notices to the department of transportation on behalf of the
Village. The Chief of Police or his designee is authorized to sign such
notices on behalf of the Village.
(a) Generally. The penalty for a violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be a forfeiture and penalty assessment, if required by Wis. Stats.
§ 757.05, a jail assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 302.46(1), a
truck driver education assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 349.04, a
railroad crossing improvement assessment, if required by Wis. Stats.
§ 346.177, 346.495 or 346.65(4r), and a crime laboratories and drug
law enforcement assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 165.755, plus
any applicable fees prescribed in Wis. Stats. Ch. 814, not to exceed the
amount of the deposit that the court may accept as provided in Wis.
Stats. § 345.37.
(b) Special local regulations. The forfeiture for a violation of any local
regulation, except parking, shall be as provided in § 1-15.
(c) Parking.
(1) The forfeiture for a violation of the parking regulations in this
chapter shall be as provided in § 1-15 and for offenses described in
Wis. Stats. §§ 346.503-346.55, adopted by reference in this chapter,
shall be as provided in Wis. Stats. § 346.56.
§ 78-4 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 78-7
1:498
§ 78-8. Enforcement. [Code 1993, § 7.16]
(2) In accordance with Wis. Stats. § 345.28(2)(a), a person charged
with a nonmoving traffic (parking) violation under this section may
mail or pay the amount of the forfeiture to the Police Department in
person. In such case, the citation shall not be filed in court.
(3) In addition to the amount of forfeiture for a violation of parking
ordinances, fees as set by the Village shall be assessed, when
applicable, for the following: When payment is made after the
scheduled court appearance date when no court appearance was
made.
(4) When payment is made following notification to the state
department of transportation to suspend or refuse the registration
of vehicles under Wis. Stats. § 345.28(4)(a)2, in addition to the fee
set forth in Subsection (c)(3)a of this section.
(a) Citations. Citations for all nonmoving traffic violations under this
chapter shall conform to Wis. Stats. § 345.28, and shall permit direct
mail payment of the applicable minimum forfeiture to the Village Police
Department within 10 days of the issuance of the citation, in lieu of a
court appearance. The issuing officer shall specify on the citation the
amount of the applicable forfeiture, as provided by this chapter. The
forfeiture for a violation of all nonmoving traffic violations under this
chapter shall double if the applicable minimum forfeiture is not paid to
the Village Police Department within 10 days of the issuance of the
citation as set forth in this subsection.
(b) Petition to reopen judgment. Whenever a person has been convicted in
the state on the basis of a forfeiture of deposit or a plea of guilty or no
contest and the person was not informed as required under Wis. Stats.
§ 345.27(1) and (2), the person may, within 60 days after being notified
of the suspension of his operating privilege, petition the court to reopen
the judgment and grant him an opportunity to defend on merits. If the
court finds that the petitioner was not informed as required under Wis.
Stats. § 345.27(1) and (2), the court shall order the judgment reopened.
The court order reopening the judgment automatically reinstates the
suspended operating privileges.
(c) Deposits.
(1) Any person arrested for a violation of this chapter may make a
deposit of money, as directed by the arresting officer, at the Police
Department. Deposits may be brought or mailed to the office of the
Police Department, as directed by the arresting officer. The
arresting officer shall notify the arrested person, orally or in
writing, that:
a. If the person makes a deposit for a violation of a traffic
regulation, the person need not appear in court at the time
§ 78-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-8
1:499
§ 78-9. Neighborhood electric vehicles. [Ord. No. 5-2008, § 1,
6-9-2008]
fixed in the citation and the person will be deemed to have
tendered a plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture
and penalty assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 757.05,
a jail assessment, if required by Wis. Stats. § 302.46(1), a
truck driver education assessment, if required by Wis. Stats.
§ 349.04, a railroad crossing improvement assessment, if
required by Wis. Stats. § 346.177, 346.495 or 346.65(4r), and
a crime laboratories and drug law enforcement assessment,
if required by Wis. Stats. § 165.755, plus any applicable fees
prescribed in Wis. Stats. Ch. 814, not to exceed the amount of
the deposit that the court may accept as provided in Wis. Stats.
§ 345.37; and
b. If the person fails to make a deposit for a violation of a traffic
regulation or appear in court at the time fixed in the citation,
the court may enter a default judgment finding the person
guilty of the offense or issue a warrant for his arrest.
(2) The amount of the deposit shall be determined in accordance with
the state revised uniform state traffic deposit schedule established
by the state judicial conference, and shall include court costs,
including any applicable fees prescribed in Wis. Stats. Ch. 814, any
applicable penalty assessment, any applicable jail assessment, any
applicable truck driver education assessment, any applicable
railroad crossing improvement assessment and any applicable
crime laboratories and drug law enforcement assessment. If a
deposit schedule has not been established, the arresting officer
shall require the alleged offender to deposit the forfeiture
established by the Village Board, which shall include the penalty
assessments. Deposits for nonmoving violations shall not include
the penalty assessment.
(3) The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall issue
the arrested person a receipt as required by Wis. Stats.
§ 345.26(3)(b).
(d) Notice of demerit points. Every officer accepting a stipulation under the
provisions of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of Wis. Stats.
§§ 343.28 and 345.26(1)(a), and shall require the alleged violator to
sign a statement of notice insubstantially the form contained on the
traffic citation promulgated under Wis. Stats. § 345.11.
(e) Forfeitures in treasury. Any officer accepting deposits or forfeited
penalties under this chapter shall deliver amounts to the Clerk-
Treasurer within seven days after receipt thereof.
(a) Definitions.
§ 78-8 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 78-9
1:500
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE (NEV) —
A self-propelled electrically-powered motor vehicle that has
successfully completed the Neighborhood Electric Vehicle America
Test Program conducted by the Federal Department of Energy and
that conforms to the definition and requirements of "low-speed
vehicles" under CFR 571.3(b) and 571.500. Electric golf carts are
not included in the foregoing definition.
(1)
A neighborhood electric vehicle shall be four-wheeled and have a
speed range of at least 20 miles per hour and not more than 25
miles per hour on a paved surface and have a gross vehicle weight
of less than 3,000 pounds. Neighborhood electric vehicles shall
have all of the following specifications:
a. Headlamps;
b. Front and rear turn signals;
c. Stop lamps;
Horn which meets the requirements listed under Wisconsin
Statutes (Trans 305.25);
d.
Reflex reflectors; one red on each side as far to the rear as
practicable and one red to the rear;
e.
An exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side and either an
exterior mirror on the passenger side or an interior rearview
mirror;
f.
g. Parking brake;
A windshield that conforms to the requirements of the federal
motor vehicle safety standards on glazing materials (49 CFR
571.205);
h.
Every windshield on a neighborhood electric vehicle shall be
equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or other
moisture from the windshield (CFR 571.104);
i.
A vehicle identification number (VIN) that complies with
federal law as provided in 949 CFR 565;
j.
A type 1 or type 2 seat belt assembly conforming to 49 CFR
571.209 and federal motor vehicle standard no. 209 for each
designated seating position; and
k.
l. Meets the general test conditions under 49 CFR 571.50056.
(2)
(b) Use permitted on Village streets only.
§ 78-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-9
1:501
§ 78-10. Prohibiting the use of compression (jake) brakes.
[Amended 10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 14-2014]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle equipped with compression brakes (jake
brakes) to downshift and release the clutch to utilize the vehicle's engine to
slow in order to meet proper speed restrictions within the Village, except
in case of extreme emergency. Any person violating the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a forfeiture as provided in § 1-15.
§ 78-11. through § 78-40. (Reserved)
(1) A licensed individual may operate a neighborhood electric vehicle
on those Village streets having a posted limit of 35 miles per hour
or less, and headlamps must be on during operation.
(2) A neighborhood electric vehicle may not be used on state or county
highways except to cross over these highways while traveling on
Village streets as stated above. A neighborhood electric vehicle
may not cross over any state or county highway that has a posted
speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
(c) License. Neighborhood electric vehicles shall be registered, titled and
licensed by the State of Wisconsin.
(d) Permitted users. Any person who operates a neighborhood electric
vehicle on any Village street must hold a valid State of Wisconsin
operator's license. The operation of a neighborhood electric vehicle
must in all respects comply with Chapter 78 of the Mt. Pleasant Village
[Code of] Ordinances.
(e) Violations; penalties. Any person convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall forfeit an amount as provided below:
(1) Operating a neighborhood electric vehicle on a state or county
highway shall result in a forfeiture of $30 plus costs and penalty
assessments.
(2) Operating a neighborhood electric vehicle on a Village street with a
speed limit of 40 — 45 mph result in a forfeiture of $30 plus costs
and penalty assessments.
(3) Operating a neighborhood electric vehicle on any state highway,
county highway or Village street with a speed limit of 50 mph or
greater shall result in a forfeiture of $50 plus costs and penalty
assessments.
§ 78-9 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 78-11
1:502
ARTICLE II
Traffic Schedules
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 78-41. through § 78-60. (Reserved)7
7. Editor's Note: Former § 78-41 was repealed 9-26-2011 by Ord. No. 05-2011.
§ 78-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-41
1:503

DIVISION 2
Speed
§ 78-61. Limits. [Code 1993, § 7.02; Ord. No. 7-2009, 2-9-2009]
§ 78-62. through § 78-80. (Reserved)
(a) The Village Board determines that the statutory speed limits on certain
streets, or portions thereof, are unreasonable, unsafe or imprudent and
modifies such speed limits under authority granted by Wis. Stats.
§ 349.11 and hereby delegates the authority to the public works
committee to review and approve amendments to the list of speed limit
zones. The public works committee, upon review and recommendation
from public safety officials, the engineering department, and the
highway department, shall amend the list or may when deemed
necessary request the Village Board to act on specific situations.
(b) The schedule of designated speed zones is on file in the office of the
Village Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 78-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-62
1:505

DIVISION 3
Through Streets
§ 78-81. Designated. [Code 1993, § 7.03; amended 9-26-2011 by
Ord. No. 06-2011]
§ 78-82. through § 78-100. (Reserved)
(a) In the interest of public safety and pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.07, the
following streets, or portions thereof, are designated and declared to be
through highways:
None at this time.
(b) Arterial stop signs shall be placed on the streets intersecting the
designated through highways set forth in Subsection (a) of this section,
and each person, before entering such through traffic street, shall be
required to bring his vehicle to a stop before entering such street.
§ 78-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-82
1:507

DIVISION 4
Stops
§ 78-101. Arterial stop signs designated. [Code 1993, § 7.04; Ord.
No. 5-2009, 2-9-2009; amended 8-18-2014 by Ord. No. 12-2014;
3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 01-2015]
§ 78-102. through § 78-120. (Reserved)
(a) The Village Board delegates the authority to the public works
committee to review and approve amendments to the list of stop sign
locations. The public works committee, upon review and
recommendation from public safety officials, the engineering
department, and the highway department, shall amend the list or may
when deemed necessary request the Village Board to act on specific
situations.
(b) The schedule of arterial stop signs is on file in the office of the Village
Clerk-Treasurer.8
8. Editor's Note: See Code Comparative Table for derivation.
§ 78-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-102
1:509

DIVISION 5
One-Ways
§ 78-121. Designated. [Code 1993, § 7.05]
Under Wis. Stats. § 349.10, 25th Street between STH 32 and Mead Street
and Mead Street between 25th Street and 24th Street are declared to be
one-way highways and all vehicles traveling or being operated on 25th
Street shall travel or be operated only in an eastbound direction and all
vehicles traveling or being operated on that portion of Mead Street shall
travel or be operated only in a northbound direction.
§ 78-122. through § 78-139. (Reserved)
§ 78-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-122
1:511

DIVISION 6
Parking
§ 78-140. Relating to declaration of snow emergency and parking
regulations. [Ord. No. 16, 2008, 11-24-2008; Ord. No. 17-2008,
11-24-2008]
(a) Declaration of snow emergency and parking regulations.
(1) Whenever snow falls during any twenty-four-hour period to a depth
of four inches or more or a situation exists resulting in freezing rain
resulting in ice accumulations throughout the Village of one-eighthinch
or more, then such storm constitutes a serious public hazard
impairing public transportation, public safety, and safe operations
within the Village and a snow emergency declaration can be issued
at any time by either the Village Administrator, highway foreman or
a designated representative.
(2) A snow emergency will remain in effect until such time as
snowplowing or salting operations have been declared completed
by the highway foreman or his/her designated representative.
(3) Whenever such emergency is declared, the Police Department shall
issue an announcement to not less than two radio or television
broadcast stations whose normal operating range includes the
Village.
(b) Parking restrictions.
(1) No person shall park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle upon any
public street, highway, or alley within the Village as defined in
Subsection (b) during the emergency except for vehicles loading or
unloading of passengers or property and provided that no other
parking ordinance is violated for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to physicians on
emergency call.
(2) Parking shall be prohibited on the odd-numbered side of the street
from 6:00 p.m. of a day before an even-numbered day until 6:00
a.m. of the next day and on the even-numbered side of the street
from 6:00 p.m. of a day before an odd-numbered day until 6:00 a.m.
of the next day; provided, however, vehicles may be parked for a
period of time not longer than three minutes for actual unloading
or loading of passengers or not longer than 30 minutes for actual
unloading or loading of property where no other regulation
restriction parking as to place or time is violated thereby.
(3) No person shall park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle upon any
cul-de-sac, semi-circular elbow street or similar configuration of
street within the portion of the street area that is defined by
concentric radii. This restriction does not apply to the portion of
§ 78-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-140
1:513
§ 78-141. All-night parking. [Code 1993, § 7.06(1); Ord. No. 2-01,
§ 7.06(1), 7-9-2001; Ord. No. 3-2006, 3-27-2006]
culs-de-sac constructed to normal roadway widths leading to the
circular portion.
(4) Any vehicle which is illegally parked on any street or alley may be
moved by or under the direction of any police officer and the cost of
moving and storage of such vehicle shall be added as a cost to the
penalty assessed for the illegal parking of such vehicles.
(a) No person shall park, stop or leave standing any motor vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, on any of the following streets, for a period of
time longer than 30 minutes, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. 6:00 a.m.
of any day, when signs are erected in any block giving notice thereof;
however, this section shall not apply to the even-numbered side of the
street on an even-numbered day and to the odd-numbered side of the
street on an odd-numbered day, nor to physicians or ambulances on
emergency calls:
Location
21st Street from Clark Street east to the alley east of Howe Street
22nd Street from Clark Street east to the alley east of Howe Street
23rd Street from Clark Street east to the alley east of Howe Street
24th Street from Racine Street east to Mead Street
24th Street north side from Mead Street east for a distance of 675
feet
Alvida Court, from Larson Street to Lawndale Avenue
Athaleen Avenue, from Sheridan Road, west to STH 32
Bryn Mawr Avenue, from STH 32, east to Lake Michigan
Clark Street, from 21st Street, south to 23rd Street
Derby Avenue, from STH 32, east to its end
Enos Avenue, from Sheridan Road, west to STH 32
Graceland Avenue, from Sheridan Road, east to STH 32
Howe Street, from 21st Street, south to 24th Street
Kenilworth Avenue, from Sheridan Road, east to Lake Michigan
Lakewood Avenue, from Sheridan Road, west to STH 32
Lawndale Avenue, from STH 32, east to Lake Michigan
Marion Avenue, from Enos Avenue, south to Lakewood Avenue
Maryland Avenue, from Sheridan Road, west to STH 32
Mead Street, from 21st Street, south to 24th Street
Plainfield Avenue, from Sheridan Road, west to STH 32
§ 78-140 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 78-141
1:514
§ 78-142. Parking restricted. [Code 1993, § 7.06(2); Ord. No. 07-01,
§ 7.06(2), 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 2-2005, 1-10-2005; Ord. No.
11-2009, 8-10-2009; Ord. No. 12-2009, 9-28-2009; amended
4-23-2012 by Ord. No. 03-2012; 6-9-2014 by Ord. No. 09-2014;
8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 07-2015]
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended
or unattended, as follows, when signs are erected in any block giving notice
thereof:
Location
Borgardt Road, on both sides of the road, from Spring Street to the north
boundary of Haban Park
Chicory Road, at any time on the north or south side of the road, from
STH 32 to a point 950 feet west
Chicory Road, on the south side of the road, from Knoll Place, west 1,010
feet
Location
Pratt Avenue, from Sheridan Road, west to STH 32
Racine Street, from 21st Street, south to 25th Street
Richard Avenue, from Sheridan Road, west to STH 32
Rosalind Avenue, from STH 32, east to Lake Michigan
Sheridan Road, from the intersection of Larson Street, south to STH
32
South Lawn Avenue, from Richard Avenue, south to its end
Vera Court, from Larson Street to Lawndale Avenue
Walter Avenue, from Sheridan Road, west to STH 32
(b) The parking, stopping or standing of motor homes, trucks with a gross
weight of more than 14,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating (as
defined by WisDOT vehicle registration), campers mounted or attached
to a motor vehicle, and trailers (truck, boat or camping) is prohibited on
both sides of all public streets between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. [Amended 10-22-2018 by Ord. No. 33-2018]
(c) Exceptions to prohibition. Vehicles which are covered by the exceptions
set forth in Wis. Stats. § 346.50 are also excepted from the prohibitions
of this section. Vehicles engaged in construction work shall be exempt
from the prohibitions of this section only when engaged directly in
construction work. Vehicles actively engaged in loading and unloading
are also exempted from this section. Vehicles which have been
approved by the Police Department as necessary for on-call service in
responding to police and fire emergencies are also exempt from the
prohibition of this section. [Added 10-22-2018 by Ord. No. 33-2018]
§ 78-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-142
1:515
Location
Clark Street, longer than two hours on any day, except Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, on the east side, from 21st Street to 23rd Street
Commerce Drive, on the west side between the Highway 20 north
frontage road and Corporate Drive, Monday through Friday between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Corporate Drive, on the south side between Commerce Drive and
Fountain Hills Drive, Monday through Friday between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Derby Avenue, at any time on either side of the easterly 100 feet of Derby
Avenue lying between Sheridan Road and the bank of Lake Michigan
Eaton Lane, between 7:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m., except Sundays and legal
holidays, on the entire west side of Eaton Lane
Eaton Lane, at any time on the west side of Eaton Lane, from a point 420
feet north of the center line of Romayne Avenue for a distance of 50 feet
south
Eaton Lane, at any time on the entire circumference of the northernmost
cul-de-sac of Eaton Lane
Fountain Hills Drive, on the west side between the Highway 20 north
frontage road and Corporate Drive, Monday through Friday between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Graceland Avenue, longer than two hours on any day, except Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, from Sheridan Road to its intersection at Lake
Michigan
Graceland Boulevard, at any time on the north side of Graceland
Boulevard, from a point 40 feet west of the city limits of Racine City,
eastward to such city limits
Hickory Grove Avenue, at any time on the north side of Hickory Grove
Avenue, beginning 175 feet west of its intersection with Coolidge Avenue,
westerly for a distance of 140 feet
Howe Street, longer than two hours on any day, except Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, from 23rd Street to 24th Street
Indiana Street, at any time on either side of Indiana Street south of
Westway Avenue, to its terminus
Larson Street, at any time on the south side of Larson Street, from STH
32, easterly to Vera Court, and on the north side, from STH 32, easterly to
Lake Michigan
Lawndale Avenue, for a period of time longer than two hours on any day,
except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, from Sheridan Road, westerly to
STH 32
§ 78-142 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 78-142
1:516
Location
Newman Road, at any time on the east side of Newman Road, from a
point 250 feet south from its intersection with the center line of CTH C,
northerly to such center line
Northwestern Court, Mead Street, 25th Street and designated alleys,
between the hours of 9:30 p.m. — 7:00 a.m. on Northwestern Court for a
distance of 900 feet from its intersection with Northwestern Avenue and
at any time on the cul-de-sac of Northwestern Court, on the east and west
side of Mead Street between 24th Street and 25th Street, and on the
north and south side of 25th Street, between Mead Street and Racine
Street and in the alleys that are located east of Howe Street from 21st
Street, south to 23rd Street, and between Mead Street and Racine Street,
from 21st Street, south to 24th Street, and between Racine Street and
Clark Street from 21st Street, south to 23rd Street
Oakes Road, south of STH 20, at any time on the west side of Oakes Road
from a point 300 feet north of the northerly most entrance to J.I. Case
High School which intersects Oakes Road, to a point 200 feet south of the
southerly most entrance to J.I. Case High School which intersects Oakes
Road and at any time on the east side of Oakes Road from 7:30 a.m. —
4:30 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays, except legal holidays, from a
point 300 feet north of the northerly most entrance to J.I. Case High
School which intersects Oakes Road, to a point 200 feet south of the
southerly most entrance to J.I. Case High School which intersects Oakes
Road
Oakes Road, along both sides from Durand Avenue north to the corporate
limits of the City of Racine
Old Spring Street, along north side from Stuart Road to 100 feet east of
Stuart Road
Phillips Avenue on the west side from a point 390 feet south of Winthrop
Avenue to a point 950 feet south and on the east side of Phillips Avenue
from a point 170 feet south of Winthrop Avenue to a point 900 feet south
Prairie Drive, at any time on both sides of the street, from STH 20 to a
point of 265 feet north
Sheridan Road, at any time on the west side of Sheridan Road, from
Athaleen Avenue, south to its intersection with Derby Avenue
Sheridan Road, at any time on the east side of Sheridan Road, from a
point 255 feet south from the center line of Larson Street, northerly to
such center line
Sheridan Road, longer than two hours on any day, except Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, from Larsen Street, southerly to Lawndale Avenue
Summerset Drive, at any time on either side of the roadway from its
intersection with the south right-of-way line of CTH C, south for a
distance of 500 feet, and on either side of Spring Street from its
intersection with Summerset Drive, west for a distance of 400 feet
§ 78-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-142
1:517
Location
Sunnyslope Drive, longer than two hours at any time on the east and west
sides of Sunnyslope Drive, from a point on the right-of-way of STH 20,
north for a distance of 600 feet
Sunnyslope Drive, no parking of buses or trucks on the east side of
Sunnyslope Drive, from a point of the north right-of-way of STH 20, north
for a distance of 265 feet. [Added 12-10-2018 by Ord. No. 41-2018]
Timber Drive, at any time on both sides of its intersection with STH 31, to
a point 200 feet west
Summerset Drive, within the turnaround tee at its south terminus:
Placement of NO PARKING signs within the turnaround tee area at the
south terminus of Summerset Drive to restrict parking in the tee where
vehicles maneuver to turn around
Warwick Way, from 9:00 a.m. — 9:00 p.m. on the east side of such way,
from a point 250 feet south of Washington Avenue to a point 520 feet
south of Washington Avenue, and on the west side of Warwick Way from
the intersection with Washington Avenue to a point 750 feet south of
Washington Avenue
Wood Road, at any time on the east side of the road from the Ridgewood
Care Center driveway, south for 310 feet to the south property line
Wood Road, at any time on the west side of the road from the north
entrance of Park Terrace Condominiums, north for 135 feet; 20 feet south
of the north entrance of Park Terrace Condominiums, 20 feet north and
south of the south entrance; 20 feet north and south of the remaining
driveway of Park Terrace Condominiums; and 20 feet north and south of
the north entrance to Park Place Condominiums
16th Street, at any time on the north side of 16th Street, from STH 31 to
Emmertsen Road
16th Street, at any time on the south side of 16th Street, from a point 943
feet from the center line of Emmertsen Road to a point 1,027 feet easterly
from such center line
21st Street, at any time on the south side of 21st Street from its
intersection with Racine Street for a distance of 30 feet easterly
23rd Street, longer than two hours at any time between the hours of 9:00
a.m. — 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and legal holidays, on the
south side of 23rd Street starting at a point 215 feet west of the
intersection of 23rd Street and Clark Street, westerly to the Chicago and
Northwestern Railway right-of-way
23rd Street, to a point 215 feet west of the intersection of Clark Street
and 23rd Street at any time on the south side of 23rd Street, starting at a
point 45 feet west of the intersection of 23rd Street and Clark Street for a
distance of 170 feet westerly
§ 78-142 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 78-142
1:518
Location
STH 20 North Frontage Road, Placement of NO PARKING signs on the
north and south side from the east line of Stuart Road to a point 240 feet
east
STH 32, from a point 300 feet south of 24th Street to 21st Street at any
time between the hours of 3:30 p.m. — 6:00 p.m. on the west side of the
roadway of STH 32, from a point 300 feet south of 24th Street northerly
to 21st Street
STH 32, at any time from Larson Street, northerly to a point 300 feet
south of 24th Street
§ 78-143. No parking. [Code 1993, § 7.06(3)]
There shall be no parking on the following streets:
Location
Howe Street, on the east side, from a distance of 110 feet north of 23rd
Street to a distance of 145 feet north of 23rd Street
Kenilworth Avenue, from Sheridan Road to its termination at Lake
Michigan
Plainfield Avenue, from STH 32 to Sheridan Road
Sheridan Road, from Larson Street to Rosalind Avenue
24th Street, north from Mead Street, easterly for a distance of 600 feet
§ 78-144. Temporary no parking. [Code 1993, § 7.06(4)]
§ 78-145. Restricted travel in parking lanes. [Ord. No. 6-2009,
2-9-2009]
(a) In the judgment of the Chief of Police, whenever public safety and
convenience would be increased by the posting of temporary no parking
signs, such signs may be erected; however such signs shall:
(1) Clearly indicate "Temporary No parking," and be visible to the
traffic affected.
(2) Show the area in which, temporarily, no parking is permitted.
(3) Be removed no later than 30 days after installation.
(a) No operator of a motor vehicle may drive upon any portion of a
roadway, which is herein identified, where designated as a dedicated
parking lane or bicycle lane, marked by either official signs or by an
unbroken white line on the pavement, to use such lane for through
travel except as permitted in Wis. Stats. Ch. 346.
§ 78-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-145
1:519
§ 78-146. Handicapped parking. [Code 1993, § 7.06(7)]
§ 78-147. through § 78-170. (Reserved)
(b) The schedule of streets, or portions thereof, which are painted to
identify uses other than a traveled lane, is on file in the office of the
Village Clerk-Treasurer.
(c) The Village Board delegates the authority to the public works
committee to review and approve amendments to the list of designated
streets. The public works committee, upon review and recommendation
from public safety officials, the engineering department, and the
highway department, shall amend the list or may when deemed
necessary request the Village Board to act on specific situations.
(a) When signs are erected giving notice of reservation of any parking for
the handicapped, no person may park, stop or leave standing any
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at any time, unless such
vehicle displays a special registration plate issued pursuant to Wis.
Stats. § 341.14(1), (1a), (1m) or (1q), or a special identification card
issued under Wis. Stats. § 343.51, or vehicles registered in another
jurisdiction and displaying a registration plate, card or emblem issued
by the other jurisdiction which designates the vehicle as a vehicle used
by a physically disabled person.
(b) Appropriate signs designating parking for the handicapped shall be
installed on the north side of Larson Street, beginning approximately 20
feet from the northeast corner of the intersection of Sheridan Road and
Larson Street, and extending a distance of 66 feet.
§ 78-145 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 78-147
1:520
DIVISION 7
Loading Zones
§ 78-171. Bus stops; medical vehicles. [Code 1993, § 7.06(5)]
§ 78-172. through § 78-190. (Reserved)
(a) Bus stops. On all streets where a license has been granted to operate
motorbuses for the transportation of passengers, bus stops for the
loading and unloading of passengers shall be established by the party
providing the bus service. Motorbuses shall stop at such bus stops for
the purpose of loading and unloading and shall not load or unload
passengers at any other place unless, in the judgment of the driver, it
would be unsafe to load or unload passengers at the designated bus
stop.
(b) Medical vehicles. In the judgment of the Village Board, whenever public
safety and convenience would be increased by the posting of "No
Parking — Loading Zone" signs for the loading and unloading of
medical patients by medical vehicle personnel, such signs may be
erected for as long as required. When signs are erected in any block of
the following streets giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, park or
leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, on the
following streets:
Location
Graceland Boulevard, on the north side of the road for 25 feet in front
of the Imperial Apartments located at 5000 Graceland Boulevard
Howe Street, on the southerly lot line of 2116 Howe Street, during
the hours of 7:00 a.m. — 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.—5:00 p.m. on
Mondays through Fridays
(c) Parking restricted. No person shall park a motor vehicle at any time
within 50 feet of an authorized bus stop sign.
§ 78-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-172
1:521

DIVISION 8
Weight Limits
§ 78-191. Designated; exceptions; signs. [Code 1993, § 7.07]
(a) Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 348.17, no person shall operate a vehicle with
a gross weight of more than three tons on the following streets:
Location
Chicory Road, from its intersection with Knoll Place, westerly to the
city limits of the City of Racine
Chicory Road, from the intersection of Meachem Road to Lathrop
Avenue
Cozy Acres Road, from its intersection with STH 11, north to the city
limits of the City of Racine
Larson Street, from its intersection with Sheridan Road, east to the
lake
Lawndale Avenue, from its intersection with Sheridan Road, east to
the lake
Newman Road, from STH 38, south to a point 775 feet south of
Westmore Drive
Old Highway 11, from its intersection with State Highway 41 to its
east terminus
Ohio Street, from the intersection with Spring Street, south to the
city limits of the City of Racine
Sheridan Road, from a point 225 feet south of Larson Street,
southerly to its intersection with STH 32
Wood Road, on both sides of the road from the intersection of Durand
Avenue, south for a distance of 375 feet
16th Street, from the city limits of the City of Racine, westerly to the
proposed Oakes Road
(b) The special weight limitation set forth in Subsection (a) of this section
shall not apply to a person operating a vehicle with a gross weight of
more than three tons on such highways when such person is obtaining
orders for supplies, or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to
or from any place of business or residence fronting on such highway,
nor to school buses while transporting students.
(c) Signs shall be erected on or along the highways set forth in Subsection
(a) of this section so as to give reasonable notice that a special weight
limitation is in effect and the nature of the limitation.
(d) Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 349.15(2), the Village designates the following
highways as Class "B" highways for the purpose of putting into effect
the weight limitations set forth in Wis. Stats. § 348.16:
§ 78-191 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-191
1:523
§ 78-192. through § 78-209. (Reserved)
Location
Airline Road, from Spring Street, north to CTH K
Borgardt Road, from Spring Street, north to Kraut Road
Braun Road, from Taylor Avenue, west to East Frontage Road
Chicory Road, from STH 32, west to the Village limits
Emmertsen Road, from 16th Street, north to STH 38
Francher Road, from CTH H, north to CTH H
Gittings Road, from Airline Road, west to Fancher Road
Kraut Road, from CTH K, west to East Frontage Road
Kraut Road, from its intersection with State Highway 41, east to the
Chicago, Milwaukee, Street Paul and Pacific Railroad crossing
Lathrop Avenue, from CTH KR, north to Taylor Avenue
Mariner Drive, from its east terminus, west to Prairie Drive
Newman Road (old STH 11), from STH 31, north to STH 38
North Sunnyslope Drive, from Spring Street to its southern terminus
Prairie Drive, from the north property line of the Quality Inn to its
north terminus at Mariner Drive
Sorensen Road, from West Road, west to East Frontage Road
Spring Street, from Summerset, west to CTH C
Stuart Road, from STH 20, north to CTH C
Sunnyslope Drive, from Linderman Avenue, north to its intersection
with Mariner Drive
West Road, from Sturtevant Village limits, north to STH 20
Wood Road, from CTH KR, north to Taylor Avenue
90th Street, from CTH KR, north to the Sturtevant Village limits
§ 78-191 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 78-192
1:524
DIVISION 9
U-Turns
§ 78-210. U-turns prohibited. [Amended 1-14-2013 by Ord. No.
01-2013]
U-turns, as defined in 340.01(73r), Stats., shall be prohibited at the
locations described in this section. Unless specified otherwise, U-turns shall
be prohibited for travel in all directions at such locations. The Village shall
cause appropriate signs indicating the prohibitions of this section to be
posted at such locations, notifying all impacted directions of travel.
(a) The intersection of Oakes Road and (the Highway 20) North Frontage
Road, prohibiting only U-turns from northbound to southbound Oakes
Road traffic.
§ 78-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-210
1:525
Chapter 82
UTILITIES
§ 78-210 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 78-210
1:526
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 82-1. Violations; penalties. [Code 1993, § 13.35]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person found to be in
violation of any provision of this chapter, or any rule or regulation
promulgated under this chapter, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
§ 1-15.
§ 82-2. through § 82-30. (Reserved)
§ 82-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-2
1:527

ARTICLE II
Sewer Use
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 82-31. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 13.03]
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The sewer and water commission or other
designated official of the Village or an authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five
days at 20° C., expressed as milligrams per liter (mg/l). Quantitative
determination of BOD shall be made in accordance with procedures set
forth in the Standard Methods.
CATEGORY A — The sanitary sewer users who discharge normal
domestic strength wastewater with concentrations of BOD no greater
than 200 mg/l, suspended solids no greater than 250 mg/l and
phosphorus no greater than six mg/l.
CATEGORY B — The sanitary sewer users who discharge wastewater
with concentrations in excess of 200 mg/l of BOD, 250 mg/l of
suspended solids and six mg/l of phosphorus. Users whose wastewater
exceeds the concentration for any one of such parameters shall be in
category B.
CHLORINE REQUIREMENT — The amount of chlorine, in mg/l, which
must be added to sewage to produce a residual chlorine as specified in
the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit.
CITY — The City of Racine, Racine County, Wisconsin.
COSTS, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE — Includes all costs
associated with the operation and maintenance of the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities, as well as the costs associated with
periodic equipment replacement which is necessary for maintaining
the capacity and performance of the wastewater and collection and
treatment facilities.
COSTS, REPLACEMENT — Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during
the useful life of the wastewater treatment facility to maintain the
capacity and performance for which such facilities were designed and
constructed.
DRAIN, BUILDING — The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
§ 82-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-31
1:529
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specified use of land
owned by others for wastewater conveyance or treatment.
GARBAGE — The residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing
of food and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and
produce.
GARBAGE, GROUND — The residue from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than 1/2
inch in any dimension.
GRANTEE — The Village for the projects in which the Village receives
federal funding.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Per the Federal Register, Vol. 43, No. 188,
September 27, 1978, quoted as follows:
Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of publicly owned
treatment works which discharges more than the equivalent of
25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary wastes and which is
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972,
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented
under one of the following divisions:
a. Division A — Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing.
b. Division B — Mining.
c. Division D — Manufacturing.
Division E — Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas
and Sanitary Services.
d.
e. Division I — Services.
(1)
After applying the sanitary waste exclusion (if the grantee chooses
to do so), dischargers in the above divisions having a volume
exceeding 25,000 gpd or the weight of BOD, suspended solids
or phosphorus equivalent to that weight found in 25,000 gpd of
sanitary wastes are considered industrial users. Sanitary wastes
are the wastes discharged from residential users.
(2)
Any nongovernmental user which discharges any wastewater
containing toxic pollutants or which has any other adverse effect
on the treatment works or receiving waters.
(3)
(4) A commercial user of an EPA funded individual system.
§ 82-31 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-31
1:530
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The wastewater from an industrial process,
trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INDUSTRY, MAJOR CONTRIBUTING — An industry that has a:
MUNICIPALITY — The Village.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface water or groundwater.
OIL, FLOATABLE — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable
oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere
with the collection system.
PARTS PER MILLION — A weight-to-weight ratio. The parts per million
value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per
million gallons of water.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, company, municipal or private
corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental
agency or other entity.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution. Neutral concentration of 10-7.
PHOSPHORUS — The total phosphorus and is expressed in mg/l of P
(phosphorus).
POLLUTANTS, COMPATIBLE — BOD, suspended solids, phosphorus,
nitrogen, pH or fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants
identified in the city's WPDES permit for its wastewater treatment
facility receiving the pollutants, if such works were designed to treat
such additional pollutants and, in fact, does remove such pollutants to
a substantial degree.
POLLUTANTS, INCOMPATIBLE — Wastewater with pollutants that will
adversely affect or disrupt the quality of wastewater treatment if
discharged to a wastewater treatment facility.
(1) Flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average workday;
Flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the wastewater
collection treatment facilities receiving the waste;
(2)
Material in its discharge included on a list of toxic pollutants issued
under Wis. Stats. § 283.21(1); or
(3)
Significant impact, either singularly or in combination with other
contributory industries, on the wastewater treatment facility or the
quality of its effluent.
(4)
§ 82-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-31
1:531
SEWAGE — The spent water of a person or community. The preferred
term is "wastewater."
SEWAGE, SANITARY — A combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes discharged from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — A charge levied on users of the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities to recover annual
revenues for debt services, replacement costs, and operation and
maintenance expenses of such facilities. The user charge which covers
operation and maintenance, and replacement expenses is a part of the
sewer service charge.
SEWER, BUILDING — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal, also known as a house
connection or house lateral.
SEWER, COMBINED — A sewer intended to receive both wastewater
and stormwater or surface water.
SEWER, PUBLIC — Any publicly owned sewer, storm drain, sanitary
sewer or combined sewer.
SEWER, SANITARY — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwater,
stormwater, and surface water that are not admitted intentionally.
SEWER, STORM OR DRAIN — A drain or sewer for conveying water,
groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
SEWERAGE — The facilities used for the collection, treatment and
disposal of wastewater.
SHALL and MAY — "Shall" is mandatory; and the term "may" is
permissive.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and/or
adversely affects the wastewater collection system and/or performance
of the wastewater treatment facility.
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and analytical procedures
in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the
Water Pollution Control Federation.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The portion of rainfall that is drained into
the sewers.
STURTEVANT — The Village of Sturtevant, Racine County, Wisconsin.
§ 82-31 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-31
1:532
§ 82-32. Use of public sewers. [Code 1993, § 13.04(1), (2)]
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that either floats
on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other
liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in
the Standard Methods and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
USER CHARGE — A charge levied on users of the wastewater collection
and treatment facilities for payment of operation and maintenance
costs of such facilities.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community or person. From
the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and
water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water
and stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER COLLECTION FACILITIES and WASTEWATER
COLLECTION SYSTEM — The structures and equipment required to
collect and carry away domestic and industrial wastewater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY — The city's arrangement of
devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and
sludge. Also referred to as wastewater treatment plant.
WASTEWATER, NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH — Wastewater with
concentrations of BOD no greater than 200 mg/l, suspended solids no
greater than 250 mg/l and phosphorus no greater than six mg/l.
WATER, UNPOLLUTED — Water of a quality equal to or better than
the effluent of the wastewater treatment facilities or water that would
not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would
not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater
treatment facilities.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water, either continuously or intermittently.
WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(WPDES) PERMIT — A document issued by the state department of
natural resources which establishes effluent limitations and monitoring
requirements for the municipal wastewater treatment facility. WPDES
permit no. WI-0021130 and modifications thereof pertain to the City of
Racine wastewater treatment facility.
(a) Sanitary sewers. No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged,
any unpolluted water, such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage or cooling water, to any sanitary sewer.
Stormwater runoff from limited areas, which may be polluted at times,
may be discharged to the sanitary sewers by permission of the
approving authority.
(b) Storm sewers. Stormwater, other than that exempted under this section
and all other unpolluted drainage, shall be discharged to such sewers
§ 82-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-32
1:533
§ 82-33. through § 82-50. (Reserved)
as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the utilities director and other regulatory agencies.
Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process water may be
discharged to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet upon
approval of the approving authority.
§ 82-32 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-33
1:534
DIVISION 2
Administration and Enforcement
§ 82-51. Right of entry. [Code 1993, § 13.08]
§ 82-52. Disposal of human and liquid waste. [Code 1993,
§ 13.02(1); amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 06-2015]
(a) All properties. The approving authority or other authorized employee of
the Village, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation or testing in accordance with the provisions of this article
and Wis. Stats. § 66.122.
(b) Private properties through which the Village holds a duly negotiated
easement. The approving authority or authorized employee of the
Village, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the Village
holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within such
easement, subject to the terms of such easement.
(a) No person shall build, erect, maintain, occupy or use any residence,
place of business or other building in the Village where persons reside,
congregate or are employed, without providing, for the use of such
occupants, adequate and properly maintained water closets and sinks
conforming to the state plumbing code and local plumbing regulations.
(b) The owner or agent of every building in the Village used for human
habitation, which abuts any street, alley or way along which there is a
sewer main, or which is located on a block through which a system of
sewerage extends, shall connect with the sewer main, and shall connect
all toilets, bathtubs, lavatories, sinks, urinals and similar devices with
such sewer in accordance with the state plumbing code and such
additional local rules and regulations not inconsistent with such code,
provided, however, that no connection shall be required if it is more
than 200 feet from the nearest part of the structure containing a
plumbing fixture to the sewer main. If any owner or agent fails to
comply for more than 10 days after notice, in writing, the Village may
cause such connection to be made, and the expense for such connection
shall be assessed as a special tax against the property. Within 30 days
after completion of the work, the owner may file a written option with
the Clerk-Treasurer stating he cannot pay such amount in one sum, and
asking that it be levied in not to exceed five equal, annual installments,
and the amount shall be so collected with interest at the current legal
rate per annum from the completion of the work, and the unpaid
balance shall be a special tax lien.
(c) No person shall build, erect, construct or maintain any cesspool, septic
tank or private system for the disposal of human excreta, liquid waste
§ 82-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-52
1:535
§ 82-53. Appeals. [Code 1993, § 13.10]
§ 82-54. Annual audit. [Code 1993, § 13.11]
The Village shall conduct an annual audit to maintain the proper proportion
between users and user classes of the sewer service charge system and
or water upon any lot or premises abutting any street, alley or way
along which there is a sewer main, or which is located on a block
through which a system of sewerage extends, unless it is more than 200
feet from the nearest part of the structure containing a plumbing fixture
to the sewer main.
(d) Exception for preexisting residences abutting upon new sewer mains
extended to service specific developments. When the construction of a
section of public sewer main occurs to accommodate a specific new
development, those existing residential properties abutting on such
public sewer shall not be subject to Subsections (b) and (c) above until
the earliest of any of the following triggering events occurs: land
division; land development, as evidenced by the need to obtain a new
zoning permit or approval; septic system failure; or, sale.
(e) Any properties subject to a moratorium that prohibits compliance with
this section shall be not be subject to Subsections (b) and (c) above until
such time as the moratorium is lifted and the earliest of any of the
triggering events listed in Subsection (d) occurs.
(a) Any user, permit applicant or permit holder affected by any decision,
action or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the
approving authority interpreting or implementing the provisions of this
article, or in any permit issued under this article, may file a written
request for reconsideration with the approving authority within 10 days
of the date of such decision, action or determination, setting forth, in
detail, the facts supporting the user's request for reconsideration. The
approving authority shall render a decision on the request for
reconsideration to the user, permit applicant or permit holder, in
writing, within 15 days of receipt of the request. If the ruling on the
request for reconsideration made by the approving authority is
unsatisfactory, the person requesting reconsideration may, within 10
days after notification of the action, file a written appeal with the sewer
and water commission of the Village.
(b) A fee as set by the Village Board shall accompany any appeal to the
sewer and water commission for their ruling. The fee may be refunded
if the appeal is sustained in favor of the appellant.
(c) The written appeal shall be heard by the sewer and water commission
within 45 days from the date of filing. The sewer and water commission
shall make a final ruling on the appeal within 60 days from the date of
filing.
§ 82-52 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-54
1:536
ensure adequate revenues are available to meet operation and maintenance
expenses, replacement costs and debt service costs.
§ 82-55. Sewer construction and connections. [Code 1993, § 13.09;
Ord. No. 7-02, 7-22-2002; Ord. No. 12-2004, § 13.09(10),
11-22-2004]
(a) Permit required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb the public sewers
or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from
the approving authority.
(b) Costs and expenses. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation
and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the person. The
person shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage that may,
directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
(c) Use of old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon
examination and test by the approving authority, to meet all
requirements of this article.
(d) Materials and methods of construction. The size, slope, alignment and
materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling
the trench shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 14 of this Code
or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village. In the absence
of code provisions, or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and
WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
(1) Private sanitary manhole construction. All private sanitary
manholes constructed tributary to the Mount Pleasant Sewer
Utility District No. 1 sanitary sewer collection system shall be
constructed in accordance with the most current Village special
provisions specifically related to frame/chimney joints, manhole
riser joints and manhole lifting holes. [Added 3-23-2020 by Ord.
No. 3-2020]
(e) Building sewer grade. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to
the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall
be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
(f) Storm and groundwater drains.
(1) No person shall make a connection of a roof downspout, exterior
foundation drain, areaway drain or other source of surface runoff
or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which is
connected, directly or indirectly, to a sanitary sewer.
§ 82-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-55
1:537
(2) All existing downspouts or groundwater drains, etc., connected,
directly or indirectly, to a sanitary sewer, shall be disconnected
within 30 days of the date of an official written notice from the
approving authority. Exceptions shall be made by the approving
authority.
(g) Conformance required. The connection of the building sewer into the
sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 14 of this
Code, other applicable rules and regulations of the Village or the
procedures in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF
Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight
and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials shall be approved by the approving authority before
installation.
(h) Connection inspection. The person making the connection to a public
sewer shall notify the approving authority when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection
shall be inspected and approved by the approving authority.
(i) Barricades and lights; restoration of disturbed property. All excavations
for a building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the approving
authority.
(j) Sewer connection charges. There shall be paid to the Village and
collected by the Treasurer on each lot, parcel of land or premises on
which a unit or connection charge shall not have been assessed or paid
by special assessment or otherwise prior to the time that a permit for
and connection is made to the sanitary sewer system of the Village, unit
connection charges shall be made as follows:
Shared
Revenue
Utility
Portion
Combined
Connection
Fee
Single-family
residential
$2,000 $1,200 $3,200
Multiunit residential
for:
First unit $1,250 $1,200 $2,450
Second unit $1,250 $600 $1,850
Each additional unit $1,250 $350 $1,600
All commercial, industrial, private and public institutions shall be
charged on a reasonable basis as determined by the Village as based
on flow and strength, with minimum charge of not less than $6,600 per
acre.
§ 82-55 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-55
1:538
§ 82-56. Violations; penalties. [Code 1993, § 13.16]
Shared Revenue Utility Portion
$6,600/acre $1,800*
* The utility portion for public, commercial and industrial connection
fees in addition to $1,800 is subject to the following:
Meter
Size
(inches)
Capacity
(GPM)
Meter
Equivalent
Base
Rate
Utility
$400
Shared
Revenue
Portion
5/8 20 1 $1,800 $2,200
3/4 25 1.5 $2,400
1 50 2.5 $2,800
1 1/2 100 5 $3,800
2 160 8 5,000 Plus
$6,000/
acre
3 300 15 $7,800
4 500 25 $11,800
6 1,000 50 $21,800
Total connection fee for commercial and industrial is base rate plus
$400 x meter equivalent plus $6,600 per acre.
The above connection fees are determined pursuant to the Inter-
Governmental Sanitary Sewer Service/Revenue Sharing Cooperation
and Settlement Agreement dated April 25, 2002, and effective August
1, 2002.
(a) Delinquent payments of sewer charges. Except as otherwise provided in
this article, any person found to be delinquent in payment of sewer
charges shall be subject to a 1.5% penalty per month of delinquency.
(b) Violation notices. Any person found to be violating any provision of this
article, except § 82-55(g), may be served by the Village with a written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time for the satisfactory correction of such violation.
Any such notice shall be given only if deemed necessary by the Village.
If the notice is given, the offender shall permanently cease all violations
within the period stated in such notice. If no notice is given, the Village
may forthwith proceed with an appropriate action against the offender.
(c) Accidental discharges. Any person found responsible for accidentally
allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewer system which causes
damage to the wastewater collection and treatment facility and/or
§ 82-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-56
1:539
§ 82-57. through § 82-80. (Reserved)
receiving body of water shall, in addition to a forfeiture, pay an amount
to cover any damages, both values to be established by the approving
authority.
(d) Continued violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the notice time limit provided, if any, or without such notice,
upon conviction, shall forfeit not less than $100, nor more than $500,
together with the costs of prosecution. In default of payment of such
forfeiture and costs, such violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail
for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day in which a violation is
continued shall be deemed a separate offense.
(e) Liability to Village for losses.
(1) Any person violating any provision of this article shall become
liable to the Village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by
reason of such violation which the Village may suffer as a result
thereof.
(2) The approving authority shall be notified immediately by any
person becoming aware of any violations that occur.
§ 82-56 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-57
1:540
DIVISION 3
Prohibited Discharges
§ 82-81. Enumerated. [Code 1993, § 13.04(3)]
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall discharge,
or cause to be discharged, to any public sewer, any of the following
described waters or wastes:
(1) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(2) Waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gasses in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, that could injure or interfere with any waste
treatment or sludge disposal process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, or create a public nuisance in the receiving
waters of the wastewater treatment facility.
(3) Waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater collection
and treatment facilities.
(4) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0.
(5) Solid or viscous substances in quantities, or of such size, capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in public sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater collection
and treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers,
etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(b) The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal sanitary sewer systems to
concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sanitary
sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment; will not have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream; or will not otherwise endanger
lives, limbs, public properties or constitute a nuisance. The approving
authority may set limitations lower than the limitations established in
this article if, in his opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary
to meet such objectives. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability,
the approving authority will give consideration to such factors as the
quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sanitary sewers, the
wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the waste in the
wastewater treatment facility and other pertinent factors. The
limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or
§ 82-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-81
1:541
wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewers which shall not be
violated without approval of the approving authority are as follows:
(1) Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
(2) Wastewater containing more than 25 mg/l of petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin.
(3) Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oil, fat or
grease.
(4) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage
grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels,
institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or
similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of
food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or
when served by caterers.
(5) Any water or waste containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
other toxic and nonconventional pollutants to such a degree that
any such material received in the composite wastewater in
concentration exceeds levels specified by federal, state and local
authorities.
(6) Any water or waste containing odor producing substances
exceeding limits which may be established by the approving
authority.
(7) Any radioactive waste or isotope of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the approving authority in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(8) Any water or waste containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment process
employed or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that
the wastewater treatment facility effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges
to the receiving waters.
(9) Any water or waste which, by interaction with other waters or
wastes in the sanitary sewer system, releases obnoxious gasses,
forms suspended solids which interfere with the collection system
or creates a condition deleterious to structures and treatment
processes.
(10) Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the wastewater treatment facility.
b. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes,
constituting slugs, as defined in § 82-31.
§ 82-81 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-81
1:542
§ 82-82. Special arrangements. [Code 1993, § 13.04(4)]
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as prohibiting any
special agreement between the utilities director and any person whereby a
waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities, either before or after pretreatment,
provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities by reason of the admission of such waste
and no extra costs are incurred by the Village without recompense by the
person, and provided that all rates and provisions set forth in this article
are recognized and adhered to.
§ 82-83. New connections and extensions. [Code 1993, § 13.04(5)]
New connections or extensions to the Village's sanitary sewer system will
be allowed only if there is available capacity in all of the downstream
wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
§ 82-84. Illicit discharges and connections. [Ord. No. 10-2005,
6-13-2005]
c. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or
of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium sulfate.
d. Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
(11) Incompatible pollutants in excess of the allowed limits as
determined by city, state and federal laws and regulations in
reference to pretreatment standards developed by the
Environmental Protection Agency and as contained in 40 CFR 403.
(c) The Village shall comply with all the city's WPDES permit conditions
and all modifications thereof. No discharge shall be allowed into the
sanitary sewers that is in violation of the requirements of the WPDES
permit and the modifications thereof.
(d) All water or waste entering the system shall be subject to all of the
provisions of the wastewater control ordinance of the city.
(a) Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable in this section:
(1) ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter
the storm drain system including but not limited to any
conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm
drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been allowed, permitted, or approved by a
government agency, prior to the adoption of this section.
§ 82-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-84
1:543
(2) PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership,
firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as
either the owner or as the owner's agent.
(3) STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly-owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited
to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters,
curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and
detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage
channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
(b) Discharges prohibited. No person shall discharge, spill or dump
substances or materials which are not entirely composed of stormwater
into receiving bodies of water or onto driveways, sidewalks, parking
lots or other areas that drain into the storm drainage system.
(c) Connections prohibited. The construction, use, maintenance or
continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system
is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made prior to the adoption of this section, regardless
of whether the connection was permissible under law or practice
applicable or prevailing at the time of construction.
(d) Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the provisions of
this section unless found to have an adverse impact on the stormwater:
(1) Discharges authorized by a permit issued by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
(2) Discharges resulting from fire fighting activities.
(3) Discharges from uncontaminated ground water, potable water
source, roof drains, foundation drain and sump pump, air
conditioning condensation, springs, lawn watering, individual
residential car washing, water main and hydrant flushing and
swimming pools if the water has been dechlorinated.
(e) Enforcement. Whenever the Village finds a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section, the Village
may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(2) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(3) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(4) In the event the person fails to eliminate the illicit connections or
discharge, fails to cease and desist in discharges, practices or
§ 82-84 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-84
1:544
§ 82-85. through § 82-100. (Reserved)
operations in violation of this section or fails to abate or remediate
the stormwater pollution or contamination hazards, that person
may be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than
$500 for each offense, together with the cost of prosecution. Each
day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(5) In the event that an illicit discharge is identified, and emergency
clean up action is undertaken by the Village, WDNR, or other
authority having jurisdiction, the persons may be subject to all
associated clean up costs incurred.
(f) Effective date. This section shall be in force and effect from and after its
adoption and publication. The above section was adopted by the Village
Board of trustees of the Village of Mt. Pleasant on 13th day of June,
2005.
§ 82-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-85
1:545

DIVISION 4
Industrial Waste Control
§ 82-101. Submission of basic data. [Code 1993, § 13.05(1)]
§ 82-102. Extension of time. [Code 1993, § 13.05(2)]
When it can be demonstrated that circumstances exist which would create
an unreasonable burden on the person to comply with the time schedule
in § 82-101, a request for an extension of time may be presented to the
approving authority for consideration.
§ 82-103. Industrial discharges. [Code 1993, § 13.05(3)]
§ 82-104. Control manholes. [Code 1993, § 13.05(4)]
(a) Within three months after passage of the ordinance from which of this
article is derived, each person who discharges industrial wastes to a
public sewer shall prepare and file a report with the approving
authority that shall include pertinent data relating to the quantity and
characteristics of the wastes discharged to the wastewater collection
and treatment facilities. The approving authority may require that such
data be provided annually, at a time specified by the approving
authority.
(b) Similarly, each person desiring to make a new connection to a public
sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes shall prepare
and file a report with the approving authority that shall include actual
or predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the
wastes to be discharged.
(c) The data and reports required by this section shall comply with the
city's WPDES permit.
(a) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or proposed to be discharged,
to the public sewers, which contain substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in § 82-81 and which, in the judgment of the
utilities director, have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities, processes, equipment or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life, health or constitute a
public nuisance, the approving authority may:
(1) Reject the wastes.
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of § 82-55(j).
§ 82-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-104
1:547
§ 82-105. Measurement of flow. [Code 1993, § 13.05(5)]
The volume of flow used for computing sewer service charges shall be the
metered water consumption of the person as shown in the records of meter
readings maintained by the water utility, except as noted in § 82-107.
§ 82-106. Deductions. [Code 1993, § 13.05(6)]
If a person discharging industrial waste into the sanitary sewers produces
evidence satisfactory to the approving authority that more than 20% of
the total annual volume of water used for all purposes does not reach the
sanitary sewer, then the determination of the water consumption to be used
in computing the waste volume discharged into the sanitary sewer may
be made a matter of agreement between the approving authority and the
person.
§ 82-107. Metering of wastes. [Code 1993, § 13.05(7)]
§ 82-108. Waste sampling. [Code 1993, § 13.05(8)]
(a) Each person discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer shall, at
the discretion of the approving authority, construct and maintain one or
more control manholes or access points to facilitate observation,
measurement and sampling of wastes, including sanitary sewage.
(b) Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in a
manner acceptable to the approving authority. If measuring and/or
sampling devices are to be permanently installed, they shall be of a type
acceptable to the approving authority.
(c) Control manholes, access facilities and related equipment shall be
installed by the person discharging the waste, at such person's
expense, and shall be maintained by the person so as to be in a safe,
accessible and proper operating condition at all times. Plans for
installation of the control manholes or access facilities and related
equipment shall be approved by the utilities director prior to the
beginning of construction.
(a) Devices for measuring the volume of wastes discharged may be
required by the approving authority if the volume cannot otherwise be
determined from the metered water consumption records. Metering
devices for determining the volume of wastes shall be installed, owned
and maintained by the person discharging the wastewater. Following
approval and installation, such meters may not be removed without the
consent of the approving authority.
(b) An industrial user may request the approval of the approving authority
to install a metering device for determining the volume of water
discharged. Such requests must be made in writing to the approving
authority.
§ 82-104 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-108
1:548
§ 82-109. Preliminary treatment and processing facilities. [Code
1993, § 13.05(9)]
Where required, in the opinion of the approving authority, to modify or
eliminate wastes that are harmful to the structures, processes or operation
of the wastewater treatment facility, the person shall provide, at his
expense, such preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be
determined necessary to render his wastes acceptable for admission to the
sanitary sewers.
§ 82-110. Grease, oil and sand interceptors. [Code 1993,
§ 13.05(10)]
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the approving authority, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in amounts in excess of the
amounts specified in § 82-81(b)(3), or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the approving authority and shall be located so as to
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In maintaining
such interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal
and disposal, by appropriate means, of the captured material, and shall
maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which are subject
to review by the approving authority. Disposal of the collected materials
performed by the owner's personnel or currently licensed waste disposal
firms shall be in accordance with currently acceptable rules and regulations
of the department of natural resources.
§ 82-111. Analyses. [Code 1993, § 13.05(11)]
(a) Industrial wastes discharged into the public sewers shall be subject to
periodic inspection and a determination of character and concentration
of such wastes. The determination shall be made by the industry as
often as may be deemed necessary by the approving authority.
(b) Such samples shall be collected in a manner so as to be representative
of the composition of the wastes. The sampling may be accomplished
either manually or by the use of mechanical equipment acceptable to
the approving authority.
(c) Installation, operation and maintenance of the sampling facilities shall
be the responsibility of the person discharging the waste and shall be
subject to the approval of the approving authority. Access to sampling
locations shall be granted to the approving authority at all times. Every
care shall be exercised in the collection of samples to ensure their
preservation in a state comparable to that at the time the sample was
taken.
(a) All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be
§ 82-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-111
1:549
§ 82-112. Submission of information. [Code 1993, § 13.05(12)]
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed flow equalization, pretreatment or processing facilities shall be
submitted for review of the approving authority prior to the start of the
construction of such facilities, if the effluent from such facilities is to be
discharged into the public sewers.
§ 82-113. through § 82-130. (Reserved)
determined in accordance with the latest edition of the Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by
the American Public Health Association, and with the federal
regulations 40 CFR 136, Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for
Analysis of Pollutants. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations
and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to
approval by the approving authority.
(b) Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial
wastes shall be made by the person discharging such wastes, or his
agent, as designated and required by the approving authority. The
approving authority may also make its own analyses on the wastes, and
such determinations shall be binding as a basis for sewer service
charges and/or industrial cost recovery charges.
§ 82-111 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-113
1:550
DIVISION 5
Fees
§ 82-131. Basis. [Code 1993, § 13.06(1); amended 4-12-2010 by Ord.
No. 04-2010]
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the
Village to levy and collect charges, rentals or rates of service upon all
the lands, lots and premises served by having connections with the Village
sanitary sewerage system and additions, and served by having connections
available with the sanitary sewerage system and additions. The proceeds
of such charges, rentals or rates of service shall be used and set aside
in separate funds as directed in the ordinance providing for the issuance
and sale of $1,500,000 sewerage system mortgage revenue bonds of the
Village and providing for the payment of such bonds and other details with
respect thereto, dated November 9, 1960, and the certain supplement to
an ordinance providing for the issuance and sale of $1,500,000 sewerage
system mortgage revenue bonds of the Village, and providing for the
payment of such bonds and other details with respect thereto, dated
November 9, 1960, and in accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats.
§§ 66.0621, 66.0821, and the certain agreement made and entered into on
January 1, 1977, by and between the city and the Village.
§ 82-132. Sewer users. [Code 1993, § 13.06(2); amended 11-22-2010
by Ord. No. 05-2010; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 08-2011; 11-25-2013
by Ord. No. 06-2013]
(a) Unit assessments.
(1) Users of the sewerage system within the Village and additions
thereto shall be assessed upon the basis of the following units:
Type of User Charge Units
Single-family dwellings 1
Two-family dwellings 2
House trailers 1
Multiple-family dwellings (three families or
more):
One-bedroom units, each 75% of 1
Two-bedroom units, each 80% of 1
Three- or more bedroom units, each 90% of 1
(2) Water meters for private water systems measuring cubic feet shall
be purchased, installed, maintained by and remain the property of
the sewer utility district no. 1, and shall have outside registers so as
to permit accessibility for reading the meters by all business,
commercial, industrial and public buildings.
§ 82-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-132
1:551
§ 82-133. Sewer service charges. [Code 1993, § 13.07; Ord. No.
12-02, 11-25-2002; Ord. No. 11-03, 10-27-2003; Ord. No. 11-2004,
§ 13.07, 11-22-2004; Ord. No. 1-2006, 1-23-2006; Ord. No. 10-2006,
11-27-2006; Ord. No. 15-2008, 11-13-2008]
(b) Metered water consumption. For the users not falling within any of the
categories set forth in Subsection (a)(1) of this section, charges will be
made according to metered water consumption. However, there shall
be a minimum charge of two residential units for each metered user.
(a) Method of determination. Customers in the Village shall be billed
quarterly, in an amount sufficient to pay the local sewer operating and
maintenance costs, including debt service, if any, and the wastewater
treatment charges from the city wastewater treatment plant. In
addition, the quarterly billings shall generate sufficient revenue for an
equipment replacement fund and a replacement fund for the operation
and maintenance of the wastewater collection facilities as required
under Subsection (e)(2) of this section. Unmetered customers shall be
billed at a flat rate based on flow contribution for the user classification.
Metered customers shall be billed a flat rate customer service charge
and a volumetric charge based on meter readings. Pollutant surcharges
billed to the Village from the city wastewater treatment plant shall be
passed on directly to the specific user. The method for determining the
user charge is given in the report entitled, Sewer Service Charge and
Industrial Cost Recovery System for Wastewater Collection Facilities
and Treatment Services, July 1979. Pertinent sections of the report are
included as attachment A, included as part of Ordinance No. 1-93,
which is adopted in this section by reference, and is available in the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
(b) Category A. Category A includes sanitary sewer user who discharge
normal domestic strength wastewater with concentrations of
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) no greater than 200 mg/l,
suspended solids no greater than 250 mg/l and phosphorus no greater
than six mg/l. The sewer service charge for category A wastewater is as
follows:
(1) Customer Service
Charge
2014
Total customer service $10
(2) Volume Charge Charge Unit
Customer
Metered
Customers
Total volume charge $115 $4.52/1,000
gallons
Total user charge $125/quarter $3.32/100 cubic
feet
(c) Category B. Category B includes sanitary sewer users who discharge
wastewater with concentrations in excess of 200 mg/l of BOD, 250 mg/l
§ 82-132 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-133
1:552
§ 82-134. through § 82-160. (Reserved)
of suspended solids or six mg/l of phosphorus. Users whose wastewater
exceeds the concentrations for any one of these parameters shall be in
category B. The sewer service charge for category B wastewater is as
follows:
(1) Customer service charge: $10, per quarter.
(2) Volume charge:
Customers Metered
Total volume charge $3.68/1,000 gallons
$2.76/100 cubic feet
(3) Surcharges:
a. BOD = $208.62/1,000 pounds.
b. Suspended solids = $333.44/1,000 pounds.
c. Phosphorus = $2,737.81/1,000 pounds.
The foregoing surcharges are those charges presently made by the
City of Racine; hereafter, such surcharges will be identical to the
surcharges established from time to time by the City of Racine.
(d) Reassignment of sewer users. The approving authority will reassign
sewer users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if
wastewater sampling programs and other related information indicate
a change of categories is necessary.
(e) Operation, maintenance and replacement fund accounts.
(1) The annual replacement revenues shall be maintained in a separate
account by the Village to be used solely for the purpose of
purchasing replacement parts and equipment. Funds may be
withdrawn from the account for such uses only with the approval of
the approving authority.
(2) All revenues collected for the replacement fund and the operation
and maintenance of the wastewater collection facilities must be
used solely for the replacement fund and operation and
maintenance of the wastewater collection facilities.
§ 82-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-134
1:553

ARTICLE III
Pretreatment
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 82-161. Purpose; objectives; applicability; enforcement. [Code
1993, § 13.20(1)]
§ 82-162. Definitions. [Code 1993, § 13.20(2)]
(a) This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the City of Racine Wastewater Utility and enables the utility to comply
with applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act
of 1977 (PL 95-217) and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR
403). The objectives of this article are to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge.
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere, or
otherwise be incompatible with the system.
(3) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
(4) Provide for equitable distribution of the operation and maintenance
cost of the utility's implementation of the industrial pretreatment
program.
(b) This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the wastewater system through the issuance of permits
to certain nondomestic users and enforcement of general requirements
for the other users; authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities;
requires user reporting; assumes that existing customers' capacity will
not be preempted; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this
article.
(c) This article shall apply to the City of Racine and persons outside such
city who are, by contract or agreement with the City of Racine, users of
such city's POTW. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the
general manager of the City of Racine's POTW shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 82-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-162
1:555
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT and THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
ADMINISTRATOR — The administrator or other duly authorized official
of the Environmental Protection Agency.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The state department of natural resources.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at a temperature of 20° C.,
expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter
(mg/l)).
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS and CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARDS — The national categorical pretreatment standards or
pretreatment standards.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic matter, expressed in mg/l,
as determined in accordance with standard laboratory procedure as set
out in the latest edition of the Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater.
CITY — The City of Racine or its representatives.
CONSISTENT REMOVAL — The reduction in the amount of a pollutant
or alteration of the nature of a pollutant in the influent to a POTW in
accordance with the procedures set forth in 40 CFR 403.7 promulgated
pursuant to the act.
DISCHARGE, ACCIDENTAL — A slug flow of material which is
sufficient to cause an upset to the utility.
DISCHARGE, DIRECT — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the state.
DISCHARGE, INDIRECT — The discharge or introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under 307(b) or (c)
of the act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW, including holding tank
waste discharged into the system.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, such term
may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly
authorized official of such agency.
GENERAL MANAGER — The person designated by the utility to
supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who
§ 82-162 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-162
1:556
is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his
duly authorized representative.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis, with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of an indirect discharge.
INDUSTRIAL USER, AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF — A:
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any
requirement of the utility's WPDES permit. Such term includes
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in
accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345), or any
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), Clean Air Act, Toxic Substances Control
Act or more stringent state criteria, including the criteria contained in
any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of the
SWDA, applicable to the method of disposal of use employed by the
POTW.
MUNICIPALITY — The communities and/or sanitary districts that are
served by the utility interceptor sewers and/or utility wastewater
treatment plant.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS and
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 307(b) and
(c) of the act (33 U.S.C. § 1347), which applies to a specific category of
industrial users.
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD and PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of 307(b) of the act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is, or may be, a discharge, the construction of which
commenced after the:
Principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if
the industrial user is a corporation.
(1)
General partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership
or proprietorship, respectively.
(2)
Duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
Subsections (1) and (2) of this definition, if such representative is
responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the
indirect discharge originates.
(3)
Promulgation of categorical pretreatment standards which are
applicable to such source; or
(1)
§ 82-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-162
1:557
PERSON — The state, or any agency or institution thereof, any
municipality, governmental subdivision, public or private corporation,
individual, partnership or other entity, including, but not limited to,
an association, commission or any interstate body and, including, any
officer, or governing or managing body of any municipality,
governmental subdivision, or public or private corporation, or other
entity.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions, expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into water.
POLLUTANT, TOXIC — Any pollutant, or combination of pollutants,
listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of 307(a) of the
act or other acts.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — The portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment of wastewater.
PRETREATMENT AND TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior
to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants
into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological process; process changes; or other means,
except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any local or state requirements
related to pretreatment, other than a categorical pretreatment
standard imposed on an industrial user.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — Includes the City
of Racine Wastewater Treatment Plant. Such term also includes sewers,
pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW
treatment plant, and includes any sewer that conveys wastewaters to
the POTW from persons outside the City of Racine who are, by contract
or agreement with such city, users of the City of Racine POTW.
SHALL; MAY — The term "shall" is mandatory; and the term "may" is
permissive.
Proposal of categorical pretreatment standards which are
applicable to such source, but only if the standards are
promulgated within 120 days of the proposal thereof.
(2)
§ 82-162 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-162
1:558
SLUG — Any discharge that has a flow rate or contains a concentration
or quantities of pollutants that exceed, for any time period of time
longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the user's average twentyfour-
hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation or
which may injure the system.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
STANDARDS, BOARD OF — A seven-member board appointed by the
mayor and confirmed by the city council of the City of Racine to provide
information and advise the Racine Wastewater Utility.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
UPSET — An exceptional incident in which a discharger is
unintentionally and temporarily in a state of noncompliance with the
standards set forth in this article due to factors beyond the reasonable
control of the discharger, excluding noncompliance to the extent caused
by operational error, improperly designated treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or
careless or improper operation thereof.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the utility's POTW.
USER, SIGNIFICANT — Any user of the utility's wastewater disposal
system, who has:
UTILITY — The City of Racine Wastewater Utility or its delegated
representatives.
WASTE, HOLDING TANK — Any waste from holding tanks, such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum
pump tank trucks.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and
(1) Discharge flow of 10,000 gallons or more on any day of the year;
In his wastes, toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 283.21, and rules; or
(2)
A significant impact, as determined by the general manager, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the
wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's
effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system.
(3)
§ 82-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-162
1:559
§ 82-163. Abbreviations. [Code 1993, § 13.20]
stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
is contributed into, or permitted to enter, the POTW.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — The document issued by the
utility to the significant users to set forth the requirements and
limitations for the industrial user.
WATER, COOLING — The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state, or
any portion thereof.
WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(WPDES) PERMIT — Any permit or requirement issued by the
department of natural resources (DNR) pursuant to the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as amended, for the
purpose of controlling sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes under
the authority of 402 of the act.
(a) The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
(1) BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand.
(2) CFR — Code of Federal Regulations (example: 40 CFR 403 is Title
40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403).
(3) COD — Chemical oxygen demand.
(4) EPA — Environmental Protection Agency.
(5) l — Liter.
(6) mg — Milligrams.
(7) mg/l — Milligrams per liter.
(8) POTW — Publicly owned treatment works.
(9) SIC — Standard Industrial Classification.
(10) SWDA — Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
(11) TSS — Total suspended solids.
(12)U.S.C. — United States Code.
(13)WPDES — Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
§ 82-162 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-164
1:560
§ 82-164. Violations; penalties. [Code 1993, § 13.31]
§ 82-165. through § 82-180. (Reserved)
(a) Civil penalties. Any industrial user who is found to have violated an
order of the board of standards, or who willfully or negligently failed to
comply with any provision of this article and orders, rules, regulations
and permits issued under this article, shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in § 1-15.
(b) Liability for costs of damage. Any industrial user violating any of the
provisions of this article or which has a discharge which causes a
deposit, obstruction, damage or other impairment to the Racine POTW
shall become liable to the utility for any expense, loss or damage caused
by the violation or discharge. The utility may add to the industrial user's
charges and fees the costs assessed for any cleaning, repair or
replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Any refusal to
pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this article.
(c) Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statement, representation or certification on any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this article or wastewater discharge permit, or who
falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-15.
§ 82-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-165
1:561

DIVISION 2
Administration and Enforcement
§ 82-181. Slug or accidental discharges. [Code 1993, § 13.30(1)]
§ 82-182. Revocation of wastewater discharge permit. [Code 1993,
§ 13.30(2)]
(a) Industrial users shall immediately notify the utility upon having a slug
or accidental discharge of substances or wastewater in violation of this
article in order to enable countermeasures to be taken by the utility to
minimize damage to the POTW and the receiving waters. The
notification shall include the damage to the POTW and receiving
waters; location of the discharge; type of waste, concentration and
volume; and corrective actions. The utility may choose to immediately
take action pursuant to § 82-185.
(b) Within five days following an accidental discharge, the industrial user
shall submit a detailed written report to the general manager,
describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by
the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss,
damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage
to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to persons or property, nor
shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fine, civil
penalty or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other
applicable law. After receipt and review of the written report, the utility
may choose to take no further action or to take action in accordance
with §§ 82-183, 82-184 and/or 82-185.
(a) Any industrial user who violates this article as follows, or applicable
state and federal regulations, is subject to having its permit revoked in
accordance with the procedures of this division:
(1) Failure of an industrial user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
(2) Failure of the industrial user to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(3) Refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user's premises for
the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
(4) Violation of conditions of the permit; or
(5) Is found tampering, or to have tampered, with sampling or flow
measurement equipment, samples and/or analyses being
conducted by, or at the direction of, the utility.
(b) Upon finding a violation, the utility may also suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall
immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. If a failure of the
§ 82-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-182
1:563
§ 82-183. Notification of violation. [Code 1993, § 13.30(3)]
Whenever the utility finds that any industrial user has violated, or is
violating, this article, the wastewater discharge permit or any prohibition,
limitation or requirement contained in this article, the utility may serve
a written notice on such user, stating the nature of the violation. Within
30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction
thereof shall be submitted to the utility by the industrial user. If the plan
is satisfactory to the utility and the industrial user complies with the plan,
the utility may not take further action against the industrial user. If the
industrial user does not comply with the plan, the utility may take action in
accordance with § 82-185.
§ 82-184. Show cause hearing. [Code 1993, § 13.30(4)]
industrial user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order occurs,
the utility shall take such steps as are deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individual. The
utility shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge.
(a) Notice. The utility may order any industrial user who causes or allows
an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the
board of standards why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. A notice shall be served on the industrial user, specifying the
time and place of a hearing to be held by the board of standards
regarding the violation; the reasons why the action is to be taken; the
proposed enforcement action; and directing the industrial user to show
cause before the board of standards why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. At least 10 days before the hearing, the
notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice of the hearing may
be served on any agent or officer of a corporation.
(b) Hearing officials. The board of standards may conduct the hearing and
take evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or
employee of the utility to:
(1) Issue, in the name of the board of standards, notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings.
(2) Take evidence.
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to
the board of standards for action thereon.
§ 82-182 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-184
1:564
§ 82-185. Legal action. [Code 1993, § 13.30(5)]
If any industrial user discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes
into the utility's POTW contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or
state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the utility, the utility's
attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable
relief in the appropriate court. The utility may take further action pursuant
to §§ 82-182 and 82-186.
§ 82-186. Records retention. [Code 1993, § 13.30(6)]
Any industrial user subject to this article shall, for no less than three years,
retain and preserve any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports,
correspondence, and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring,
sampling and chemical analyses made by, or on behalf of, an industrial
user in connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters
which are the subject of any enforcement or litigation activities brought
by the city pursuant to this article shall be retained and preserved by
the industrial user until all enforcement activities have concluded and all
periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired.
§ 82-187. Operating upsets. [Code 1993, § 13.30(7)]
(c) Transcripts. At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony
taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The
transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the
public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges
thereof.
(d) Issuance of orders and directives. After the board of standards has
reviewed the evidence, it shall make a recommendation to the utility.
Further orders and directives, as are necessary and appropriate, may
be issued by the utility. The utility may act on such recommendation by
issuing an order to the industrial user on continued sewer service, as
necessary and appropriate. If the user violates an order, the utility may
take action in accordance with § 82-185.
(a) Any discharger which experiences an upset in operations which places
the discharger in a temporary state of noncompliance with this division
or a wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this division shall
inform the utility within 24 hours of the first awareness of the
commencement of the upset. The utility may choose to immediately
take action pursuant to § 82-185. Where such information is given
orally, a written follow-up report thereof shall be filed by the discharger
with the utility within five days. The report shall specify:
(1) A description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact
on the discharger's compliance status.
§ 82-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-187
1:565
§ 82-188. Annual publication of significant violations. [Code 1993,
§ 13.30(8)]
A list of the users which, during the preceding 12 months, were significantly
violating applicable pretreatment requirements or standards, shall be
published annually in a local newspaper. The term "significant violation"
means a violation which remains uncorrected for a period of 45 days after
notification of noncompliance, a violation which includes a pattern of
noncompliance over a twelve-month period or a violation which includes the
failure of the user to accurately report noncompliance. The publication shall
also summarize any enforcement action taken against the user during such
twelve-month period.
§ 82-189. Wastewater discharge permits. [Code 1993, § 13.23(1)]
(2) The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of
noncompliance and, if the noncompliance continues, the time by
which compliance is reasonably expected to occur.
(3) All steps taken, or to be taken, to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of such an upset or other condition of noncompliance.
(b) A documented and verified bona fide operating upset shall be an
affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the utility
against a discharger for any noncompliance with this division or any
wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this division which
arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the
upset. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage
to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage persons or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the user of any fine, civil penalty or other
liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
After receipt and review of the written report, the utility may choose to
take no further action or take action in accordance with §§ 82-183,
82-184 and/or 82-185.
(a) Required. All existing significant users shall obtain a wastewater
discharge permit as required by this section. All new significant users
proposing to connect or contribute to the POTW shall obtain a
wastewater discharge permit before connecting, or contributing, to the
POTW. All significant users that have facilities in more than one
geographic location will be issued separate wastewater discharge
permits for each facility.
(b) Application.
(1) Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
complete and file an application with the utility, in the form
prescribed by the utility, and accompanied by a permit fee as
specified in § 82-252. Existing significant users shall submit a
permit application for a wastewater discharge permit within 90
§ 82-187 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-189
1:566
days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this
article is derived, and proposed new significant users shall submit
a permit application at least 90 days prior to connecting, or
contributing, to the POTW. Existing nonsignificant users who plan
to become significant users by changing their wastewater volume
and/or characteristics shall submit a permit application at least 90
days before the proposed process wastewater is discharged to the
sewerage system. A 180-day baseline report can be submitted for
the permit application. Where actual data is not yet available, new
users shall submit estimates for the required items. The permit
application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user and certified by a qualified professional. In support
of the application, the significant user shall submit the following
information, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation:
a. Name, address and location, if different from the address.
b. SIC number in accordance with the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as
amended.
c. Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but
not limited to, the standards set forth in this article, as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. Sampling and
analysis, if required by categorical pretreatment standards,
shall be performed in accordance with procedures established
by the EPA pursuant to 304(h) of the act and contained in 40
CFR 136, as amended. In the case of new industrial users, this
subsection shall apply to the projected wastes.
d. Times and duration of wastewater contributions.
e. Site plans showing all sewer connections and appurtenances to
the municipal sanitary sewer system by size and location.
f. General description of activities, facilities and plant processes
on the premises.
g. Nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by any city, state or National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, and a statement regarding whether
or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance and/or pretreatment is required for the
significant user to meet applicable categorical pretreatment
standards.
h. Shortest schedule by which the significant user will provide
additional pretreatment, if additional pretreatment and/or
operation and maintenance will be required to meet the
categorical pretreatment standards. The completion date in
the schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
§ 82-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-189
1:567
established for the applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. The following conditions shall apply to such
schedule:
1. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the significant user to
meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards
(e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans,
completing final plans, executing a contract for major
components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.). No increment shall exceed a period of
nine months.
2. Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the significant user shall
submit a report to the general manager, if the significant
user has not complied with the increment of progress to be
made on such date; the date on which the significant user
expects to comply with the increment of progress; the
reason for delay; and the steps being taken by the
significant user to return the construction to the schedule
established.
i. Proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment
system.
j. Any other information, as may be requested by the utility,
which may be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
(2) The utility will evaluate the data furnished by the significant user
and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the utility may issue a
wastewater discharge permit, subject to the terms and conditions
provided in this section.
(c) Modifications. Within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, any significant user with
an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the general
manager the information required by Subsection (b) of this section.
Where a significant user, subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, has not previously submitted an application for a
wastewater discharge permit as required by Subsection (b) of this
section, the significant user shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
(d) Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to
all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user
charges and fees established by the utility. Permits may contain the
following information:
§ 82-189 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-189
1:568
§ 82-190. Permittee reporting requirements. [Code 1993,
§ 13.23(2)]
(1) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
(2) Requirements for installation and maintenance of pretreatment
facilities.
(3) Requirements for notification to the utility of any new introduction
of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume
or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into
the wastewater treatment system.
(4) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the utility and affording
the utility access thereto.
(5) Requirements for notification of slug discharges per § 82-181.
(6) Other conditions deemed appropriate by the utility to ensure
compliance with this article.
(e) Duration; changes. Permits shall be issued for a period of four years. A
significant user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days
prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and
conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the utility
during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements identified
in Division 3 of this article are modified or as other just cause exists. A
significant user shall be informed of any proposed change in its permit
at least 30 days prior to the effective date of such change. Any change
or new condition in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule
for compliance.
(f) Assignability and transferability. Wastewater discharge permits are
issued to a specific significant user for a specific operation. A
wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned, transferred or
sold to a new significant user.
(g) Appeal procedure. A user desiring to appeal to the utility commission
regarding a wastewater discharge permit shall file a petition for appeal
with the utility commission not more than 20 days after the user
receives the wastewater discharge permit or modification thereof. If the
user does not file a petition for appeal within such time, the wastewater
discharge permit is final.
(a) Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in
the case of a new significant user, following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any such user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements
shall submit a report to the general manager, indicating the nature and
§ 82-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-190
1:569
concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated
process which are limited by categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements, and the average and maximum daily flow. The report
shall state whether the applicable categorical pretreatment standards
and requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary
to bring the user into compliance. The statement shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the significant user.
(b) Periodic compliance reports.
(1) Any significant user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the
compliance date of such categorical pretreatment standard, or, in
the case of a new significant user, after commencement of the
discharge into the POTW, shall submit a report to the general
manager, during the months of June and December, unless required
more frequently in the categorical pretreatment standard or by the
general manager, indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment
standards. At the discretion of the general manager and in
consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates,
holidays, budget cycles, etc., the general manager may agree to
alter the months during which the report is to be submitted. In
accordance with Wis. Admin. Code Ch. NR 101, reports can be used
by such users to comply with part of the periodic compliance
reports requirement.
(2) The general manager may impose mass limitations on significant
users which are using dilution to meet applicable categorical
pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements or in other
cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In
such cases, the report required by Subsection (b)(1) of this section
shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by categorical
pretreatment standards in the effluent of the significant user. Such
reports shall contain the results of sampling and concentration or
production and mass where requested by the general manager of
pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
categorical pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring
shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standards. All
analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established in the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, 15th edition, 1981, as amended, and/or
established by the administrator pursuant to 304(h) of the act and
contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended, or with any other test
procedures approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the
administrator. (Comment: Where 40 CFR 136 does not include a
sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the EPA publication entitled, Sampling and
§ 82-190 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-190
1:570
§ 82-191. Monitoring facilities. [Code 1993, § 13.23(3)]
§ 82-192. Inspection and sampling. [Code 1993, § 13.23(4)]
The utility shall inspect the facilities of any industrial user to ascertain
whether the purposes of this article are being met and all requirements are
being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater
is created or discharged shall allow the utility or their representative ready
access, at all reasonable, times to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any
of their duties. The utility, DNR and EPA shall have the right to set up
on the industrial user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
Where an industrial user has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises,
the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security
guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from
the utility, DNR and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the
purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.
§ 82-193. Compliance required; availability of records. [Code 1993,
§ 13.23(5)]
Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for
Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments thereto, or with
any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the
administrator.)
(a) The utility shall require monitoring facilities to be provided and
operated, at the industrial user's own expense, in order to allow
inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/
or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally
be situated on the industrial user's premises, but the utility may, when
such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the
industrial user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street
or sidewalk area and located so as not to be obstructed by landscaping
or parked vehicles.
(b) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
facility shall be maintained in a safe and proper operating condition at
all times, at the expense of the industrial user.
(c) The sampling and monitoring facilities, whether conducted on public or
private property, shall be provided in accordance with the utility's
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction of such facilities shall be completed within
90 days following written notification by the utility.
(a) Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as
required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with
§ 82-190 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-193
1:571
§ 82-194. Confidential information. [Code 1993, § 13.23(6)]
§ 82-195. Generation of sludges. [Code 1993, § 13.23(7)]
Sludges, floats, skimmings, etc., generated by an industrial or commercial
pretreatment system shall not be placed into the Racine POTW. Such
sludges shall be contained, transported and disposed of by haulers in
accordance with all federal, state and local regulations.
§ 82-196. through § 82-220. (Reserved)
all National Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time
limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any
facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the
utility shall be provided, operated and maintained at the industrial
user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the utility for review and
shall be acceptable to the utility before construction of the new facility.
The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way
relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility, as necessary, to produce an effluent acceptable to the utility
under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent change in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported, and be
acceptable, to the utility prior to the industrial user's initiation of the
change.
(b) All records relating to compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval
authority, upon request.
(a) Information and data on an industrial user, obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and
inspections, shall be available to the public and governmental agencies,
without restriction, unless the industrial user specifically requests, and
is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the utility, that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user.
(b) When requested, in writing, by the person furnishing a report, trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by
the public, but shall be made available upon written request to
governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the Wisconsin
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit, state disposal
system permit and/or the pretreatment programs. Such trade secret or
secret process information shall be available for use by the state or any
state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving
the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
§ 82-193 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-196
1:572
DIVISION 3
Prohibited Discharges
§ 82-221. Enumerated. [Code 1993, § 13.21(1)]
(a) No user shall, directly or indirectly, contribute, or cause to be
contributed, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the
operation or performance of the POTW. Such general prohibitions apply
to all users of a POTW, whether or not the users are subject to National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state or
local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not
contribute the following substances to any POTW:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction
with other substances, to cause fire or explosion, or be injurious in
any other way to the POTW or the operation of the POTW. At no
time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at
the point of discharge into the system or at any point in the system,
be more than 15%, nor any single reading over 30% of the lower
explosive limit (LEL) of the meter for the specific chemical.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ether, alcohol,
ketone, aldehyde, peroxide, chlorate, perchlorate, bromate,
carbide, hydride, sulfide and any other substance which the utility,
the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to
the system.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to, grease,
particles with sufficient dimensions or quantity, either alone or in
combination with other particles, to obstruct the wastewater flow,
animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone or marble dust, metals, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood,
plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or
polishing wastes.
(3) Any wastewater entering the municipal sanitary sewer system
having a pH less than 5.0, or wastewater having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and/or personnel of the POTW.
(4) Any wastewater entering the municipal sanitary sewer system
having a pH in excess of 10.0.
(5) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
§ 82-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-221
1:573
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving
waters of the POTW, or exceed the limitation set forth in categorical
pretreatment standards. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be
limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to 307(a) of the act.
(6) Any noxious or malodorous liquid, gas or solid which, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes, is sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life, or is sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance and repair.
(7) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product to the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the
POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under 405 of
the act, any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use
or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the
Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state or local
criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.
(8) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its WPDES
permit or the receiving water quality standards.
(9) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(10) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant, resulting in interference, but,
in no case, wastewater with a temperature which is lower than 32°
F. (0° C.) or exceeds 150° F. (65.6° C.) at the discharge point from
the source to the sanitary sewer system. The temperature shall not
exceed 104° F. (40° C.) at the POTW wastewater treatment plant.
(11) Any pollutants, including oxygen demand pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference to the POTW and/or which would constitute a
slug.
(12) Any unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, cooling water,
stormwater or groundwater.
(13)Wastewater containing inert suspended solids, such as, but not
limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or
dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate, in such quantities that would cause interference
with the wastewater disposal system.
§ 82-221 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-221
1:574
§ 82-222. Controlling categorical pretreatment standards. [Code
1993, § 13.21(2)]
Upon the promulgation of the categorical pretreatment standards for a
particular industrial subcategory, the categorical pretreatment standards,
if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources
in the subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed
under this article. The general manager shall notify all affected users of the
applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
§ 82-223. Modification of categorical pretreatment standards.
[Code 1993, § 13.21(3)]
Where the utility's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent
removal of pollutants limited by categorical pretreatment standards, the
utility may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific
limits in the categorical pretreatment standards. If consistent removal of
pollutants can be achieved at the POTW, the utility may then modify
pollutant discharge limits in the categorical pretreatment standards, if the
requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval
from the approval authority is obtained.
§ 82-224. Specific pollutant limitations; variances. [Code 1993,
§ 13.21(4)]
(14) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(15) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
(b) When the general manager determines that a user is contributing to the
POTW any of the substances enumerated in Subsection (a) of this
section in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW,
the general manager shall:
(1) Notify the user and board of standards.
(2) Develop effluent limits for such user to correct the interference
with the POTW.
(3) Take immediate action, if necessary, to eliminate interference.
(a) No user shall discharge wastewater containing pollutants in excess of
the following amounts:
(1) Limits. Limits for flow proportional sampling procedures and batch
discharges or grab samples, when necessary:
§ 82-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-224
1:575
§ 82-225. Applicability of state requirements. [Code 1993,
§ 13.21(5)]
State requirements and discharge limitations shall apply in any case where
such requirements and limitations are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those set forth in this article.
§ 82-226. Right of revision. [Code 1993, § 13.21(6)]
The utility reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW, if deemed necessary
to comply with the objectives presented in § 82-161.
§ 82-227. Dilution of excessive discharges. [Code 1993, § 13.21(7)]
No user shall increase the use of process water or attempt to dilute a
discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to
Total cadmium
(no user shall discharge more than 0.1 pounds
per day)
0.07 mg/l
Total chromium 14.00 mg/l
Total copper 4.50 mg/l
Total lead 1.38 mg/l
Total mercury 0.10 mg/l
Total nickel 4.10 mg/l
Total zinc 8.40 mg/l
(2) Grab samples.
a. Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 200 mg/l, as measured by EPA
method 413.1, or containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32° — 150° F.
(0-65.6° C.).
b. Total cyanide of 1.9 mg/l.
(b) The general manager shall be able to modify the limitations set forth in
Subsection (a) of this section as long as such limitations do not violate
state or federal laws.
(c) Any variance request for fat, wax, grease or oil limitations as set forth in
Subsection (a)(2) of this section shall be submitted to the general
manager. The variance request shall be based upon the criteria
enumerated in 40 CFR 403.13. If a variance is granted, the general
manager will have sole discretion on whether to accept alternative
testing procedures for the variance.
§ 82-224 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-227
1:576
achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the categorical
pretreatment standards or this article.
§ 82-228. Prevention of accidental discharges. [Code 1993,
§ 13.21(8)]
Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities
to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided
and maintained at the user's own expense.
§ 82-229. Notice of emergency notification procedure. [Code 1993,
§ 13.21(9)]
A notice advising employees whom to call if a dangerous discharge occurs
shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other
prominent place. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause
such a dangerous discharge to occur, or who may suffer from such a
discharge, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
§ 82-230. through § 82-250. (Reserved)
§ 82-227 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-230
1:577

DIVISION 4
Fees
§ 82-251. Purpose. [Code 1993, § 13.22(1)]
This division shall provide for the recovery of necessary costs from the users
of the utility's POTW for the implementation of the program established in
this article. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the utility's
schedule of charges and fees, which shall be prepared from time to time by
the general manager and approved by the Racine Wastewater Commission.
The fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate
from all other fees chargeable by the utility.
§ 82-252. Enumeration. [Code 1993, § 13.22(2)]
§ 82-253. Additional charges. [Code 1993, § 13.22(3)]
§ 82-254. through § 82-290. (Reserved) [Amended 3-24-2014 by
Ord. No. 07-2014]
(a) The utility may adopt charges and fees which may include the following:
(1) Permit fee. The utility will charge users a permit fee at the time
permits are issued or reissued.
(2) Sampling charge. The utility will assess the industrial users a
sampling charge for sampling their wastewater with utility
equipment and manpower.
(3) Laboratory analysis charge. The utility will assess the industrial
users a laboratory analysis charge to recover the utility's expenses
of having the industrial wastewater samples analyzed for specific
pollutants under categorical pretreatment standards or where
specifically regulated by the utility.
(a) Additional costs will be charged to industrial users on a case-by-case
basis for the following:
(1) Fees for filing appeals.
(2) Fees for consistent removal by the utility of pollutants otherwise
subject to categorical pretreatment standards where such removal
is an additional cost to the utility.
(3) Other fees the utility may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained in this article where there is an additional
cost to the utility.
§ 82-251 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-254
1:579

ARTICLE IV
Water Services
§ 82-291. Definitions. [Ord. No. 7-2004, § 13.32(1), 7-26-2004]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DEVELOPER — Any person other than the Village causing work to be done
that requires installation of, construction of or changes to the local water
facilities.
LOCAL WATER FACILITIES — Water mains that are designed to provide
for local water distribution and all related appurtenances and equipment,
including, without limitation, fire hydrants, valves, pump stations and water
services in the Village service area which facilities are owned, operated and
maintained by the Racine Utility.
RACINE UTILITY — The water utility owned by and a department of the City
of Racine.
RACINE WATER SYSTEM — The water system facilities owned and
operated by the Racine Utility.
VILLAGE SERVICE AREA — The geographical area within which the city
and the Racine Utility provide retail water service to the territory of the
Village and to individual retail customers within such territory, pursuant
to the agreement between the Village, city and Racine Utility, entitled
Intergovernmental Retail Water Service Agreement Between the City of
Racine and the Village of Mt. Pleasant, dated May 24, 2004.
§ 82-292. Requirements; prohibitions. [Ord. No. 7-2004, § 13.32(2),
7-26-2004]
(a) No person shall make a new service connection to the Racine Water
System or expand a building or change the use of a building or real
property in the Village without first filing with the Village an application
for the necessary permits and approvals and submitting the information
required to determine the applicability and amount of the connection
charge that the Village is required by agreement to pay to the City of
Racine. Such information shall be submitted to the Village on forms
provided by the Village and shall include, without limitation, the
number of bedrooms for each multifamily residential unit and, for all
nonresidential uses, the SIC codes for all uses and the maximum
potential employee hours for a peak day of operations.
(b) No person shall make a service connection to the Racine Water System
without first receiving from the Village a written permit or written
approval therefor.
(c) No person shall be authorized by the Village to make a service
connection to the Racine Water System for any person or property
§ 82-291 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-292
1:581
outside of the Village service area, except as otherwise provided for by
agreement between the Village and the city.
(d) No person shall make a service connection to the Racine Water System
for any person or for any property outside the Village service area,
except as otherwise provided by agreement between the Village and the
city.
(e) No single water user shall use water from the Racine Water System to
the extent that the user's average daily water use exceeds 9,000 gallons
per day per acre of the user's contiguous land that is served by the
Racine Water System without first having made and duly satisfied any
special arrangements or complied with any special requirements
specified by the Racine Utility after review of the situation by the
Racine Utility.
(f) No person shall construct or install in the Village a water main that is
less than 12 inches in diameter that is intended to serve multifamily
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional or other nonresidential
or nonrural land uses; or a water main that is less than eight inches in
diameter that is intended to serve single-family or duplex residential or
rural land uses that are not multifamily residential, commercial,
industrial or institutional in nature, or a new water main that is less
than eight inches in diameter that will be part of the local water
facilities.
(g) No person shall commence construction or installation of local water
facilities without first having received from the Racine Utility written
approval of the size and location of all local water facilities, and written
approval of all plans and specifications for such facilities. The Racine
Utility shall complete its review of plans and specifications for local
water facilities within 45 days after receiving them.
(h) All local water facilities shall be constructed and installed in
accordance with plans and specifications prepared and sealed by a
state registered professional engineer and shall satisfy all applicable
standards of the city and/or Racine Utility for water mains and other
water facilities to be constructed or installed in the city, and in
compliance with all of the rules and regulations imposed by the city
and/or Racine Utility with respect to installation and construction
standards of water mains and related equipment and appurtenances.
(i) No person retained by the Village or by a developer shall perform work
on local water facilities without having made, in advance, arrangements
with the Racine Utility for construction review of the construction or
installation of all local water facilities. The Village or the developer,
whichever is having the work performed, shall, within 30 days after
receipt of an invoice from the Racine Utility, reimburse the Racine
Utility for the cost of construction review of the construction or
installation of the local water facilities, for which purpose the Racine
Utility may retain construction review personnel.
§ 82-292 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-292
1:582
(j) No person that has not been pre-approved to construct and install
water facilities in the city shall construct or install local water facilities
in the Village. The Village or the developer shall submit to the Racine
Utility the names and addresses of all contractors and subcontractors
that will be used in connection with a local water facilities project,
including a description of their respective roles in such project, and
shall not commence construction or installation on any such project
until the Racine Utility approves the project in writing.
(k) The Village or the developer, whichever is having the work performed,
shall be responsible for paying all costs and fees incurred in connection
with the provision of local water facilities, including, without limitation,
site or easement acquisition, project review, construction review,
engineering, construction, legal services and permitting.
(l) The Village or the developer, whichever is having the work performed,
shall obtain all authorizations, permits or approvals required for the
construction or installation of any local water facilities and all
easements or other interests in real property required to construct,
install, maintain, repair and replace any such facilities, and shall be
responsible for paying all related costs. All such easements,
authorizations, permits and approvals shall be subject to review and
approval as to form and content by the Racine Utility in conjunction
with the Racine Utility's review of plans and specifications for any local
water facilities project.
(m) After completion and testing of each local water facilities project, and
review and approval by the Racine Utility (including preparation and
approval of as-built plans for the project), the Village or the developer,
whichever is having the work performed, shall give, grant, dedicate and
transfer ownership of the local water facilities to the Racine Utility and
shall assign to the Racine Utility any related authorizations, permits
and approvals, all free of cost to the Racine Utility or the city and free
and clear of any liens or encumbrances that are not accepted in writing
by the Racine Utility, and shall assign to the city any related easements
or other interests in real property that are required to operate,
maintain, repair or replace such facilities, all free of cost to the city and
the Racine Utility and free and clear of any encumbrances that are not
accepted in writing by the Racine Utility. Upon written notice from the
Racine Utility to the Village of its acceptance of such local water
facilities, the Racine Utility shall own and be responsible for the repair
and maintenance of such local water facilities, except when repair or
maintenance is required because of acts of the Village, the developer or
its or their employees, agents or contractors, or their subcontractors.
(n) All local water facilities dedicated and transferred to the Racine Utility
shall be warranted by the Village and the Village's contractor or by the
developer and the developer's contractor, whichever is having the work
performed and whichever performed the work, to be free of defects or
insufficiencies in design, construction or materials for a period of one
year from and after the Racine Utility's acceptance in writing of the
§ 82-292 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-292
1:583
§ 82-293. Disconnecting or removing water meters. [Ord. No.
7-2004, § 13.32(3), 7-26-2004]
No person shall disconnect or remove any water meter from the place
where such meter is connected to the Racine Water System without first
obtaining written consent from the Racine Utility.
§ 82-294. Industrial buildings, remote metering. [Ord. No. 7-2004,
§ 13.32(4), 7-26-2004]
dedication and transfer of such facilities. The developer shall provide to
the Racine Utility a letter of credit or other form of security satisfactory
to the Racine Utility, in an amount of 10% of the total project cost,
the form of which is approved by the Racine Utility, to secure such
warranty.
(o) No connection to local water facilities shall be permitted by the Village
until after the dedication and transfer of the local water facilities to the
Racine Utility has been accepted in writing by the Racine Utility, with a
copy provided to the Village, such facilities have become part of the
Racine Water System, and a water meter has been installed by the
Racine Utility for each such connection.
(p) No work on any local water facilities project shall commence until there
has been full compliance with all of the requirements of this article.
(q) The requirements of this article shall be provided for in a written
agreement binding upon the Village and the Village's contractor, or
upon the Village, developer and the developer's contractor, whichever
is having the work performed as between the Village and the developer,
which agreement shall be enforceable by the city or the Racine Utility
and which shall be approved by the Racine Utility prior to
commencement of construction or installation.
(r) Upon conviction, any person found to be in violation of this section shall
forfeit an amount of not less than $50 nor more than $500. Each day
that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(a) No retail water service to an industrial building first being served on or
after April 1, 2002, or to any such building that is remodeled or
rehabilitated so as to require changes to the water service on or after
April 1, 2002, shall be initiated or maintained without installation,
operation and maintenance of authorized automatic meter reading
(AMR) equipment and a telephone line for the purpose of monitoring all
water metering equipment for the building.
(b) The Racine Utility shall not install a water meter for an industrial
building covered by this section until the owner or other responsible
party (owner) complies with this section. If the owner fails to maintain
the monitoring system and/or telephone line associated therewith, the
utility may take appropriate action to terminate the water service.
§ 82-292 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-295
1:584
§ 82-295. Water conservation — Declaration of emergency. [Ord. No.
7-2004, § 13.32(5), 7-26-2004]
The Racine mayor and, in his absence, the president of the city waterworks
commission, is authorized, empowered and directed to declare the
existence of an emergency relating to the Racine Water System's available
water supply and to impose restrictions on the use of water during the
emergency, following consultation with the Village President.
§ 82-296. Water conservation — Imposition and notice of
restrictions during emergency. [Ord. No. 7-2004, § 13.32(6),
7-26-2004]
Whenever the Racine mayor or, in his absence, the president of the city
waterworks commission or designee has declared the existence of an
emergency and imposed reasonable restrictions on the use of water and
reasonable notice of such emergency and restrictions has been to the
general public, such restrictions shall be in full force and effect in the
Village. The violation or failure to observe any restriction so imposed shall
constitute a violation of this article.
§ 82-297. Penalty for violation. [Ord. No. 7-2004, § 13.32(7),
7-26-2004]
Upon conviction, any person violating any restriction on the use of water
imposed pursuant to this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than $50 nor more than $500. Each day of violation constitutes a separate
offense.
§ 82-298. Penalties for nonpayment of invoice; notice. [Ord. No.
7-2004, § 13.32(8), 7-26-2004]
(a) Delinquent charges. All general service-urban, general servicesuburban,
and private fire protection service customers shall pay
invoices of the Racine Utility for such services within 15 days from the
date of such invoices; all such customers who fail to pay such invoices
within such fifteen-day period shall pay a penalty as authorized in the
latest state Public Service Commission (PSC) rate case. The Racine
Utility is authorized to shut off water service upon three days' written
notice to the water customer for failure to pay the water invoice within
20 days from the date of the invoicing; the Racine Utility is further
authorized to charge a service fee as authorized in the latest PSC rate
case for turning on water; all as authorized by the orders of the PSC.
(b) Notice of delinquency. The Racine Utility will give notice not later than
October 15 of each year to the owner or occupant of each lot or parcel
of real estate in the Village to which the Racine Utility has furnished
retail water service prior to October 1 of that year for which payment is
owing and in arrears at the time of giving the notice. The notice shall
state the amount in arrears, including any penalty assessed pursuant to
the rules of the Racine Utility; and that unless the amount is paid by
§ 82-295 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-298
1:585
§ 82-299. Access to property. [Ord. No. 7-2004, § 13.32(9),
7-26-2004]
The Village authorizes City of Racine agents, contractors and employees
to enter upon private property for the purpose of installing water meters,
reading and maintaining water meters, inspecting water meters, inspecting
water connections and any other purposes that are associated with the
city's discharge of its responsibilities in providing water service to the
Village, to the fullest extent authorized by law. The Village shall fully
cooperate, to the extent legally possible, with the city and/or Racine Utility
in obtaining any necessary special inspection warrants under Wis. Stats.
§ 66.0119.
§ 82-300. Fire hydrants. [Ord. No. 7-2004, §§ 13.32(10),(11),
7-26-2004]
November 1 a penalty of 10% of such amount will be added; and
that unless the amount in arrears and any added penalty are paid by
November 15, the amount in arrears and any added penalty will be
levied as a tax against the lot or parcel of real estate to which retail
water service was furnished and for which payment is delinquent.
(c) Certificate of delinquency. On November 16, or as soon thereafter as is
practicable, the Racine Utility shall certify and file with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer a list of all lots or parcels of real estate (giving the legal
description of each) for which notice of arrears and any added penalty
was given and with respect to which an amount in arrears and/or any
added penalty remain unpaid, stating the amount of arrears and added
penalty. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall insert the total delinquent
amount including any added penalty as a tax against the lot or parcel of
real estate. The Village shall thereafter take reasonable actions to
collect the delinquent amounts, including penalties. Upon collection of
any delinquent amounts, including penalties, the Village shall promptly
pay such amounts to the Racine Utility. The Village hereby adopts as a
part of this section, Wis. Stats. § 66.0809(3), as though the Racine
Utility were a utility operated by the Village, for the purpose of carrying
out the provisions of this section, and the utility is hereby authorized to
give the notice of delinquency.
(a) Tampering. No person shall tamper with, damage or destroy a fire
hydrant within the Village or use a fire hydrant within the Village except
governmental officials or employees in the course of their official
duties.
(b) Release of water. No person, except governmental officials or
governmental employees in the course of their official duties or other
persons with prior written authorization from the Village or from the
Racine Utility, shall intentionally release water from or take water from
fire hydrants in the Village.
§ 82-298 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-301
1:586
§ 82-301. Recovery for recalculated connection charges. [Amended
3-24-2014 by Ord. No. 07-2014]
The City of Racine and the Village of Mt. Pleasant have entered into an
Intergovernmental Retail Water Service Agreement whereby the Village of
Mt. Pleasant is serviced with water from the Racine Water Utility. This
agreement allows the Racine Water Utility to recalculate connection
charges for commercial and/or industrial users based upon the highest
actual recorded water usage during any twelve-month period between the
first and the third anniversary date of any connection.
If any recalculated charge exceeds the original connection charge paid by
the Village of Mt. Pleasant to the Racine Water Utility, the Racine Water
Utility will provide to the Village of Mt. Pleasant written notice of the
difference and charge the Village of Mt. Pleasant for the difference.
In the event the Racine Water Utility charges the Village of Mt. Pleasant
for any recalculated connection charges, such costs constitute an additional
connection charge; and commercial and/or industrial users shall reimburse
the Village upon demand by the Village for said charge.
§ 82-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-301
1:587
Chapter 83
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 82-301 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 82-301
1:588
ARTICLE I
Generally
§ 83-1. Creation authority. [Ord. No. 7-2007, 10-10-2007; amended
5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 05-2012]
(a) Creation. There is hereby created and established a stormwater
ordinance for the Village of Mount Pleasant. The implementation and
oversight of the stormwater ordinance shall be under the supervision of
the Village engineers.
(b) Authority. The Village, acting through the stormwater commission, may
without limitation due to enumeration, acquire, construct, lease, own,
operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair,
conduct, manage and finance such facilities, operations and activities,
as are deemed by the Village to be proper and reasonably necessary for
a system of storm water and surface water management. These
facilities may include, without limitation due to enumeration, surface
and underground drainage facilities, sewers, watercourses, retaining
walls, ponds, streets, roads, ditches and such other facilities as will
support a storm water management system.
(c) Definitions. For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall
apply:
(1) DEVELOPED PROPERTY — Property that has been altered from its
natural state by the addition of any improvement, such as a
building, structure or impervious surface and where a certificate of
occupancy has been issued, or upon completion of construction or
final inspection if no such certificate is issued; or where
construction of an improvement is at least 50% complete and
construction is halted for a period exceeding three months.
(2) DWELLING UNIT — Any residential space identified for habitation
by the building code. A dwelling unit includes, but is not limited to;
single family residences, and two-, three-, or four-family
apartments, condominiums, or townhouse living units.
(3) EQUIVALENT RUNOFF UNIT or ERU — Is defined as 3,000 square
feet of impervious area. The impervious area includes, but is not
limited to, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions, patios,
porches, driveways and sidewalks.
(4) IMPERVIOUS AREA or IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that
has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is
highly resistant to infiltration by rainwater. It includes, but is not
limited to, paved streets, driveways, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots,
brick pavers and other similar surfaces constructed of impervious
materials such as concrete, asphalt, etc. Compacted gravel and
clay are not considered impervious areas.
§ 83-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-1
1:589
§ 83-2. Rates and charges/appeals procedure. [Ord. No. 7-2007,
10-10-2007]
(5) NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any developed lot or parcel not
exclusively residential as defined herein, including but not limited
to, transient rentals (such as hotels and motels), multifamily
apartment buildings with more than two units commercial,
industrial, institutional, governmental property.
(6) RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any lot or parcel developed
exclusively for residential purposes including, but not limited to,
single family homes, manufactured homes, and condominiums. In
the case of private ownership of individual residential units existing
in multiple family buildings or developments, each dwelling unit
shall be assigned a separate ERU.
(7) SINGLE FAMILY PROPERTY — A residential space identified as a
habitation with exactly one dwelling unit.
(8) STORMWATER COMMISSION — Five members Village Trustee
Members will be appointed by the Village President and Citizen
Members will be appointed by the Village President and confirmed
by the Village Board. It is preferred that a majority of the members
be Citizens.
(9) UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY — Property which has not been
altered from its natural state by the addition of any improvements
such as a building, structure, or impervious surface.
(a) Rates and charges.
(1) The basis for computation of the charge for storm water services to
all lots and parcels of land within the Village is established under
this section. The amount of charge to be imposed, the
establishment of formulas for the calculation of charges, the
creation of customer classifications for the imposition of charges,
and changes in such charges, formulas and customer classifications
may be made by further resolution of the Village Board following a
recommendation by the storm water commission. All charges
established pursuant to this section shall be fair and reasonable. A
schedule of current charges shall be maintained on file in the office
of the Village Clerk.
(2) Charges shall be imposed to recover all or a portion of the costs of
the storm water management activities. Such charges, which shall
be established pursuant to further resolution of the Village Board,
may include the following components:
a. Base operational charge applied to undeveloped parcels. A
base operational charge will be imposed on all undeveloped
properties in the Village. The base operational charge is
established in recognition of the fact that all properties in the
§ 83-1 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 83-2
1:590
Village receive services from the Village's storm water
management activities and contribute to some degree to the
storm water runoff that must be managed by the Village. The
base operational charge will be assessed to collect a
proportionate amount of the operational costs of the storm
water management activities from undeveloped properties.
The charge per undeveloped parcel will be determined by
taking the budgeted annual operational expense of the storm
water commission for the storm water management activities
and dividing by the total number of real estate parcels in the
Village of Mount Pleasant.
Base Operational Charge Applied to Undeveloped Lots =
(Annual Budget Operating Cost) ÷ (Total Real Estate Tax
Parcels)
b. ERU charge. An equivalent runoff unit charge (1 ERU) will be
imposed on all property containing impervious surface. This
ERU charge will fund both the capital and remaining
operational costs not recovered from undeveloped parcels.
Non-residential properties containing impervious area will be
charged multiples of the ERU, but no less than 1 ERU, based on
the impervious area of the property.
ERU Charge (Applied to Parcels containing Impervious Area) =
((Total Annual Budgeted ERU Revenue) -
(Revenue recovered from Undeveloped Lots)) ÷ (Total ERUs)
(3) The Village Board may establish rates and classifications by further
resolution as will be likely to provide a reasonable and fair
distribution of costs for storm water management. In the event the
owner and non-owner users of a particular property are not the
same; the liability for the charges attributable to that property shall
be that of the owner.
(4) The charges established will be billed to the customer at the same
time and in the same manner as the Village tax bill as an additional
fee for storm water services. Such charges shall be payable in the
same manner as a tax bill. Bills for storm water charges shall be
mailed to the owner of the property to which the bill relates.
Payment is due with the first tax installment.
(5) All storm water service charges shall be billed and collected, and
shall be a lien upon the property served under the provisions of
Wis. Stats. § 66.0809, as amended and/or renumbered.
(b) Appeals procedures.
(1) Adjustments for ERU charges.
§ 83-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-2
1:591
a. The Village elects not to be subject to the administrative
review provisions contained within Wis. Stats. Ch. 68, and
establishes the following as a complete and final review
procedure: As a condition precedent to challenging any storm
water utility charge, the charge must be timely paid in full with
the property owner's real estate taxes, under protest to the
Village. Any appeal should be presented in written form to the
Village engineers and the stormwater commission. The appeal
shall specify all grounds for challenge to the amount of the
charge and shall state the amount of charge that the appellant
considers to be appropriate.
b. Requests for adjustments of the ERU's allocated to a parcel of
property shall focus upon the calculation of ERU's based upon
the amount of impervious area or impervious surface on the
property. The Village engineers shall have the authority to
administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of
ERU's as established in this section.
c. A customer may at any time, subject to the conditions herein
provided, submit a written request seeking an adjustment of
the ERU's allocated to a parcel or property, which shall
describe in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought.
d. A customer requesting adjustments may be required, at their
own expense, to provide supplemental information to the
Village engineers including, but not limited to, survey data
approved by a registered land surveyor. Failure to provide such
information within a thirty-day time period may result in denial
of an adjustment request.
e. Following submission of a completed adjustment request and
all required information, the Village engineers shall have 30
calendar days within which to render a written decision. In
considering an adjustment request, the Village engineers shall
consider whether the calculation of the ERUs for the property
are correct.
f. The Village engineers' decision shall be mailed to the address
provided on the adjustment request by first class mail and
notification shall be complete upon mailing.
g. Appeal of the Village engineers' decision concerning an ERU
adjustment request shall be in writing and shall specify the
grounds for challenging the Village engineers' decision.
Appeals shall specifically address the Village engineers'
conclusions and shall not merely repeat the grounds for the
initial adjustment request. Appeals to the storm water
commission shall be submitted within 30 calendar days after
date of mailing of the Village engineers' decision. Failure to
timely and properly appeal shall deprive the customer of
§ 83-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 83-2
1:592
having the stormwater commission hear the appeal and/or
have further action by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
h. The stormwater commission will review and reply in writing to
appeals no later than 30 days after receiving the customer's
appeal in writing.
i. If the appeal is not satisfied at the Village engineers' review or
the storm water commission review, then the appeal should
formally go before the Zoning Board of Appeals. The appellant
must issue a letter to the deputy director of planning to
schedule a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals. A
written notice of hearing shall be mailed to the appellant not
less than 20 days prior to the actual hearing. The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall take evidence at any hearing on appeal which
may consist of some or all of the following: sworn testimony
and documentary evidence, including but not limited to,
learned treatises, public records and other documents the
Zoning Board of Appeals desires both relevant and trustworthy.
Following the hearing the Zoning Board of Appeals shall mail
to appellant, "findings of fact and decision" within five business
days following said hearing. This notice shall contain the
Zoning Board of Appeals' decision and a short synopsis of the
basis for that decision.
j. Appeals of the Zoning Board of Appeals' decision be
determined by the procedures prescribed Wis. Stats.
§ 62.23(7)(e).
k. If the result of any appeal or judicial review pursuant to Wis.
Stats. § 62.23(7)(e) is that a refund is due, it will be payable by
the Village to appellant within 30 days of the written
determination. Any further resulting adjustment will appear on
subsequent bills.
(2) Alternative method to collect stormwater charges. In addition to
any other method for collection of the charges established under
this article or subsequent resolution, stormwater charges may and
are hereby authorized to be levied and imposed on property as a
special charge pursuant to Wis. Stats § 66.0627. The mailing of the
bill for storm water utility charges to a property owner shall serve
as notice to the property owner that failure to pay the charges
when due may result in the charges being imposed pursuant to the
authority of Wis. Stats. § 66.0627. The procedures contained
therein shall govern such notice and further collection procedures.
(3) Budget excess revenues. Stormwater finances shall be accounted
for in a separate storm water fund. The stormwater commission
shall prepare an annual budget, which shall include all
maintenance costs, debt service and other costs related to the
operational activities of the stormwater commission. The budget is
§ 83-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-2
1:593
subject to approval by the Village Board. The costs shall be spread
over the rate classifications as determined by the Village Board.
Any excess of revenues over expenditures in a year will be retained
by the fund for subsequent years' needs.
(4) Penalty. A person convicted in the Village municipal court (or other
municipal court) or the circuit courts of the State of Wisconsin, of
violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, pay
forfeiture not less than $50 and not more than $1,000 for each
offense, plus costs and assessments. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 83-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 83-2
1:594
Chapter 86
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND
FACILITIES REGULATORY ORDINANCE
§ 86-1. Findings. [Ord. No. 10-08, § 86-101, 7-14-2008]
§ 86-2. Purposes. [Ord. No. 10-08, § 86-102, 7-14-2008]
(a) The Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 ("the Act") grants the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over:
(1) The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF)
emissions from telecommunications facilities; and
(2) The regulation of radio signal interference among users of the RF
spectrum.
(b) The Village's regulation of towers and telecommunications facilities in
the Village will not have the effect of prohibiting any person or entity
from providing wireless telecommunications services in violation of the
Act.
(a) The general purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement,
construction, and modification of towers and telecommunications
facilities in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public,
while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the
development of the competitive wireless telecommunications
marketplace in the Village. This chapter is inapplicable to towers and
telecommunication facilities existing at the effective date of this
chapter until modifications are requested. In the event, any owner/
lessee of an already existing tower or telecommunications facility seeks
to modify said tower/facility, this chapter shall be applicable.
(b) Specifically, the purposes of this chapter are:
(1) To regulate the location of towers and telecommunications facilities
in the Village;
(2) To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impact of towers and telecommunications facilities;
(3) To minimize adverse visual impact of towers and
telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting,
landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
(4) To promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers and
antenna support structures as a primary option rather than
construction of additional single-use towers;
§ 83-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-2
1:595
§ 86-3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 10-08, § 86-103, 7-14-2008]
(5) To promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that
will either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of new tower
structures to support antenna and telecommunications facilities;
(6) To avoid potential damage to property caused by towers and
telecommunications facilities by ensuring such structures are
soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained,
and removed when no longer used or are determined to be
structurally unsound;
(7) To ensure that towers and telecommunications facilities are
compatible with surrounding land uses; and
(8) To promote public health, safety and welfare by requiring proper
setbacks and regulating construction of structures within the fall
zone of towers and telecommunications facilities.
(a) The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
or affixed to a tower, building, or structure and used in communications
that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog
signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless
telecommunications signals or other communications signals. The term
"antenna," as used in this article, shall not include residential television
antennas, residential satellite dishes 30 inches in diameter or less,
amateur radio antennas, municipal CB radio antennas, or other CB
radio antennas in conformance with applicable zoning district height
regulations. "Earth Station Dish Antennas" and/or "terrestrial"
antennas are those satellite signal receiving dishes affixed to a ground
support or a structure greater than 30 inches in diameter and less than
42 inches in diameter.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any building or structure other
than a tower which can be used for location of telecommunications
facilities.
APPLICANT — Any person that applies for a tower and/or
telecommunications facility development permit.
APPLICATION — The process by which the owner of a parcel of land
within the Village submits a request to develop, construct, build,
modify, or erect a tower upon such parcel of land. Application includes
all written documentation, verbal statements, and representations, in
whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the Village concerning
such a request.
§ 86-2 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 86-3
1:596
COLLOCATION — The provision of multiple antennas or more than one
commercial wireless communication service provider or government
entity on a single tower or structure.
ENGINEER — Any engineer licensed by the State of Wisconsin.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from finished grade to the highest point on the tower or other
structure, including the base pad.
MODIFICATIONS/MODIFY — Any change, enhancement or
improvements to a tower or telecommunications facility that increases
the function of the structure, lattice, base support or increase in the
amount of antenna or receivers to be affixed to any tower. Routine
maintenance, including but not limited to, painting, etc., of the periodic
replacement of guy wires shall not be defined as a modification for the
purpose of this chapter.
OWNER — Any person with fee title to any parcel of land within the
Village who desires to develop, or construct, build, modify, or erect a
tower upon such parcel of land.
PERSON — Is any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether
for profit or not for profit.
STEALTH — Any tower or telecommunications facility which is
designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including,
but not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas,
antennas integrated into architectural elements, and towers designed
to look other than like a tower such as light poles, power poles, and
trees. The term stealth does not necessarily exclude the use of
uncamouflaged lattice, guyed or monopole tower designs.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Any cables, wires, lines; wave
guides, antennas, and any other equipment or facilities associated with
the transmission or reception of communications which a person seeks
to locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support
structure. However, telecommunications facilities shall not include:
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio, and
similar communication purposes, including but not limited to, selfsupporting
lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers, commoncarrier
towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures,
Any satellite earth station antenna two meters in diameter or less
which is located in an area zoned industrial or commercial; or
(1)
Any satellite earth station antenna 42 inches or less in diameter,
regardless of zoning category.
(2)
§ 86-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-3
1:597
§ 86-4. Antennas, accessory uses; permitted. [Ord. No. 10-08,
§ 86-101, 7-14-2008]
and the like. The term includes the foundation, structure and any
support there.
(a) Antennas, including earth station dish antennas and terrestrial
antennas are permitted as accessory uses. Terrestrial antennas may be
located in the rear yard or on the roof of the principal structure in all
residential districts within the maximum permitted height of the
proposed structure. Earth station dish antennas may be located in the
rear yard in any residential district subject to an approved "screening"
plan. Terrestrial antennas and earth station dish antennas may be
located in the side or rear yard or on the roof of the principal structure
in all agricultural, business, manufacturing, institutional or park
districts subject to the maximum permissible structure height. In
addition:
(1) All Antennas, including earth station dish antennas, shall be
manufactured and installed in compliance with Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) and Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) regulations and applicable Village airport
safety zones, and Village building and electrical codes.
(2) Not more than two dish antennas, whether earth station or
terrestrial, per dwelling unit shall be permitted on a lot or parcel in
a residential zoning district without permission of the Village Plan
Commission.
(3) Earth station dish antennas shall be located and designed to reduce
their visual impact on surrounding properties and roadways.
(4) No form of advertising or identification may be displayed on the
dish or framework of all earth station dish other than the
customary manufacturer's identification plates, except on an earth
station dish that is less than 32 inches in diameter.
(5) Portable or trailer-mounted antennas are not permitted; with the
exception of temporary installation for on-site testing and
demonstration purposes for a period not to exceed two days at any
one location.
(6) Ground mounted communication structures, such as radio and
television transmission and relay towers, aerials, and radio and
television receiving and transmitting antennas, not including
ground and building-mounted earth station dish antennas, shall
not, in any zoning district, be located less than 1.25 time the height
of the structure or tower (whichever is taller) to any lot line.
Ground-mounted earth station dish antennas shall not exceed a
height of 15 feet. Building-mounted earth station dish antennas
§ 86-3 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 86-4
1:598
§ 86-5. Development of wireless telecommunication sites. [Ord. No.
10-08, § 86-105, 7-14-2008]
shall not exceed the maximum height regulation of the district in
which they are located.
(a) Background and purpose. Recent advances in wireless communications
technology have resulted in a new generation of telecommunication
services. These new services transmit electromagnetic waves of such a
frequency and power that will likely require numerous antenna
locations. These antennas may be located on buildings, water towers
and other similar structures but will also frequently be located on new
or conforming existing towers. This requires that the Village regulate
these wireless communication system facilities in a different manner
than conventional television and radio transmission towers, which are
able to transmit their signals at much greater distances.
(1) A number of providers of wireless communication services have
recently been licensed by the Federal Communications Commission
and additional providers are expected to be licensed in the near
future. These firms are expected to pursue antenna sites within the
Village and these efforts are expected to include requests to
construct new communication towers.
(2) The intent of this proposed regulation is to provide for the
establishment and or expansion of wireless telecommunication
services within the Village while protecting neighborhoods and
airport safety zones and minimizing the adverse visual and
operational effects of wireless telecommunications facilities
through careful design, siting and screening. More specifically this
regulation has been developed in order to:
a. Maximize use of existing and approved conforming towers and
other structures to accommodate new antennas and
transmitters in order to reduce the number of communication
towers needed to serve the community;
b. Encourage providers to co-locate their facilities on a single
tower;
c. Minimize the location of facilities in visually sensitive areas;
d. Encourage creative design measures to camouflage facilities;
e. Encourage the use of monopole towers as more eco-friendly
and more;
f. Protect residential areas from potential adverse impacts of
communication towers;
§ 86-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-5
1:599
g. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure through engineering and careful siting of tower
structures; and
h. Avoid potential for personal injuries to persons in close
proximity to supporting structures due to collapse and/or
falling ice.
(b) Location preferences. The locations for siting the equipment involved in
receiving or transmitting electromagnetic waves associated with
wireless telecommunication services are listed in the following order of
preference.
(1) On existing structures such as buildings, water towers and utility
poles.
(2) On existing conforming towers that otherwise meet local, state and
federal regulations.
(3) On new towers less than 100 feet in height located in industrial or
institutional zones.
(4) On new towers 100 feet or greater in height located in industrial or
institutional zones.
(5) On new towers less than 100 feet in height located in commercial
zones.
(6) On new towers 100 feet or greater in height located in commercial
zones.
(7) On new towers less than 100 feet in height located in residential
zones.
(8) On new towers 100 feet or greater in height located in residential
zones.
(9) On existing nonconforming towers only when a showing is made
that co-location on an existing nonconforming tower is the only
physically legitimate option.
(c) Permitted uses. The following uses which generally pose minimum
adverse visual effect may be permitted upon review by the Village
planning and zoning department upon a written showing by the
applicant demonstrating compliance. Such permitted uses must obtain
a building permit, and are subject to the submittal requirements that
would meet and obtain "staff" approval established in applicable
sections of Code of Ordinances for the Village of Mount Pleasant. A site
plan is necessary for a permitted use.
(1) Wireless telecommunications sites where the antenna is mounted
to existing buildings, conforming towers, utility poles, water
§ 86-5 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 86-5
1:600
towers, light standards or other structures provided the following
standards are met:
a. No changes are made to the height of such structure.
b. No panel antenna shall exceed 72 inches in height and 24
inches in width.
c. No dish antenna shall exceed three feet in diameter.
d. All accompanying equipment buildings or boxes shall be
screened and fenced as approved by the Village as part of the
site plan review.
e. The structure and antenna total height complies with the
applicable zoning district height regulations.
f. The owner of the structure specifically approves the use in
writing.
(d) Uses allowed only by conditional use permit. Wireless
telecommunications sites not otherwise permitted in Subsection (c)
shall be considered conditional uses in all zoning districts. All wireless
telecommunication sites requiring a conditional use permit shall submit
a site plan in conformance with the standards below.
(e) Site plan requirements. All proposals to develop a wireless
telecommunication site shall be subject to the site plan requirements
listed below. No tower shall ever be defined or considered a permitted
use. Rather towers shall always be defined as conditional uses.
(1) Permitted use.
a. A complete site plan application and checklist with applicable
fee as determined by the Village Board.
b. A plan prepared by a State of Wisconsin licensed civil engineer
showing where and how the proposed antenna will be affixed
to a building or structure.
c. Details of all proposed antenna and mounting equipment
including size and color.
d. An elevation of all proposed equipment buildings or boxes and
details of all proposed fencing and screening.
e. A report from a State of Wisconsin licensed civil engineer
indicating that the proposed wireless telecommunication site
will not interfere with local and regional public safety
communications.
(2) Conditional use permit.
§ 86-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-5
1:601
a. A complete conditional use application with applicable fee as
determined by the Village Board.
b. All of the plans and information required for permitted uses in
the previous subsection.
c. A design drawing including cross-section and elevation of all
proposed towers. A description of the tower's capacity
including the number and type of antennas it can
accommodate as well as the proposed location of all mounting
positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation
distances between antennas. Where a monopole is proposed
the design shall illustrate how the tower will collapse upon
itself without encroaching upon any adjoining property line.
Upon request of the Plan Commission the applicant shall
provide a Digital 3D rendering of the proposed wireless
telecommunication site within the context of the surrounding
area in order to help the commission ascertain the visual
impacts associated with such proposal.
d. An analysis of the fall zone for the proposed tower prepared by
a licensed engineer.
e. Proof that either the applicant or co-applicant holds a bona fide
license from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
to provide the telecommunications services that the proposed
tower is designed to support.
f. A report or letter from the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) that the proposed tower complies with all airport safety
requirements of and for Racine Batten Airport and where
applicable Sylvania Airport.
g. A report from a State of Wisconsin licensed civil engineer that
the proposed tower complies with the Village airport safety
zoning regulations.
h. A map depicting the extent of the provider's planned coverage
within the Village and the service area of the proposed wireless
telecommunications site.
i. A map indicating the search radius for the proposed wireless
telecommunication site.
j. Upon request of the Plan Commission the applicant shall
provide a Digital 3D rendering of the proposed wireless
telecommunication site within the context of the surrounding
area in order to help the commission ascertain the visual
impact associated with such proposal.
k. For towers located in a residential zoning district or within
1,000 feet of a residential zoning district, the applicant shall
§ 86-5 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 86-5
1:602
provide a view shed analysis showing all areas from which the
tower would be visible.
l. Expiration of permit. The approval of an application for
conditional use permit shall be void and of no effect unless
construction of the project commences within one year and is
completed within two years from the date of the approval
granted by the Village Board. For purposes of this regulation,
start of construction shall be defined as the installation of a
permanent building foundation or slab. The Village Board may
grant up to two six-month extensions of the time to start
construction upon written request by the applicant and
landowner. The Village Board shall not approve an extension
unless the development plan is brought into conformance with
any relevant zoning regulations, which have been amended
subsequent to the original approval and unless the applicant
provides adequate evidence that construction is able to begin
within the extended time period sought. The Village Board
may, as a condition of approval of a conditional use permit,
establish a time period that such conditional use permit shall
remain in effect.
(f) Height, setback requirements, and distance to other structures.
(1) Height. Towers are exempt from all other maximum height
restrictions of the districts where located.
a. The maximum height of a tower proposed under Chapter 86
regardless of zoning classification and regardless of whether
affixed to a structure or the ground shall be 200 feet including
the antenna and all other appurtenances. The height of a tower
mounted on a building shall be measured from the average
level of the ground along all walls of the building to the tallest
point on the tower including the antenna and all other
appurtenances.
b. The maximum height of any rooftop mounted equipment
building or box (including antennas) shall be 15 feet above the
roof surface.
(2) Setbacks.
a. All towers affixed to the ground shall comply with the following
minimum property line setbacks:
1. In all zoning districts within the Village no wireless radio
and television transmission and relay tower, aerials and
radio and television receiving and transmitting antennas
shall be located closer than 125% of the tower's height
from any lot line.
§ 86-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-5
1:603
2. All equipment buildings/boxes or equipment areas, which
are each 50 square feet or greater in area, shall comply
with the minimum property line setbacks for a principal
building in the underlying zone. All equipment buildings/
boxes or equipment areas which are each less than 50
square feet in area shall comply with the following
minimum property line setbacks:
[a] Front yard or street yard — Same as for a principal
building in the underlying zone.
[b] Rear and side yards — 15 feet.
b. All wireless radio and television transmission and relay towers,
aerials and radio and television receiving and transmitting
antennas mounted or affixed to buildings shall comply with the
following:
1. No such facility may be located such that the facilities "fall
distance" shall extend over the edge of the structure to
which the facility is affixed.
(3) Distance to other structures.
a. For ground mounted/affixed towers.
1. The Village has for years followed the accepted custom,
habit and practice based upon the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Village to limit and prevent
the location and building of structures within the fall
distance of towers. Towers have in the past and will
doubtless in the future malfunction, become unsafe and in
some instances collapse. Additionally, blowing ice from the
structure and appurtenances thereto has caused a
hazardous condition. Consequently, within this chapter the
Village has required that towers constructed upon other
structures not be capable of collapsing or falling over the
edge of any building.
2. For ground mounted or affixed towers new structure or
building expansion shall be prohibited within a distance of
100% of the tower's height to the base of said tower.
(g) General requirements.
(1) No wireless telecommunication "tower" (either monopole or lattice
and regardless of whether it is a transmitting or receiving tower)
shall be located within 500 feet of an existing or proposed
residential area denoted on the adopted Comprehensive Land Use
and Transportation 2030 Plan.
(2) No lights shall be mounted on proposed towers unless otherwise
required in writing by the FAA.
§ 86-5 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 86-5
1:604
(3) Towers not requiring special FAA painting or markings shall be
painted a noncontrasting blue or gray.
(4) Towers may not be used to exhibit any signage or other advertising.
(5) Any proposed tower shall be designed in all respects to
accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable
antennas for at least two additional users if the tower is over 100
feet in height or for at least one additional comparable antenna if
the tower is between 50 and 100 feet in height. The Plan
Commission may require the tower to be of such design as to allow
for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to
accommodate antennas mounted at varying heights.
(6) Antennas or equipment buildings/boxes mounted to or on buildings
or structures shall, to the greatest degree possible, blend with the
color and design of such building or structure.
(7) No proposed wireless telecommunication site shall be designed,
located or operated as to interfere with existing or proposed public
safety communications.
(8) No wireless telecommunication site shall be located within a
designated floodplain or wetland.
(9) The design of all wireless telecommunication sites shall comply
with the standards promulgated by the FCC for emissions.
(10) All utilities proposed to serve new wireless telecommunication
sites shall be installed underground unless otherwise approved by
the Plan Commission.
(11) All generators installed in conjunction with any wireless
telecommunication site shall comply with all local noise
regulations.
(h) Factors upon which conditional use permit decisions of the Plan
Commission shall be based. In considering applications for wireless
telecommunication sites, the Plan Commission shall also find:
(1) In the case where an application for the proposed location of a
wireless telecommunication facility is not a preferred site as
identified in § 86-105 that the applicant has adequately described
the efforts and measures taken to pursue those preferences and
why a higher preference location was not technologically, legally or
economically feasible. The supplied documentation should evaluate
the following factors:
a. The planned equipment would cause unacceptable
interference with the operation of other existing or planned
equipment on an existing or approved tower as documented by
a qualified licensed engineer and that the interference cannot
§ 86-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-5
1:605
§ 86-6. Landscaping. [Ord. No. 10-08, § 86-106, 7-14-2008]
All landscaping on a parcel of land containing towers, antenna support
structures, or telecommunications facilities shall be in accordance with the
applicable landscaping requirements in the zoning district where the tower,
antenna support structure, or telecommunications facilities are located.
The Village may require landscaping in excess of the requirements in the
Village Code in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses.
Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of any fencing.
§ 86-7. Access. [Ord. No. 10-08, § 86-107, 7-14-2008]
A parcel of land upon which a tower is located must provide access to at
least one paved vehicular parking space on site. Additionally, the parcel of
land upon which a tower is located must have approved ingress/egress to a
pubic roadway.
§ 86-8. Certifications and inspections. [Ord. No. 10-08, § 86-108,
7-14-2008]
be prevented or eliminated at a reasonable cost as determined
by the Plan Commission.
b. The planned equipment cannot be accommodated on existing
or approved towers due to structural deficiencies as
documented by a qualified licensed engineer and that such
deficiencies cannot be eliminated at a reasonable cost as
determined by the Plan Commission.
c. The existing or planned equipment on an existing or approved
tower would cause unacceptable interference with the
equipment proposed by the applicant as documented by a
qualified licensed engineer and that the interference cannot be
prevented or eliminated at a reasonable cost as determined by
the Plan Commission.
d. Any restriction or limitation imposed by the FCC.
(a) All towers shall be certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and
in conformance with the requirements of the building code and all other
construction standards set forth by the Village's Code and federal and
state law. For new monopole towers, such certification shall be
submitted with an application pursuant to § 86-105 of this chapter and
every five years thereafter. For existing monopole towers, certification
shall be submitted within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter
and then every five years thereafter. For new lattice or guyed towers,
such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to
§ 86-105 of this chapter and every two years thereafter. For existing
lattice or guyed towers, certification shall be submitted within 60 days
of the effective date of this chapter and then every two years thereafter.
The tower owner may be required by the Village to submit more
§ 86-5 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 86-8
1:606
§ 86-9. Maintenance. [Ord. No. 10-08, § 86-109, 7-14-2008]
§ 86-10. Abandonment. [Ord. No. 10-08, § 86-110, 7-14-2008]
frequent certifications should there be reason to believe that the
structural and electrical integrity of the tower is jeopardized.
(b) The Village or its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property
upon which a tower is located, between the inspections and
certifications required above, to inspect the tower for the purpose of
determining whether it complies with the building code and all other
construction standards provided by the Village Code and federal and
state law.
(c) The Village reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time,
upon reasonable notice to the tower owner. All expenses related to such
inspections by the Village shall be borne by the tower owner.
(a) Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care
and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly
accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents
which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
(b) Tower owners shall install and maintain towers, telecommunications
facilities, wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in substantial
compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code
and all FCC, state, and local regulations, and in such manner that will
not interfere with the use of other property.
(c) All towers, telecommunications facilities, and antenna support
structures shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition,
order, and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life
or property of any person.
(d) All maintenance or construction of towers, telecommunications
facilities, or antenna support structures shall be performed by licensed
maintenance and construction personnel.
(e) All towers shall maintain compliance with current RF emission
standards of the FCC.
(f) In the event that the use of a tower is discontinued by the tower owner,
the tower owner shall provide written notice to the Village of its intent
to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
(a) If any tower shall cease to be used for a period of 365 consecutive days,
the (Village Board) shall notify the owner, with a copy to the applicant,
that the site will be subject to a determination by the (Village Board)
that such site has been abandoned. The owner shall have 30 days from
receipt of said notice to show, by a preponderance of the evidence that
the tower has been in use or under repair during the period. If the
owner fails to show that the tower has been in use or under repair
§ 86-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-10
1:607
§ 86-11. Compliance required, violations, penalties. [Ord. No.
10-08, § 86-111, 7-14-2008]
Any person who fails to comply with this chapter or any order of the
Zoning Administrator or planning commission issued in accordance with
this chapter, or resists enforcement, shall, upon conviction, be liable for
such equitable relief as a court shall grant and shall forfeit not less than
$500, nor more than $1,000, and costs of prosecution for each violation.
Failure to follow an order of the Zoning Administrator or planning
commissioner to remove, halt construction or vacate a structure found to
be in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation for
each day the violation exists or continues. Such monetary penalties may be
demanded by the Village prior to issuance of any conditional use permit,
variance or building permit for the structure.
§ 86-12. Appeals. [Ord. No. 10-08, § 86-112, 7-14-2008]
during the period, the (Village Board) shall issue a final determination
of abandonment for the site. Upon issuance of the final determination
of abandonment, the owner shall, within 75 days, dismantle and remove
the tower. If the tower owner fails to remove their facilities within this
time frame the Village shall remove said facilities and charge the cost
of such removal to the property involved pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 66.
(b) To secure the obligation set forth in this section, the applicant [and/or
owner] shall post a bond in the amount of $5,000 in a form approved by
the planning commission. The planning commission may reduce or
increase this amount based upon the anticipated cost of removal.
(a) The planning commission of the Village shall have original jurisdiction
for all applications, submittals, site plans and approvals of "wireless
facilities" as set forth in this chapter as well as the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996. The Federal Telecommunications Act
of 1996 requires certain procedures to be followed in determining
whether wireless facilities may be placed in the Village. This chapter is
intended to be compliant with said Federal Law.
(b) In making any decision concerning the placement, construction or
modification of any "wireless facility", as such term is defined by the
Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 as amended, the planning
commission shall require the following:
(1) The planning commission will keep a tape recording of the
discussion and vote, in addition to the minutes of such decision.
The tape will be maintained by the Village for a period of one year
following the meeting.
(2) The planning commission will prepare a written record supporting
its decision, based upon all documents and testimony in opposition
to the petition and all documents in support of the petition, as well
as written recommendations by the planning/zoning staff,
§ 86-10 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 86-12
1:608
Chapter 90
ZONING
transcripts of any applicable public hearing, the appropriate
applicable sections of the comprehensive zoning ordinance or
neighborhood plans, any applicable sections of the SEWRPC
planning documents, written letters or comments by the public, any
empirical analyses, studies or reports by persons having specific
knowledge applicable to the issues, and any other records,
documents or reports deemed applicable by the petitioner, staff or
decision-making body.
(3) All final decisions made by the planning commission will be in
written form, stating with particularity the specific reasons for the
decision. The final written decision will incorporate and refer to the
portions of the written records upon which the decision is based. In
addition, the written decision, if prohibiting the required use or
structure (or other wireless facility) will advise the petitioner of his/
her or its appeal rights.
§ 86-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-12
1:609

ARTICLE 10
Introductory Provisions
DIVISION 90-10
General Framework
§ 90-10.10. Title. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-20209]
This chapter of the Village Code is known and may be cited and referred to
as the "zoning chapter."
§ 90-10.20. Authority. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
This zoning chapter is adopted under the authority of the powers granted
and limitations imposed by Wisconsin law, including §§ 62.23(7), 62.231,
87.30 and 236.45, Wis. Stats.
§ 90-10.30. Effective date. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The provisions of this zoning chapter become effective on June 8, 2020,
except as otherwise expressly stated.
§ 90-10.40. Applicability and jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
The provisions of this zoning chapter apply to all public and private use
and development of properties within the Village of Mount Pleasant, except
as provided by state or federal law or as otherwise expressly stated in this
zoning chapter.
§ 90-10.50. Purposes. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
This zoning chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
(a) Promoting land use and development patterns that are consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan and other relevant, officially adopted plans of
the Village;
(b) Protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the Village;
(c) Securing safety from fire, flooding, pollution, contamination and other
dangers;
(d) Maintaining and promoting safe motorized and nonmotorized
circulation;
(e) Ensuring the provision of adequate open space for light, air, firesafety
and recreation;
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 90, Zoning, adopted 8-8-1972,
as amended.
§ 90-10.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-10.50
1:611
§ 90-10.60. Minimum requirements. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-10.70. Compliance required. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-10.80. Conflicting provisions. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(f) Protecting environmentally sensitive areas;
(g) Removing obstacles and providing opportunities for energy
conservation and renewable energy use;
(h) Facilitating the adequate, efficient and cost-effective provision of
infrastructure and other public services and facilities;
(i) Preserving the natural scenic beauty of the Village and enhancing the
appearance of the natural and built environment;
(j) Stabilizing, protecting, and enhancing property values;
(k) Protecting productive agricultural land from premature urbanization
and providing opportunities for local food production;
(l) Accommodating innovative project designs, including developments
that incorporate mixed uses and housing variety and choice;
(m) Promoting the orderly development and economic vitality of the Village;
(n) Providing an adequate variety of housing and commercial building
types to satisfy the Village's social and economic goals; and
(o) Providing for the administration and enforcement of this zoning
chapter, as well as remedies and penalties for ordinance violations.
(a) The provisions of this zoning chapter are the minimum requirements
deemed necessary to carry out the zoning chapter's stated purposes.
(b) In addition to the requirements of this zoning chapter, all uses,
buildings and structures must comply with all other applicable
ordinances, laws and regulations.
(c) References in this zoning chapter to other governmental regulations do
not constitute a complete list of such regulations. These references do
not imply any responsibility for the Village to enforce regulations
imposed by other government authorities.
(a) All lots created or modified must comply with all applicable provisions
of this zoning chapter.
(b) The use of land, buildings and structures must comply with the
provisions of this zoning chapter.
(c) Buildings and structures erected, located, moved, reconstructed,
extended or structurally altered must comply with the provisions of this
zoning chapter.
§ 90-10.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-10.80
1:612
§ 90-10.90. Language and interpretation. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(a) Abrogation. The regulations of this zoning chapter are not intended to
repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing
easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, ordinances,
rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to
law.
(b) State or federal regulations. If the provisions of this zoning chapter are
inconsistent with or conflict with state or federal law, the applicable
state and federal law or regulation governs.
(c) Other Village regulations. If the provisions of this zoning chapter are
inconsistent with one another or if they conflict with provisions found in
other adopted ordinances or regulations of the Village, the more
restrictive provision governs unless otherwise expressly stated. The
more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent
controls.
(d) Private agreements and covenants. The Village is not responsible for
monitoring or enforcing agreements or covenants among private
parties. If the provisions of this zoning chapter impose a greater
restriction than imposed by an agreement or covenant among private
parties, the provisions of this zoning chapter govern.
(a) Meanings and intent.
(1) Words and terms expressly defined in this zoning chapter including
those defined in Division 90-620 have the specific meanings
assigned unless the context indicates another meaning.
(2) Words that are not expressly defined in this zoning chapter have
the meaning assigned in Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary.
(b) Conjunctions. Unless the context otherwise expressly indicates,
conjunctions have the following meanings:
(1) "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and
(2) "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singularly or in combination.
(c) Computation of time.
(1) References to "days" are to calendar days unless otherwise
expressly stated. References to "business days" are references to
regular Village government working days, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays observed by Village government.
(2) The time in which an act is to be completed is computed by
excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a
§ 90-10.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-10.90
1:613
Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by Village government, that
day is excluded.
(3) A day concludes at the close of business, and any materials
received by the Village after that time will be considered to have
been received the following day.
(d) Tenses and usage.
(1) Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also
true.
(2) Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The
reverse is also true.
(3) The words "shall," "will," and "must" are mandatory.
(4) The word "may" is permissive, not mandatory or required, but the
phrase "may not" means that the referenced action is expressly
prohibited.
(5) Phrases that include numbers, such as "up to x," "not more than x"
and "a maximum of x" all include "x."
(6) The words "used" and "occupied" include "intended and designed
to be used or occupied."
(e) Illustrations. Illustrations are provided for convenience and reference
only and do not define or limit the scope of any provision of this zoning
chapter. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between
the text of this zoning chapter and any figure or illustration, the text
governs.
(f) References to other regulations. All references in this zoning chapter to
other Village, county, state, or federal regulations are for informational
purposes only, and do not necessarily constitute a complete list of
applicable regulations. References to other applicable regulations do
not imply any responsibility by the Village for enforcement of such
regulations.
(g) Versions and citations. All references in this zoning chapter to other
Village, state or federal regulations are to be construed as referring to
the most up-to-date version and citation for those regulations or
successor regulations, unless otherwise expressly indicated. When the
referenced regulations have been repealed and not replaced by other
successor regulations, zoning chapter requirements for compliance are
no longer in effect.
(h) Lists and examples. Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of items
or examples that use "including," "such as," or similar terms are
intended to provide examples only. They are not to be construed as
exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
§ 90-10.90 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-10.90
1:614
§ 90-10.100. Zoning Map. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(i) Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or another officer or employee of the Village to
perform an act or duty, that provision will be construed as authorizing
the department head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others
over whom they have authority. Delegation of authority is not allowed
when the provisions of this zoning chapter expressly prohibit such
delegation.
(j) Public officials and agencies. Unless otherwise expressly stated, all
employees, public officials, and boards and commissions to which
references are made are those of the Village of Mount Pleasant.
(a) Establishment. The location and boundaries of the districts defined in
this zoning chapter must be established by ordinance and shown on a
geographic coverage layer that is maintained as part of a geographic
information system (GIS) under the direction of the Community
Development Director. This zoning geographic coverage layer
constitutes the Village's official Zoning Map.
(b) Maintenance and updates. The Community Development Director is
responsible for directing revisions to the official Zoning Map to reflect
its amendment as soon as possible after the effective date of any
ordinance establishing or amending zoning district boundaries.
(c) Boundaries. Zoning boundary lines must be described by legal
description or by a map that accompanies the ordinance establishing
the district or amending the district boundaries. When a legal
description is used, the boundary is deemed to extend to the center line
of abutting streets. When a map is used, boundary lines must be
established by dimensions, property lines, recorded lot lines, or the
center line of abutting streets, alleys, or railroad rights-of-way, as those
features were of record at the time of adoption.
(d) Map interpretations. Where any uncertainty exists about a zoning
boundary that was established by legal description, the legal
description accompanying the amending ordinance governs. In other
cases, the Community Development Director is authorized to make an
interpretation of the boundaries. The following rules apply to all Zoning
Map interpretations:
(1) Boundaries shown as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, alleys or other public rights-of-way must be
construed to follow such center lines.
(2) Boundaries shown as approximately following platted lot lines must
be construed as following such lot lines.
(3) Boundaries shown as approximately following Village limit lines
must be construed as following those lines.
§ 90-10.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-10.100
1:615
(4) Boundaries shown as approximately following railroad lines must
be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
(5) Boundaries shown as approximately following the shoreline or
center line of a river, stream, lake or other watercourse must be
construed as following the actual shoreline or center line of the
watercourse. If, after establishment of the boundary, the shoreline
or center line of the watercourse moves as a result of natural
processes, the boundary must be construed as moving with the
shoreline or center line of the watercourse.
(e) Annexed land. When land is annexed or otherwise brought into the
zoning jurisdiction of the Village, it must be assigned a zoning
classification based on the Comprehensive Plan, existing land uses, any
applicable annexation agreement or other relevant considerations.
(f) Split-zoned parcels.
(1) The Zoning Map may not be amended to classify a single parcel into
two or more base zoning districts. This provision does not apply to
overlay zoning districts.
(2) The split zoning of any newly created parcel (into more than one
base zoning district classification) is prohibited. This provision does
not apply to overlay zoning districts.
(3) The following regulations apply to existing parcels that are
classified in two or more base zoning classifications:
a. For existing and proposed uses and structures, the more
restrictive provisions of the applicable zoning districts apply to
the entire parcel except when one base zoning district applies
to at least 75% of the total parcel area and the remainder of the
parcel is less than 10,000 square feet in area. The regulations
of the zoning district that applies to the larger portion of the
parcel applies to the entire parcel.
§ 90-10.100 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-10.100
1:616
§ 90-10.110. Transitional provisions. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The provisions of this section address the transition to this zoning chapter
from the zoning ordinance in effect immediately before the effective date
specified in § 90-10.30.
Figure 90-10-1
Split-Zoned Lots
b. Building setbacks do not apply along base zoning district
boundary lines that split a parcel under single ownership.
c. If any use, building or structure rendered nonconforming by
the split-zoned parcel provisions of this section is accidentally
damaged or destroyed, it may be reestablished, as long as the
reestablishment does not increase the extent of nonconformity.
(a) Applications, permits and approvals.
(1) Any building, development or structure for which a building permit
was issued or a complete building permit application had been
accepted for processing before the effective date specified in
§ 90-10.30 may be completed in conformance with the issued
building permit and other applicable permits and conditions, even
if such building, development or structure does not comply with
provisions of this zoning chapter. If the building, development or
structure is commenced but not completed within the time allowed
under the original building permit and any authorized permit
extension, the building, development or structure may be
constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the
regulations of this zoning chapter.
(2) Complete applications for variances, exceptions, special permits,
conditional uses, site plans, planned developments, and other
zoning-related approvals that are pending approval on the effective
date specified in § 90-10.30 must be reviewed wholly under the
§ 90-10.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-10.110
1:617
terms of the zoning ordinance in effect immediately preceding the
effective date specified in § 90-10.30.
(3) The Community Development Director is authorized to issue
permits for construction or development approved before the
effective date specified in § 90-10.30 and for developments pending
approval before that effective date even if such building,
development or structure does not fully comply with provisions of
this zoning chapter. If building is not commenced and completed
within the time allowed under the permit and any authorized
permit extension, then the building, development or structure may
be constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the
regulations of this zoning chapter.
(b) Zoning district name conversions. The zoning district names in effect
before the effective date specified in § 90-10.30 are converted as
indicated in Table 90-10-1.
Table 90-10-1 Zoning Name Conversions
Previous District New (Renamed) District
Residential
OAG RE
R-100 and R-100D RL-1
R-75 and R-75D RL-1
R-60 and R-60D RL-1 or RL-2 (based on lot size)
R-40 RL-2
RM-1 RM-1
RM-2 RM-2
RM-3 and RM-4 RH-1
None RH-2 (new district)
R-50MH Eliminated
Mixed-Use
None MX-1 (new district)
None MX-2 (new district)
None MX-3 (new district)
None MX-4 (new district)
Business and Employment
B-1 B-1
OOS B-1
B-2 and B-4 B-2
B-3 B-3
§ 90-10.110 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-10.110
1:618
§ 90-10.120. Disclaimers of liability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Table 90-10-1 Zoning Name Conversions
Previous District New (Renamed) District
OHS B-4
B-P B-P
M-E M-1
M-1 M-2
OEL M-3
Special Purpose
None AG-1 (new district)
AG AG-2
PUL P-1 or P-2
W-F Eliminated1
AUH Eliminated (rezone to R)
RCH Eliminated
Overlay
OAG RE, AG-1 or AG-2 (varies)
OEL M-3
OCR Eliminated
OCS Eliminated1
OIP P-1 or P-2
OHS B-4
OOS B-1
OPD PD (legacy district)
OLC Eliminated
NOTE:
1 Handled through generally applicable development regulations
rather than mapped zoning designation.
(c) Violations. The adoption of this zoning chapter does not affect any
pending or future suit, proceeding or prosecution of, or action to abate,
violations of the previous zoning ordinance that occurred before the
effective date specified in § 90-10.30.
(a) The Village does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only the soils
listed as being unsuited for specific uses are the only unsuitable soils
and hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the Village
§ 90-10.110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-10.120
1:619
§ 90-10.130. Severability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Board, its agencies or employees for any sanitation problems or
structural damages that may occur as a result of reliance upon, and
conformance with, this zoning chapter.
(b) The Village does not guarantee, warrant, or represent that only those
areas designated as floodplain will be subject to periodic inundation
and hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the Village, its
officers, employees, agents, or representatives for any flood damages,
sanitation problems, or structural damages.
(a) If one or more provisions of this zoning chapter, or the application of
this zoning chapter to specific properties is held by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, invalid, unenforceable, or
preempted by applicable state or federal law or regulations, such
provisions are deemed to be severed from this zoning chapter.
Remaining provisions remain in full force and effect.
(b) If any requirement or condition attached to an approval given under
this zoning chapter is found to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, it will be presumed that the approval would not have been
given without the requirement or condition and, therefore, the subject
approval will also be deemed invalid.
§ 90-10.120 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-10.130
1:620
ARTICLE 100
Base Districts
DIVISION 90-110
Residential Districts
§ 90-110.10. Districts established. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Village's residential zoning districts are listed in Table 90-110-1. When
this zoning chapter refers to "residential" zoning districts or "R" zoning
districts, it is referring to these districts.
Table 90-110-1
Residential (R) Districts
Symbol District Name
RE Estate Residential
RL Low-Density Residential
RM Moderate-Density Residential
RH High-Density Residential
§ 90-110.20. District descriptions. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) General. Residential zoning districts are primarily intended to create,
maintain and promote a variety of housing opportunities for individuals
and households of various ages, incomes and lifestyle preferences. The
districts are also intended to maintain and promote the desired physical
character of existing and developing neighborhoods. While the R
Districts primarily accommodate residential uses, some nonresidential
(public and civic) uses are also allowed.
(b) RE Residential Estate District. The RE (Residential Estate) District is
primarily intended to accommodate detached houses on very large lots,
and very limited keeping of horses or farm animals.
(c) RL Low-Density Residential District. The RL (Low-Density Residential)
District is primarily intended to accommodate one or two dwelling units
on lots of various sizes. When this chapter refers to RL Districts it is
referring to all RL Districts.
(d) RM Moderate-Density Residential District. The RM (Moderate-Density
Residential) District is primarily intended to accommodate a range of
residential building types and densities. When this chapter refers to RM
Districts it is referring to all RM Districts.
(e) RH High-Density Residential District. The RH (High-Density
Residential) District is primarily intended to accommodate a range of
residential building types and higher densities. When this chapter
refers to RH Districts it is referring to all RH Districts. RH zoning is
§ 90-110.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-110.20
1:621
§ 90-110.30. Allowed uses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Uses are allowed in R Districts in accordance with the use regulations of
Division 90-310.
§ 90-110.40. Allowed building types. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-110.50. Horses and farm animals. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
See Division 90-340.
§ 90-110.60. Gardening and farming. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
No more than 30% of any R-zoned lot may be used for gardens or the
growing of crops.
intended to be applied only in areas with excellent transportation/
transit access, including major highway corridors.
(a) Allowed residential uses must occupy residential buildings which are
allowed in R Districts in accordance with Table 90-110-2.
(b) Allowed public and civic uses must occupy civic buildings which are
allowed in R Districts as indicated in Table 90-110-2.
Table 90-110-2
R District Building Types
Districts
Building Type
RE RL RM RH
See Section
•= permitted
— = prohibited
Residential Buildings
Detached house • • • • § 90-110.90
Two-unit house — • • • § 90-110.90
Twinhouse — • • • § 90-110.100
Townhouse
building
— — • • § 90-110.110
Multi-unit
building
— — • • § 90-110.120
Cottage court — — • • § 90-110.130
Backyard cottage • • • • § 90-110.140
Nonresidential Buildings
Civic building • • • • § 90-110.150
§ 90-110.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-110.70
1:622
§ 90-110.70. Garages. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Purpose. The garage regulations of this section are intended to help
preserve the desired physical character of low-density residential areas
and prevent garages from becoming the dominant feature of houses
within such areas.
(b) Applicability.
(1) The garage regulations of this section apply to garages established
after the effective date established in § 90-10.30 on lots occupied
by detached houses, two-unit houses, twinhouses or townhouses.
The regulations also apply to carports.
(2) Garages and carports in existence on the effective date established
in § 90-10.30 may be modified, reconstructed or replaced as long as
the modification, reconstruction or replacement does not result in
the garage or carport increasing the extent of noncompliance with
the garage regulations of this section.
(c) Detached houses, two-unit houses and twinhouses. Garages for
detached houses two-unit houses and twinhouses must be front-loaded,
side-loaded or rear-loaded, in accordance with the regulations of this
subsection.
(1) Front-loaded garages. Vehicle entrances to attached or detached
front-loaded garages on lots occupied by detached houses, two-unit
houses or twinhouses must be set back at least 25 feet from the
street right-of-way or 20 feet from the back of sidewalk, whichever
results in a greater setback. Front-loaded garages that are set back
less than three feet from the front wall plane of the detached house,
two-unit house, or twinhouse are subject to the following
regulations:
a. The total area of any street-facing garage doors may not
exceed 40% of the total exterior wall area on the garage-side
facade of the detached house, two-unit house, or twinhouse;
and
b. Garage doors must be wood-clad or include decorative
windows.
(2) Side-loaded garages. Side-loaded garages may be attached or
detached, with the vehicle entrance generally oriented
perpendicular to the street-facing plane of the detached house,
two-unit house or twinhouse. The street-facing wall of an attached
side-loaded garage must be set back from the street in accordance
with the minimum street setback requirements of the subject
zoning district and include at least 20 square feet of window area.
The side-loaded vehicle entrance must be set back at least 28 feet
from the side lot line.
§ 90-110.70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-110.70
1:623
(3) Rear-loaded garages. Rear-loaded garages may be attached or
detached, with the vehicle entrance generally oriented to the rear
of the lot. Rear-loaded detached garages must be set back at least
two feet from the alley right-of-way.
(d) Townhouses. Garages for townhouses on lots taking access to local or
collector streets may be rear-loaded, side-loaded or front-loaded, in
accordance with the regulations of this section. Garages for
townhouses on lots taking access from nonlocal or noncollector streets
must be rear-loaded, in accordance with the regulations of this section.
(1) Rear-loaded garages. Rear-loaded townhouse garages may be
attached or detached, with the vehicle entrance generally oriented
to the rear of the lot. Rear-loaded detached garages must be set
back at least two feet from the alley right-of-way.
(2) Front- and side street-loaded garages. Front-loaded townhouse
garage entrances must be recessed at least 12 inches behind the
front wall plane of the principal building or be located beneath a
second-story building element that projects at least 12 inches
forward of the garage entrance.
a. The total area of any street-facing garage doors may not
exceed 40% of the total exterior wall area on the garage-side
facade of the individual townhouse dwelling unit.
b. Vehicle entrances to all front- and side street-loaded garages
must be setback at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way or
20 feet from the back of sidewalk, whichever results in a
greater setback.
c. When garages are paired (abutting), driveways must be
combined and centered on the property line between
townhouse dwelling units. In all cases, driveways serving frontor
side street-loaded townhouse garages must be designed to
ensure at least 25 feet of uninterrupted curb length between
single or paired driveways.
(e) Exceptions. The Community Development Director is authorized to
approve alternative garage placement and designs in accordance with
the administrative adjustment procedures of Division 90-565. In
reviewing requests for administrative adjustment approval, the
Community Development Director must consider all of the following:
(1) Whether the proposed alternative meets the purpose and intent of
the garage regulations.
(2) Whether the requested exception would adversely affect the safety
of nonmotorized travel; and
§ 90-110.70 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-110.70
1:624
§ 90-110.80. Other regulations. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Buildings and uses in R Districts are subject to all other applicable
regulations of this zoning chapter, including the following:
§ 90-110.90. Detached houses and two-unit houses. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(3) Whether the proposed alternative design would have an adverse
impact on the established character of the surrounding area and, if
so, whether measures have been taken to mitigate such impacts.
(f) Garage types.
Figure 90-110-1
Garage Types
(a) Accessory uses and structures. See Division 90-330.
(b) Parking. See Division 90-420.
(c) Landscape and screening. See Division 90-430.
(d) Signs. See Division 90-440.
(e) Sewer and water service. See Division 90-410.
§ 90-110.70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-110.90
1:625
(a) Description.
(1) A detached house is a residential building that contains only one
dwelling unit and is located on a single lot not occupied by other
principal buildings.
(2) A two-unit house is a residential building that contains two
dwelling units and is located on a single lot not occupied by other
principal buildings.
(b) Where allowed. Detached houses are allowed in all R Districts. Two-unit
houses are allowed in all RL, RM, and RH Districts. The Village is
authorized to approve multiple detached houses and multiple two-unit
houses on a single lot if 1) approved in accordance with the plat
procedures of Chapter 74 and 2) a plan is submitted showing that the
lot could be subdivided so that each such principal and accessory
building would comply with the lot and building regulations of the
subject zoning district.
(c) Lot and building regulations. Detached houses and two-unit houses are
subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of Table
90-110-3.
Table 90-110-3
Detached House and Two-Unit House Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation RE RL-1 RL-2 RM & RH
(a) Lot
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
21,780 6,000 3,600 3,600
Maximum lot area
(square feet)
430,560 43,560 9,600 7,200
Minimum lot width
(feet)
100 55 35 35
Maximum lot width
(feet)
No max. 120 80 60
Maximum building
coverage (% of lot)
25 50 55 55
(b) Principal Building Siting
Street setback
(minimum; feet)
20 15 151 151
Interior side
(minimum; feet)2
15 8 6 6
Rear (minimum; feet) 25 25 25 25
(c) Accessory Building Siting
§ 90-110.90 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-110.90
1:626
Table 90-110-3
Detached House and Two-Unit House Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation RE RL-1 RL-2 RM & RH
Allowed location Allowed in rear yard only
Side and rear
setbacks (minimum;
feet)
10 3 3 3
(d) Garages
Garage configuration See § 90-110.70(c).
(e) Maximum Building Height
Principal building
(feet)
35 35 35 35
Accessory building
(feet)
24 20 20 20
(f) Minimum Heated
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
2,500 1,2503 None None
NOTES:
1 Ten-foot minimum street setback on lots with alley access to parking/
garage
2 Driveways must be set back at least two feet from interior side lot lines.
3 Applies only if one or more abutting lots is occupied by a detached
house or two-unit house.
§ 90-110.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-110.90
1:627
§ 90-110.100. Twinhouses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Figure 90-110-2
Detached House
(See Table 90-110-3)
Figure 90-110-3
Two-Unit House
(See Table 90-110-3)
(d) Additional regulations for RE Districts.
(1) At least 60% of street-facing facades on detached houses in the RE
District must be brick masonry, stone masonry or cast stone
masonry. The Plan Commission is authorized to approve the use of
alternative high-quality, durable building materials if approved
through the Plan Commission site plan review process of Division
90-540. Detached accessory buildings that are visible from and
located within 200 feet of a public right-of-way must match the
architectural style and major building materials of the principal
dwelling unit.
(2) Lots occupied by detached houses in the RE District must include
at least one canopy tree per 40 linear feet of street frontage.
Canopy trees must be located within 50 feet of the street right-ofway
and comply with the canopy tree specifications of § 90-430.70.
(a) Description. A twinhouse is a residential building occupied by two
dwelling units, each of which is located on its own lot with a common or
abutting wall along the dwelling units' shared lot lines. Each dwelling
unit has its own external entrance.
(b) Where allowed. Twinhouses are allowed in all RL, RM and RH Districts.
(c) Lot and building regulations. Twinhouses are subject to compliance
with the lot and building regulations of Table 90-110-4.
§ 90-110.90 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-110.100
1:628
Table 90-110-4
Twinhouse Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation RL-1 RL-2 RM & RH
(a) Lot
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
3,000 1,800 1,800
Maximum lot area
(square feet)
7,200 3,600 3,600
Minimum lot width
(feet)
30 24 24
Maximum lot width
(feet)
55 35 35
Maximum building
coverage (% of lot)
50 55 55
(b) Principal Building Siting
Street setback
(minimum; feet)
15 151 151
Interior side
(minimum; feet)2
6 6 6
Rear (minimum; feet) 25 25 25
(c) Accessory Building Siting
Allowed location Allowed in rear yard only
Side and rear
setbacks (minimum;
feet)
3 3 3
(d) Garages
Garage configuration See § 90-110.70(c).
(e) Maximum Building Height
Principal building
(feet)
35 35 35
Accessory building
(feet)
20 20 20
NOTES:
1 Ten-foot minimum street setback on lots with alley access to parking/
garage
2 Interior side building setbacks apply only to end units (i.e., on
nonattached side). Driveways must be set back at least two feet from
interior side lot lines.
§ 90-110.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-110.100
1:629
§ 90-110.110. Townhouse buildings. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Figure 90-110-4
Twinhouses
(See Table 90-110-4)
(d) Ownership. A twinhouse dwelling lot may be paired with only one other
lot, and both lots must be held under the same ownership at the time of
construction of both twinhouses. Both attached twinhouse dwelling
units must be constructed as a single unit and project during the same
construction time period.
(e) Covenants and restrictions. A declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions or a similar enforceable agreement must be submitted with
the plat (or CSM) if new lots are being created or with the zoning
compliance application if no new lots are being created. The declaration
must specify respective owner obligations and rights with regard to any
common structures, such as shared walls, roof, and other inseparable
improvements.
(a) Description. A townhouse building is a residential building occupied by
three or more dwelling units, each of which is located on its own lot and
has one or more common or abutting walls with other dwelling units in
the townhouse building. Each dwelling unit has a front and back and its
own external entrance. Townhouse dwelling units do not share common
floors/ceilings with other dwelling units.
(b) Where allowed. Townhouses are allowed in RM and RH Districts.
(c) Lot and building regulations. Townhouses are subject to compliance
with the lot and building regulations of Table 90-110-5.
§ 90-110.100 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-110.110
1:630
Table 90-110-5
Townhouse Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation RM-1 RM-2 RH
(a) Lot
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
1,800 1,800 1,800
Maximum lot area
(square feet)
3,600 3,600 3,600
Minimum lot width
(feet)
18 18 18
Maximum lot width
(feet)
35 35 35
Maximum building
coverage (% of lot)
55 55 55
(b) Principal Building Siting
Street setback
(minimum; feet)
15 151 151
Interior side
(minimum; feet)2
6 6 6
Rear (minimum;
feet)
25 25 25
(c) Principal Building Width
Maximum number of
attached units
6 12 No maximum
(d) Garages
Garage configuration See § 90-110.70(d).
(e) Accessory Building Siting
Allowed location Allowed in rear yard only
Side and rear
setbacks (minimum;
feet)
3 3 3
(f) Maximum Building Height
Principal building
(feet)
35 35 35
Accessory building
(feet)
20 20 20
§ 90-110.110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-110.110
1:631
§ 90-110.120. Multi-unit (three or more) buildings. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
NOTES:
1 Ten-foot minimum street setback on lots with alley access to parking/
garage
2 Interior side building setbacks apply only to end units (i.e., on
nonattached side). Driveways must be set back at least 2 feet from
interior side lot lines.
Figure 90-110-5
Townhouses
(See Table 90-110-5)
(d) Ownership. All townhouse dwelling units with shared structural
elements (e.g., walls or roofs) must be constructed as a single unit and
project during the same construction time period.
(e) Covenants and restrictions. A declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions or a similar enforceable agreement must be submitted with
the plat (or CSM) if new lots are being created or with the zoning
compliance application if no new lots are being created. The declaration
must specify respective owner obligations and rights with regard to any
common structures, such as shared walls, roof, and other inseparable
improvements.
(a) Description. A multi-unit building is a residential building that is
located on a single lot and occupied by three or more dwelling units.
(b) Where allowed. Multi-unit buildings are allowed in all RM and RH
Districts.
§ 90-110.110 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-110.120
1:632
(c) Lot and building regulations. Multi-unit buildings in RM and RH
Districts are subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations
of Table 90-110-6.
Table 90-110-6
Multi-Unit Building Lot and Building Regulations
Zone standards
Regulation RM-1 RM-2 RH-1 RH-2
Minimum lot area (square feet) 7,200 7,200 7,200 7,200
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit (square feet) 2,400 1,500 1,000 500
Minimum lot width (feet) 60 60 60 60
Maximum building coverage (% of lot) 55 55 55 55
Street setback (minimum; feet) 20 20 20 20
Interior side (minimum; feet)1 8 8 10 10
Rear (minimum; feet) 25 25 25 25
Maximum number of dwelling units 6 20 No maximum No maximum
(d) Accessory Building Siting
Allowed location Allowed in rear yard only
Side and rear
setbacks (minimum;
feet)
5 5 5 5
(e) Maximum Building Height
Principal building
(feet)
35 40 60 90
Accessory building
(feet)
20 20 20 20
§ 90-110.120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-110.120
1:633
§ 90-110.130. Cottage courts. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
NOTE:
1 Interior side building setbacks apply only to end units (i.e., on
nonattached side). Driveways must be set back at least two feet from
interior side lot lines.
Figure 90-110-6
Multi-Unit Building
(See Table 90-110-6)
(a) Description. A cottage court development is a grouping of small
detached houses clustered around a common open space or shared
courtyard.
(b) Where allowed. Cottage courts are allowed in all RM and RH Districts.
(c) Lot and building regulations. Cottage courts in RM and RH Districts are
subject to compliance with the lot and building regulations of Table
90-110-7.
Table 90-110-7
Cottage Court Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation RM RH
(a) Lot
Minimum lot area (square feet) 7,200 7,200
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit
(square feet)
1,400 1,400
§ 90-110.120 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-110.130
1:634
Table 90-110-7
Cottage Court Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation RM RH
Minimum lot width (feet) 60 60
Maximum building coverage (% of lot) 55 55
Minimum court yard/common open
space area (square feet per unit)
400 400
(b) Principal Building Siting
Street setback (minimum; feet) 10 10
Interior side (minimum; feet) 6 6
Rear (minimum; feet) 15 15
(c) Accessory Building Siting
Allowed location Allowed in rear yard only
Side and rear setbacks (minimum; feet) 5 5
(d) Maximum Building Height
Principal building (feet) 35 35
Accessory building (feet) 20 20
§ 90-110.130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-110.130
1:635
Figure 90-110-7
Cottage Court
(See Table 90-110-7)
(d) Additional regulations. Cottage courts in RM and RH Districts are
subject to compliance with the following additional regulations.
(1) Development size. Cottage courts must contain at least four and no
more than 10 houses arranged around at least two sides of a
courtyard or common open space.
(2) Open space. A unified, contiguous courtyard or common open
space must be provided as the focal point of the cottage house
development.
(3) Building orientation.
a. Houses adjacent to minor streets must have their front
building elevation facing the street, including a building
entrance. All other houses in a cottage court development must
be oriented to, and have a main entry onto a courtyard or
common open space area that is accessible to residents in the
cottage court development.
b. Required courtyards and common open space areas must have
houses on at least two sides.
c. All houses within a cottage court must be located within a
walking distance of 75 feet of a required courtyard or common
open space area.
(4) Vehicular access and parking.
§ 90-110.130 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-110.130
1:636
§ 90-110.140. Backyard cottages. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
a. Vehicular access to parking areas within the cottage court
development may come from the street, an alley or a private
drive.
b. Parking may be provided in attached or detached garages or in
a shared parking area. Common parking areas containing six
or more spaces must be screened from view of abutting Rzoned
lots in accordance with the vehicular use area screening
standards of § 90-430.30. Parking may not be located in street
yards or in the required courtyard or common open space area.
Garages must comply with the regulations of § 90-110.70(c).
(a) Description. A backyard cottage is a small accessory residential
building occupied by a single, self-contained accessory dwelling unit.
Backyard cottages are located on the same lot as but not attached to a
detached house. See also § 90-330.110, Secondary suites.
(b) Where allowed. Backyard cottages are allowed in all R Districts on lots
occupied by a single detached house.
(c) Lot and building regulations. Backyard cottages are subject to
compliance with the lot and building regulations of Table 90-110-8.
Table 90-110-8
Backyard Cottage Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation All R Districts
(a) Lot
Minimum lot area (square feet) Same as required for detached
house
Minimum lot width (feet) Same as required for detached
house
(b) Building Siting
Street setback (minimum; feet) Permitted in rear yard only
Interior side and rear (minimum;
feet)
10
(c) Maximum Building Size
Building height (feet) 24 or height of principal building,
whichever is less
Building floor area (square feet) 700
(d) Additional regulations.
(1) Code compliance. Backyard cottages must comply with all
applicable building and fire codes.
§ 90-110.130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-110.140
1:637
§ 90-110.150. Civic buildings. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(2) Number. No more than one backyard cottage is permitted on a
single lot. Backyard cottages are not permitted on lots occupied by
a secondary suite. (See § 90-330.110.)
(3) Rental. No more than one of the dwelling units on a lot occupied by
backyard cottage may be a rental dwelling unit. Backyard cottages
may not be rented for periods of less than seven consecutive days.
(4) Parking. No additional parking is required for a backyard cottage.
(5) Number of residents. The total number of residents that reside in
the backyard cottage and the detached house, combined, may not
exceed the number permitted for a household.
(6) Design. The design regulations of this subsection apply to all newly
constructed backyard cottages.
a. Exterior finish materials. The exterior finish material must be
the same or visually match in type, size and placement, the
exterior finish material of the principal dwelling unit.
b. Roof pitch. The roof pitch must be the same as the
predominant roof pitch of the detached house.
c. Trim. Type, size and location of trim elements must match
those of the detached house.
d. Entrances. Entrances to backyard cottages may not face the
nearest side or rear property line unless there is an alley
abutting that property line.
(7) Deed restriction. Before issuance of any permits for a backyard
cottage, the subject property owner must file a deed restriction
with the Register of Deeds stating that the owners of the subject
property agree to comply with all applicable regulations and to
notify all prospective purchasers of such regulations. The deed
restriction must run with the land and be binding upon the property
owner, their heirs and assigns, and upon any parties subsequently
acquiring any right, title, or interest in the property. The deed
restriction must be in a form prescribed by the Community
Development Director.
(a) Description. A civic building is a building occupied by a public or civic
use.
(b) Where allowed. Civic buildings are allowed in all R Districts.
(c) Lot and building regulations. Civic buildings are subject to compliance
with the lot and building regulations of Table 90-110-9.
§ 90-110.140 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-110.150
1:638
Table 90-110-9
Civic Building in R Districts
Regulation RE RL-1 RL-2 RM & RH
(a) Lot
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
40,000 7,200 7,200 7,200
Minimum lot width
(feet)
150 60 60 60
Maximum building
coverage (% of lot)
25 50 50 50
(b) Principal Building Siting
Street setback
(minimum; feet)
25 25 25 25
Interior side
(minimum; feet)
12 10 10 10
Rear (minimum;
feet)
25 25 25 25
(c) Accessory Building Siting
Allowed location Allowed in rear yard only
Side and rear
setbacks (minimum;
feet)
10 5 5 5
(d) Maximum Building Height
Principal building
(feet)
35 35 35 35
Accessory building
(feet)
24 20 20 20
§ 90-110.150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-110.150
1:639
Figure 90-110-8
Civic Building
(See Table 90-110-9)
§ 90-110.150 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-110.150
1:640
DIVISION 90-120
Mixed-Use Districts
§ 90-120.10. Districts established. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Village's mixed-use zoning districts are listed in Table 90-120-1. When
this zoning chapter refers to "mixed-use" zoning districts or "MX" zoning
districts, it is referring to these districts.
Table 90-120-1
Mixed-Use (MX) Districts
Symbol District Name
MX-1 Transitional Mixed-Use
MX-2 Neighborhood Mixed-Use
MX-3 Corridor Mixed-Use
MX-4 Village Mixed-Use
§ 90-120.20. District descriptions. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-120.30. Allowed uses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Uses are allowed in MX Districts in accordance with the use regulations of
Division 90-310.
§ 90-120.40. Lot and building regulations. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Buildings in MX Districts are subject to compliance with the lot and building
regulations of Table 90-120-2.
(a) General. Mixed-use zoning districts are primarily intended to create,
maintain and promote walkable mixed-use development patterns.
(b) MX-1. The MX-1 District is intended to accommodate commercial and
mixed-use buildings in transition areas at the edges of established
residential neighborhoods.
(c) M-X2. The MX-2 District is primarily intended to accommodate small,
neighborhood-scale mixed use-buildings.
(d) MX-3. The MX-3 District is primarily intended to accommodate mixeduse
buildings in mixed-use corridors and nodes.
(e) MX-4. The MX-4 District is primarily intended to accommodate mixeduse
buildings in a walkable village center context.
§ 90-120.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-120.40
1:641
Table 90-120-2
MX District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation MX-1 MX-2 MX-3 MX-4
(a) Lot
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
4,000 4,000 4,000 2,500
Minimum lot area
per dwelling unit
(square feet)
2,000 No minimum; all other regulations
apply.
Minimum lot width
(feet)
40 40 40 25
Maximum building
coverage (% of lot)
55 65 75 90
(b) Principal Building Siting
Primary street
build-to zone
(minimum/
maximum; feet)
25/35 10/20 15/25 5/10
Building frontage
within primary
street build-to zone
(minimum)
NA 60% 60% 80%
Side street build-to
zone (minimum/
maximum; feet)
25/35 10/20 15/25 5/10
Building frontage
within side street
build-to zone
(minimum)
NA 40% 40% 40%
Driveway side
setback (minimum;
feet)
5 5 5 5
Nondriveway side
setback (minimum;
feet)
0 or 5 0 or 5 0 or 5 0 or 5
Rear setback
(minimum; feet)
25 25 25 25
(c) Principal Building Design
Primary street
building width
(maximum; feet)
50 80 NA 100
§ 90-120.40 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-120.40
1:642
Table 90-120-2
MX District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation MX-1 MX-2 MX-3 MX-4
Ground-story
transparency
(minimum)
NA 50% 50% 65%
Upper-story
transparency
(minimum)
NA 20% 20% 20%
Primary streetfacing
entrance
Required in all MX Districts
Ground-story floor
to ceiling height
(minimum; feet)
NA 12 12 14
(d) Principal Building Size
Maximum ground
floor area (square
feet)
1,000 2,000 No
maximum
No
maximum
(e) Parking Siting
Allowed location Not permitted in front yard
Primary street
setback (minimum;
feet)
25 25 25 25
Side street setback
(minimum; feet)
10 10 10 10
Side (minimum;
feet)
5 5 5 5
Rear (minimum;
feet)
5 5 5 5
(f) Accessory Building Siting
Allowed location Allowed in rear yard only
Minimum side and
rear setbacks (feet)
5 5 5 5
Minimum building
separation (feet)
10 10 10 10
(g) Maximum Building Height
Principal building
(feet)
35 35 48 60
Accessory building
(feet)
20 20 20 20
§ 90-120.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-120.40
1:643
Table 90-120-2
MX District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation MX-1 MX-2 MX-3 MX-4
(h) Minimum Building Height
Principal building
(stories)
None None 2 2
Accessory building
(feet)
None None None None
Figure 90-120-1
MX District Lot and Building Regulations
(See Table 90-120-2)
§ 90-120.50. Other regulations. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Buildings and uses in MX Districts are subject to all other applicable
regulations of this zoning chapter, including the following:
(a) Accessory uses and structures. See Division 90-330.
(b) Parking. See Division 90-420.
(c) Landscape and screening. See Division 90-430.
§ 90-120.40 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-120.50
1:644
(d) Signs. See Division 90-440.
(e) Sewer and water service. See Division 90-410.
§ 90-120.50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-120.50
1:645

DIVISION 90-130
Business and Industrial Districts
§ 90-130.10. Districts established. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Village's business and industrial zoning districts are listed in Table
90-130-1. When this zoning chapter refers to "business and industrial" or to
"B" or "M" zoning districts, it is referring to these districts.
Table 90-130-1
B and M Districts
Symbol District Name
B-1 Neighborhood Business
B-2 Community Business
B-3 General Business
B-4 Highway Business
BP Business Park
M-1 Limited Industrial
M-2 General Industrial
M-3 Intensive/Extractive Industrial
§ 90-130.20. District descriptions. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) General. Business and industrial zoning districts are primarily intended
to accommodate and promote neighborhood, community- and regionserving
commercial uses, as well as industrial and employment uses.
(b) B-1. The B-1 District is primarily intended to accommodate lowintensity,
walkable commercial buildings in transition areas at the
edges of established residential neighborhoods.
(c) B-2. The B-2 District is primarily intended to accommodate moderateintensity,
neighborhood-scale commercial buildings along local arterial
or collector streets.
(d) B-3. The B-3 District is primarily intended to accommodate highintensity
commercial buildings along state trunk highways, county
trunk highways, and local arterial street corridors and nodes.
(e) B-4. The B-4 District is primarily intended to accommodate highintensity,
automobile-oriented commercial buildings adjacent to
interstate, state trunk, and county trunk highways.
(f) BP. The BP District is primarily intended to accommodate
manufacturing and warehousing buildings with minimal outdoor
storage of products or materials, as well as office and commercial
§ 90-130.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-130.20
1:647
§ 90-130.30. Allowed uses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Uses are allowed in business and industrial districts in accordance with the
use regulations of Division 90-310.
§ 90-130.40. Lot and building regulations. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
buildings commonly found in business parks located adjacent to
interstate, state trunk, and county trunk highway.
(g) M-1. The M-1 District is primarily intended to accommodate lowintensity,
neighborhood-level manufacturing and warehousing buildings
that are harmonious with adjacent residential or commercial buildings
and lack exterior signs of manufacturing such as fumes, exhaust, noise,
or outdoor storage. M-1 Districts are located along state trunk
highways, county trunk highways, local arterial streets, or collector
streets.
(h) M-2. The M-2 District is primarily intended to accommodate moderateintensity
manufacturing and warehousing buildings where the
manufacturing takes place primarily within a building, but where some
external storage of materials or finished products is allowed. M-2
Districts are located along state trunk highways, county trunk
highways, or local arterial streets.
(i) M-3. The M-3 District is primarily intended to accommodate earth
extraction operations and other high-intensity industrial uses that have
significant potential for adverse impacts on nearby lower intensity land
uses. Rezoning to the M-3 District requires concurrent submittal of a
development plan aimed at ensuring safe, nuisance-free operations
leading systematically to a restored site that can be put to productive
use.
(a) Buildings in business districts are subject to compliance with the lot
and building regulations of Table 90-130-2.
Table 90-130-2
Business District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation B-1 B-2 B-3 B-43 BP
(a) Lot
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
As needed to comply with all other applicable
regulations
Minimum lot area
per dwelling unit
(square feet)
2,400 2,400 NA 2,400 NA
Minimum lot width
(feet)
As needed to comply with all other applicable
regulations
§ 90-130.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-130.40
1:648
Table 90-130-2
Business District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation B-1 B-2 B-3 B-43 BP
(b) Principal Building Siting
Street setback
(minimum; feet)
10 10 10 25 25
Driveway side
setback (minimum;
feet)
15 25 25 25 25
Nondriveway
setback (minimum;
feet)
0 or 10 0 or 10 0 or 5 0 or 10 0 or 10
Rear setback
(minimum; feet)
25 0 or 25 0 or 25 25 25
(c) Principal Building Size
Maximum ground
floor area (square
feet)
1,500 60,000 120,000 No
maximum
No
maximum
(d) Accessory Building Siting
Allowed location Allowed in rear yard only
Minimum side and
rear setbacks (feet)
5 10 5 10 10
Minimum building
separation (feet)
10 10 10 10 10
(e) Maximum Building Height
Principal building
(feet)
30 40 60 90 90
Accessory building
(feet)
15 24 24 24 24
(b) Buildings in industrial districts are subject to compliance with the lot
and building regulations of Table 90-130-3.
Table 90-130-3
Industrial District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation M-1 M-2 M-3
(a) Lot
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
As needed to comply with all other
applicable regulations
§ 90-130.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-130.40
1:649
§ 90-130.50. Other regulations. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Buildings and uses in B and M Districts are subject to all other applicable
regulations of this zoning chapter, including the following:
Table 90-130-3
Industrial District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation M-1 M-2 M-3
Minimum lot area per
dwelling unit (square feet)
NA NA NA
Minimum lot width (feet) As needed to comply with all other
applicable regulations
(b) Principal Building Siting
Street setback (minimum;
feet)
10 10
Driveway side setback
(minimum; feet)
15 25
Nondriveway setback
(minimum; feet)
0 or 10 0 or 10
Rear setback (minimum;
feet)
15 50
Regulations
established in
approved
development
plan (See
Division
90-535.)
(c) Accessory Building Siting
Allowed location Not in street yard
Minimum side and rear
setbacks (feet)
15 50
Minimum building
separation (feet)
10 10
Regulations
established in
approved
development
plan (See
Division
90-535.)
(d) Maximum Building Height
Principal building (feet) 30 60
Accessory building (feet) 30 60
Regulations
established in
approved
development
plan (See
Division
90-535.)
(a) Accessory uses and structures. See Division 90-330.
(b) Parking. See Division 90-420.
(c) Landscape and screening. See Division 90-430.
(d) Signs. See Division 90-440.
§ 90-130.40 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-130.50
1:650
(e) Sewer and water service. See Division 90-410.
(f) M-3 Zoning Map amendments.
(1) Supplemental information. Applications for rezoning to the M-3
District, must be accompanied by the following supplemental
information:
a. Operational plan.
1. A written description of the nature of the proposed
operation, including the type and amount of machinery
and equipment to be used; the source, quantity and
disposition of water to be used; and the nature of the
proposed fill materials.
2. A map showing existing contours, at vertical intervals of at
least five feet, plus existing trees.
3. The depth, by area, of proposed excavations or filling.
4. The proposed screening method, including earth berms,
fences and plantings.
5. The drainage plan during the operations.
b. Restoration plan.
1. Proposed stages of excavation or filling by area.
2. Estimated timetable for commencement and restoration.
3. Proposed contours of the land after completion.
4. General use plan, such as proposed roads and lots for
future urban development, if so zoned.
5. Depth of restored topsoil and location of proposed
plantings or reforestation.
(2) Performance guarantees. Performance guarantees, in the form of a
surety bond or other such method acceptable to the Village Board
and approved by the Village Attorney and the Plan Commission,
upon the advice of the Village Engineer.
a. The applicant, in designing his place of operation, shall give
consideration to operating in compact stages to minimize the
required amount of performance guarantee in any one
guarantee period.
b. Such guarantees shall be for periods not to exceed two years,
with renewals allowed. With each renewal, the Village
Engineer shall advise the Village on the proper amount of
guarantee to cover restoration of operations existing and
proposed for the next period.
§ 90-130.50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-130.50
1:651
(3) Rezoning decisions. In reviewing and acting on M-3 Zoning Map
amendments, the Plan Commission and Village Board must
consider:
a. The effect of the proposed operation on existing roads and
traffic movement in terms of adequacy, safety and efficiency.
b. The effect of the proposed operation on drainage and water
supply and the possibility of soil erosion as a result of the
proposed operation.
c. Practical possibility of restoration of the site in keeping with
probable land use after restoration.
§ 90-130.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-130.50
1:652
DIVISION 90-140
Public Districts
§ 90-140.10. Districts established; descriptions. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
§ 90-140.20. P-1 District. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-140.30. P-2 District. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Districts established. The Village's public zoning districts are listed in
Table 90-140-1. When this zoning chapter refers to "public" zoning
districts or "P" zoning districts, it is referring to these districts.
Table 90-140-1
Public (P) Districts
Symbol District Name
P-1 Neighborhood-Scale
P-2 Campus-Scale
(b) Description. P Districts are primarily intended to accommodate public,
quasi-public, civic and institutional uses, expressly including parks,
open spaces and utility uses.
(a) Purpose. The P-1 (Neighborhood-Scale) Public District is intended to
accommodate small-scale, low-intensity public, civic, and institutional
uses that are commonly found in or near residential neighborhoods.
(b) Allowed uses. Uses are allowed in the P-1 District in accordance with
the use regulations of Division 90-310.
(c) Lot and building regulations. The lot width, building setback and
building height regulations of the most restrictive abutting zoning
district apply to P-1 zoned lots.
(d) Other regulations. Development in P-1 Districts is subject to all other
general development regulations of this zoning chapter, including
parking, landscaping and other regulations of in Article 400.
(a) Purpose. The P-2 (Campus-Scale) Public District is intended to
accommodate development and expansion of large-scale and campustype
public, civic and institutional uses.
(b) Allowed uses. Uses are allowed in the P-2 Districts in accordance with
the use regulations of Division 90-310.
(c) Development review.
(1) Applicability. Unless otherwise expressly exempted, development
review and approval is required before the issuance of any building
§ 90-140.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-140.30
1:653
or development permit in the P-2 District. To comply with the
development review requirements of this section, applicants must
submit and secure approval of an overall institutional master plan
in accordance with the requirements of this section.
(2) Exemptions. The following are exempt from the development
review requirements of this section:
a. Development that complies with a valid, approved institutional
master plan;
b. Interior building alterations if the alteration will not result in
an increase in the number of employees or the creation of or
need for additional parking spaces; and
c. Exterior building modifications that will not result in an
increase in the number of employees or the creation of or need
for additional parking spaces.
(d) Lot and building regulations.
(1) Transitional areas. The size, location, and design of all buildings,
structures, activity areas and other site improvements located
within 100 feet of the boundary of any abutting R Zoning District,
are subject to the lot width, building setback and building height
regulations of the most restrictive abutting R District.
(2) Interior site areas. Areas of a P-2 zoned lot located more than 100
feet from the boundary of an abutting R Zoning District are
governed by the regulations approved at the time of institutional
master plan approval. Institutional master plans must include the
applicant's detailed description of the regulations proposed to be
used.
(3) Multiple principal building and uses. Multiple principal uses and
buildings are allowed on a single lot in the P-2 District.
(e) Institutional master plans.
(1) Purpose. Institutional master plan requirements provide a
framework for development of public, civic and institutional uses in
campus-like settings. Approval of an institutional master plan is
intended to protect the character and integrity of adjacent areas
while allowing flexibility in site development and design that is not
possible when development occurs on a lot-by-lot or building-bybuilding
basis.
(2) Planning area. An institutional master plan must include all land
located within the proposed P-2 District and identify all land uses
within the area extending out at least 200 feet from the P-2 District
boundary.
§ 90-140.30 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-140.30
1:654
(3) Existing property and uses. The institutional master plan must
include a description of land, buildings, and other structures
occupied by the institution as of the date of submission of the
institutional master plan. At a minimum, the following information
must be required:
a. Illustrative site plans showing the footprints of each building
and structure, together with roads, sidewalks, parking,
landscape features and other significant site improvements;
b. Land and building uses;
c. Gross floor area;
d. Building heights;
e. Landscaping and lighting; and
f. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
(4) Uses and development envelope. The institutional master plan
must include a description of all proposed land uses to be allowed
and the land area and development envelope within which future
development will occur. The development envelope must be
described in writing and through the use of drawings or models.
The plan must include the following in describing the development
envelope:
a. Floor area;
b. Height;
c. Setbacks;
d. Total open space; and
e. Total number of motor vehicle and bicycle parking spaces to be
provided.
(5) Transportation plan. The institutional master plan must include a
study that identifies traffic and parking impacts associated with the
proposed use and a plan for mitigation of transportation-related
impacts, including consideration of motorized and nonmotorized
travel.
(6) Approval procedures. Institutional master plans require review and
approval in accordance with the development plan procedures of
Division 90-535.
§ 90-140.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-140.30
1:655

DIVISION 90-150
Agricultural Districts
§ 90-150.10. Districts established. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Village's agricultural zoning districts are listed in Table 90-150-1. When
this zoning chapter refers to "agricultural" zoning districts or "AG" zoning
districts, it is referring to these districts.
Table 90-150-1
Agricultural (AG) Districts
Symbol District Name
AG-1 Limited Agriculture
AG-2 General Agriculture
§ 90-150.20. District descriptions. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-150.30. Allowed uses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Uses are allowed in AG Districts in accordance with the use regulations of
Division 90-310.
§ 90-150.40. Lot and building regulations. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Buildings in AG Districts are subject to compliance with the lot and building
regulations of Table 90-150-2.
(a) General. Agricultural zoning districts are generally intended to
accommodate farming, agricultural and traditional rural (principal and
accessory) uses.
(b) AG-1 Limited Agricultural District. The AG-1 District is primarily
intended to accommodate small-scale, low-intensity farming,
agricultural and traditional rural activities, including the keeping of a
limited number of horses or farm animals.
(c) AG-2 General Agricultural. The AG-2 District is primarily intended to
accommodate full-scale farming and agricultural uses in areas where
farming is to be encouraged and generally protected from
encroachment by urban uses. The AG-1 District may also be applied in
areas to prevent premature urban development where sewer, water and
other infrastructure and service capacity is inadequate to safely
accommodate such development.
§ 90-150.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-150.40
1:657
Table 90-150-2
AG District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation AG-1 AG-2
(a) Lot
Maximum lot area (acres) 19.99 No maximum
Minimum lot area (acres) 5 20
Minimum lot width (feet)
Interior lot 300 500
Corner lot 150 40
Maximum building coverage (% of
lot)
25 55
(b) Principal Building Siting
Street setback (minimum; feet) 25 25
Driveway side (minimum; feet) 12 12
Nondriveway side (minimum;
feet)
8 8
Rear (minimum; feet) 25 25
(c) Accessory Building Siting
Allowed location Allowed in rear yard only
Side and rear setbacks (minimum;
feet)
10 10
Building separation (minimum;
feet)
10 10
(d) Maximum Building Height
Principal building (feet) 35 35
Accessory building (feet) 24 24
§ 90-150.50. Horses and farm animals. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
See Division 90-340.
§ 90-150.60. Other regulations. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Buildings and uses in AG Districts are subject to all other applicable
regulations of this zoning chapter, including the following:
(a) Accessory uses and structures. See Division 90-330.
§ 90-150.40 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-150.60
1:658
(b) Parking. See Division 90-420.
(c) Landscape and screening. See Division 90-430.
(d) Signs. See Division 90-440.
(e) Sewer service. The municipal sewer service provisions of § 90-410.10
expressly apply to properties in AG Districts.
(f) Water service. Properties in AG Districts are exempt from the municipal
water service provisions of § 90-410.20.
(g) Building on vacant platted lots. Vacant lots that were platted and
recorded before the effective date specified in § 90-10.30 may built
upon in the AG District to accommodate a residential dwelling unit that
is accessory to an agricultural use. Such lots may be built upon to
accommodate a residential dwelling unit that is not accessory to an
agricultural use only if all of the criteria are met:
(1) The lot cannot be returned to agricultural use by virtue of damage
done to the land as part of subdividing, or its remote accessibility to
farming as a result of surrounding roads and housing;
(2) The soils are suitable for on-site sewage disposal, as verified by the
issuance of necessary Village and other required permits for such
use; and
(3) Information regarding Subsection (g)(1) and (2) of this section is
presented to the Plan Commission for review, and the Plan
Commission determines that the criteria are satisfied, and that
there are no other reasons why the subject lot should not be built
upon, including the widening or extending of highways, etc. The
Plan Commission must indicate in its decision which district lot and
building regulations should be applied to the allowed construction.
§ 90-150.60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-150.60
1:659

DIVISION 90-160
Legacy Districts
§ 90-160.10. PD District. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Legacy district status.
(1) Land classified in a PD Zoning District on the effective date
specified in § 90-10.30 will continue to be classified in the PD
District until it is rezoned at the request of the property owner or
through a Village-initiated rezoning.
(2) No applications to establish new PD Zoning Districts or to expand
the boundaries of existing PD Zoning Districts may be accepted for
processing after the effective date specified in § 90-10.30, except
that PD rezoning applications that were in process on the effective
date specified in § 90-10.30 may continue to be processed and may
be approved. (See the transitional provisions of § 90-10.110.)
(3) The PD Zoning District regulations of this section and all applicable
conditions of approval of the (formerly) approved PD plans govern
the use and development of PD zoned areas.
(b) District regulations.
(1) Permitted uses. Uses permitted by-right in the PD District include
all uses and structures existing on the effective date specified in
§ 90-10.30, including the right to repair and maintain such uses and
structures, except that all proposed remodeling, additions, new
principal or accessory structures, or changes of use require
conditional use approval in accordance with Division 90-550.
(2) Conditional uses. Uses allowed through the conditional use
approval process include all continuations of uses existing on the
effective date specified in § 90-10.30 involving remodeling,
additions or new construction of structures, and all changes of use
from those existing on the effective date specified in § 90-10.30.
(3) Minimum area. In order to be approved, proposed planned
developments must meet the following minimum land area
requirements:
a. Residential and open space uses: 100,000 square feet.
b. Mixed (residential and nonresidential) uses: 200,000 square
feet.
c. Commercial-industrial uses: 200,000 square feet.
(4) Application of regulations. In addition to the uses permitted in the
underlying district, any other use may be permitted as designated
in this section for the PD District, consistent with the regulations of
this section. Individual uses and structures in a planned
§ 90-160.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-160.10
1:661
development district need not comply with the specific lot and
building regulations of the underlying base zoning district,
provided that the spirit and intent of such requirements are
complied with in the total development plan for such project,
consistent with the regulations of this section.
(c) Procedures for approval.
(1) Before officially submitting an application, the applicant must meet
with the Plan Commission for a preliminary discussion as to the
scope and proposed nature of the contemplated development,
especially as it relates to the applicant's intentions to submit a
general or detailed application.
(2) Following the preapplication conference, an application for PD
Zoning Map amendment may be made to the Clerk-Treasurer by
the owner or agent of the property proposed for such development.
The application must be accompanied by the fee that has been
established by the Village and the following information, in
appropriate detail as to the type of approval (general or detailed)
desired:
a. A statement describing the general character of the intended
development and the desirability of applying the requirements
of this district rather than those ordinarily applicable through
basic zoning. The statement should at least include:
1. Statistical data on the total size of the project area, open
space area, residential density computation and proposed
number of units, population analysis, market analysis,
economic analysis, impact upon municipal services and
any other similar data pertinent to a comprehensive
evaluation of the proposed development.
2. A general summary of financial factors, such as the value
of structures, estimated improvement costs, amount
proposed for landscaping and special features, estimated
sale or rental price and total anticipated development cost
of the project.
3. General outline of the intended organizational structure
related to the property owner's association, deed
restrictions and provision of private services.
b. A general development plan and related maps and plans,
including descriptive statements of objectives, principles and
standards used on its formulation of the project, showing at
least the following information as may be required by the Plan
Commission and Village Board to apply the criteria for
approval as set forth in this section:
§ 90-160.10 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-160.10
1:662
1. An accurate map of the project area, including its
relationship to surrounding properties.
2. The pattern of public and private roads, driveways,
parking facilities and intended design standards.
3. The size, arrangement and location of lots or proposed
building groups.
4. The location of recreational and open space areas and
areas reserved or dedicated for public uses, such as a
school, park, etc.
5. The type, size and location of structures.
6. General landscape treatment.
7. Architectural drawings and sketches illustrating the
design and character of the proposed structures.
8. The location of sanitary sewer and water facilities.
9. Existing topography and storm drainage pattern and the
proposed storm drainage system showing basic
topographic changes.
(3) The petition must be referred to the Plan Commission and
processed as a zoning change. Upon completion of the necessary
study and investigation, the Plan Commission must make its
recommendation to the Village Board as to the appropriateness and
desirability of the application of the PD District as it relates to the
suitability of the building, site and development plans and any
additional conditions which it may feel necessary or appropriate.
(4) Upon receipt of the Plan Commission's recommendation, the
Village Board, before taking affirmative action to approve such
petition, must hold a public hearing pursuant to statutory
provisions for zoning amendments. Notice for such hearing must
include reference to the consideration of the proposed project
development plans coincident with the requested zoning change.
(d) Review and approval criteria. The Plan Commission in making its
recommendations, and the Village Board in making its decision, must
consider and determine that:
(1) The proponents of the proposed development have demonstrated
that they intend to start construction within a reasonable period of
time following the approval of the project and requested overlay of
the PD District, and that the development will be carried out
according to a reasonable construction schedule which is
satisfactory to the Village.
§ 90-160.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-160.10
1:663
(2) The proposed development is consistent in all respects with the
purpose of this section and with the spirit and intent of this
chapter; is in conformity with the general plans for community
development; would not be contrary to the general welfare and
economic prosperity of the Village or the immediate neighborhood;
the specific development plans have been prepared with competent
professional advice and guidance; and the benefits and improved
design of the resultant development justifies the variation from the
normal requirements of this chapter through the application of the
PD District.
(3) In the case of proposed residential developments:
a. Such development will create an attractive residential
environment of sustained desirability and economic stability,
including structures in relation to terrain, consideration of safe
pedestrian flow, ready access to recreation space and
coordination with overall plans for the neighborhood.
b. The total average residential density of the project will be
compatible with the general plan.
1. Where the land is in the Urban Holding District, the
average residential density allowable is the average as
specified in the adopted general plan or in the adopted
neighborhood plan for the subject site.
2. For specific project density, computation where the land is
partly or entirely in a basic residential development
district, the project area must be measured to include all
of the land, exclusive of existing public rights-of-way or
public open space easements. The allowable maximum
density must be computed separately for each existing
basic district which applies to the project area, except for
industrial, wetland-floodplain and agricultural districts.
The density must be computed by multiplying the area in
each such district by the percentage factor given in Table
90-160-1, and then dividing the result by the number of
square feet per family as required by the district. The total
allowable density for the project is the sum of such
individual computations. If the project includes wetlands
or floodplains, the maximum density may be increased by
the percentage of such land, but no more than 40%.
§ 90-160.10 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-160.10
1:664
Table 90-160-1
PD District Density
District Percentage
Lot Area per Dwelling
Unit
(square feet)
RE 100 1
RL-1 90 12,000
RL-1 85 9,000
RL-1 80 7,200
RL-1 75 6,000
RL-1 90 6,000
RL-1 85 4,500
RL-1 80 3,600
RL-1 75 3,000
RM-1 100 3,600
RM-2 100 2,700
RM-3 100 1,500
RH-1 100 1,000
B-1 100 2,700
B-2 100 2,700
B-3 100 2,700
NOTE:
1 As determined in the adopted general or
neighborhood plan.
3. An increase in the allowable maximum density, not to
exceed 10%, may be permitted upon recommendation of
the Plan Commission, and the increased density is justified
in terms of the relationship to open areas, service demand
and the total quality and character of the project.
4. The population composition of the development will not
result in adverse effects from that anticipated in the
general plan upon the community's capacity to provide
needed school or other municipal service facilities.
5. An adequate guarantee is provided for permanent
retention as open area of open land area resulting from the
application of the regulations of this section, either by
private reservation or by dedication to the public.
§ 90-160.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-160.10
1:665
(4) In the case of proposed commercial developments:
a. The economic practicality of the proposed development can be
justified on the basis of purchasing potential competitive
relationship and demonstrated tenant interest.
b. The proposed development will be adequately served by offstreet
parking and truck service facilities.
c. Locations for entrances and exits have been designed to
prevent unnecessary interference with the safe and efficient
movement of traffic on surrounding streets, and the
development will not create an adverse effect on the general
traffic pattern of the area.
d. The architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting and
general site development will result in an attractive and
harmonious service area compatible with, and not adversely
affecting, the property values of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(5) In the case of proposed industrial developments:
a. The operational character, physical plan arrangement and
architectural design of buildings will be compatible with the
latest in performance standards and industrial development
design, and will not result in an adverse effect upon the
property values of the surrounding neighborhood.
b. The proposed development will have adequate provision for
off-street parking and truck service areas, and will be
adequately served by rail or highway facilities.
c. The proposed development is properly related to the total
transportation system of the Village and will not result in an
adverse effect on the safety and efficiency of the public streets.
(6) In the case of mixed developments:
a. The proposed mixture of uses produces a unified composite
which is compatible within itself and which, as a total
development entity, is compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood and consistent with the general objectives of the
general plan.
b. Various types of uses conform to the general requirements as
set forth in this section which are applicable to projects of such
character.
c. Allowable maximum residential density must be computed in
the same manner as provided in Subsection (d)(3)b2 of this
section. Such figure must then be reduced by the percentage
which any nonresidential use, landscaped area, pedestrian
§ 90-160.10 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-160.10
1:666
malls or other areas which, in the opinion of the Plan
Commission, contribute to the enhancement of the total
project environment which may be excluded. The resulting
allowable maximum density may be increased by the addition
of residential units located in the same building with a
nonresidential use, on the basis of one dwelling unit for each
3,600 square feet of nonresidential use area excluded from the
normal density computation.
(e) Final decisionmaking.
(1) The Village Board, after due consideration, may deny the petition
as submitted, approve the petition or approve the petition subject
to additional conditions.
(2) The general or detailed approval of a petition and consequent
amending of the Zoning Map must be based on and include
conditions to the building, site and operational plans for the
development as approved by the Village Board.
a. General approval. Plans submitted for such approval need not
necessarily be completely detailed at the time of overlay
zoning, provided that they are of sufficient detail to satisfy the
Plan Commission and Village Board as to the general
character, scope and appearance of the proposed development.
Such preliminary plan must at least designate the pattern of
proposed streets; the size and arrangement of lots as in the
preliminary platting process, which may indeed also be
involved; the basic pattern of land use; and illustrate a typical
example of the development proposed. The approval of such
preliminary plan must be conditioned upon the subsequent
submittal and approval of more specific and detailed plans as
the development progresses so that all detailed approvals are
complete before an occupancy certificate is required.
b. Detailed approval. Plans submitted for detailed approval must
be sufficiently precise so that all required information is
identified, and that any approvals given are all that would be
necessary prior to issuance of a zoning permit.
(3) Any subsequent change or addition to the plans or use must first be
submitted to the Plan Commission for approval and if, in the
opinion of the Plan Commission, such change or addition
constitutes a substantial alteration of the original plan, a public
hearing before the Village Board is required in accordance with the
Zoning Map amendment procedures of this zoning chapter.
§ 90-160.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-160.10
1:667

DIVISION 90-170
Master Plan Development District
§ 90-170.10. Purpose and intent. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The MPD (Master Plan Development) District is established to
accommodate development that would be difficult or impossible to carry
out under otherwise applicable zoning regulations. Different types of MPDs
will promote different planning goals. In general, however, all MPDs are
intended to result in development that is consistent with the Village's
adopted plans and that provides greater public benefits than could be
achieved using conventional zoning regulations. MPDs are also generally
intended to promote one or more of the following:
§ 90-170.20. Initiation of amendment. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Applications to establish an MPD District or expand the boundaries of an
existing MPD District may be initiated only by the owner of the subject
property or the owner's agent.
§ 90-170.30. Statement of intent. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Each MPD application must include a written explanation describing how
the proposed development meets the purpose and intent described in
(a) Variety in housing types and sizes to accommodate households of all
ages, sizes, incomes and lifestyle choices;
(b) Compact, mixed-use development patterns where residential,
commercial, employment, civic, and open space areas are located in
close proximity to one another;
(c) A transportation network designed to accommodate safe and efficient
motorized and nonmotorized travel;
(d) Direct, safe and convenient nonmotorized travel routes within the
boundaries of the development site, as well as connections to abutting
properties;
(e) Buildings and other improvements that by their arrangement, massing,
design, character and site design elements establish a quality, livable
environment;
(f) Sustainable development practices;
(g) Incorporation of open space amenities and natural resource features
into the development design;
(h) Low-impact development (LID) and best management practices for
managing stormwater; and
(i) Flexibility and creativity in responding to changing social, economic
and market conditions.
§ 90-170.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-170.30
1:669
§ 90-170.10 and the supplemental review and approval criteria of
§ 90-170.40(b).
§ 90-170.40. Approval procedures. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Overview of required approval process.
(1) A property owner request for rezoning to the MPD Zoning District
requires review and approval of a Zoning Map amendment (See
Division 90-530.), which is processed concurrently with a
development plan. (See Division 90-535.)
(2) After approval of the Zoning Map amendment and development
plan, site plan review and approval is required in accordance with
the procedures of Division 90-540.
(3) No building permit may be issued and no building or development
may occur in an MPD Zoning District until a zoning compliance
determination has been issued.
(b) Supplemental review and approval criteria. In making
recommendations and decisions on MPD District Zoning Map
amendments, review and decisionmaking bodies must consider the
Zoning Map amendment criteria of § 90-530.80 and the following
factors:
(1) Whether the proposed master planned development is consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan and any other adopted plans for the
subject area;
(2) Whether the development plan complies with the MPD District
provisions of this division;
(3) Whether the development will result in public benefits that are
equal to or greater than those that would have resulted from
development under conventional zoning (non-MPD) regulations;
and
(4) Whether appropriate terms and conditions have been imposed on
the approval to protect the interests of surrounding property
owners and residents, existing and future residents of the MPD and
the general public.
(c) Restrictive covenants. No building permit may be issued, and no
building or development may occur in an MPD District until covenants
necessary to reasonably ensure continued compliance with the
approved development plan are recorded in the County Clerk's office.
Such covenants may be established in a subdivision plat or in a
separately recorded legal instrument. In order that the public interest
may be protected, the Village of Mount Pleasant must be made
beneficiary of the covenants pertaining to such matters as location of
uses, height of structure, setbacks, screening, and access. Such
§ 90-170.30 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-170.40
1:670
§ 90-170.50. Abandonment. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Abandonment of an approved MPD requires that the property be rezoned
to another zoning district in accordance with the Zoning Map amendment
procedures or that a new MPD be approved following the procedures of
§ 90-170.40.
§ 90-170.60. Use regulations and lot and building standards. [Ord.
No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The use regulations and lot and building standards that apply within an
MPD Zoning District must be established at the time of development plan
approval by the Village Board.
§ 90-170.70. Other development regulations and standards. [Ord.
No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Unless otherwise expressly provided in the approved development plan,
properties within the MPD District are subject to all other applicable
provisions of this zoning chapter and the subdivision regulations.10 The
MPD District is expressly intended to accommodate the use of alternative
standards for streets and other public improvements based on the approved
development plans. The development plan must specify the deviations
proposed from otherwise applicable public improvement standards if
deviations from otherwise applicable standards are proposed.
covenants must provide that the Village of Mount Pleasant may enforce
compliance of the covenants, and further provide that amendment
of the covenants requires Village Board approval and the filing of
record of a written amendment to covenants, endorsed by the Plan
Commission.
(d) Issuance of building permits. Building permits may be issued only after
a zoning compliance determination has been issued and covenants have
been recorded. Any permits issued must be in accordance with the
approved development plan.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 74, Subdivisions.
§ 90-170.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-170.70
1:671

ARTICLE 200
Overlay Districts
DIVISION 90-210
Overlay Districts Generally
§ 90-210.10. Purpose and intent. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-210.20. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-210.30. Procedure. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The boundaries of overlay zoning districts are shown on the official Zoning
Map. The following procedures apply to the establishment, amendment or
termination of overlay districts unless otherwise expressly stated.
(a) As the name implies, overlay zoning districts "overlay" applicable base
zoning district classifications to alter some or all of the base district
zoning regulations that apply to particular sites.
(b) Overlay districts work to modify or supplement the regulations imposed
by a base zoning district when necessary to address special situations
or accomplish specific objectives.
(c) Overlay zoning is intended to be used when the base zoning applied to
an area remains generally appropriate, but when an additional,
modified or eliminated requirement could help implement the Village's
planning goals or address an area-specific planning, design or land use
regulation issue.
(a) All applicable regulations of the underlying base zoning district apply to
property in an overlay district unless otherwise expressly stated in the
overlay district regulations.
(b) When overlay district regulations conflict with regulations that
otherwise apply in the underlying base zoning district, the regulations
of the applicable overlay govern. If property is classified in multiple
overlay districts and the regulations of one overlay district conflict with
the regulations of another overlay district, the more restrictive
regulation governs.
(a) Overlay district regulations must be established, amended or
terminated in accordance with the zoning chapter text amendment
procedures of Division 90-520.
(b) Except as otherwise expressly stated, Zoning Map amendments
establishing, expanding or reducing the boundaries of an overlay
district or terminating all or part of an overlay district must be
processed in accordance with the Zoning Map amendment procedures
of Division 90-530.
§ 90-210.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-210.30
1:673

ARTICLE 300
Uses
DIVISION 90-310
Allowed Uses
§ 90-310.10. Use Table. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Principal uses are allowed in accordance with Table 90-310-1.
§ 90-310.20. Interpretation of Use Table. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(a) Use classification system. Uses are listed in the first column of Table
90-310-1. This zoning chapter classifies uses into categories and
subcategories, as explained in Division 90-320. In some cases, specific
use types are listed in addition to the use categories and subcategories.
(b) Permitted uses. Uses identified with a " " are permitted as-of-right in
the subject zoning district, subject to compliance with any
supplemental regulations identified in the final column of Table
90-310-1 and with all other applicable regulations of this zoning
chapter.
(c) Conditional uses. Uses identified with a " " are allowed only if reviewed
and approved in accordance with the conditional use procedures of
Division 90-550.
(d) Prohibited uses. Uses identified with a "–" are expressly prohibited.
Uses that are not listed in the Table and that cannot be reasonably
interpreted (as stated in § 90-320.50) to fall within any defined use
category or subcategory are also prohibited.
(e) Uses prohibited on ground floor of building. Uses identified with a "?"
are allowed in the subject zoning district but only when located above
the ground-floor. Such uses are prohibited on the ground floor.
(f) Reference. The final (Reference) column of Table 90-310-1 includes a
cross-reference to the use definition and any applicable supplemental
use regulations that apply to the use. Unless otherwise expressly
stated, compliance with supplemental use regulations is required
regardless of whether the use is permitted as-of-right or requires
conditional use approval. Bracketed numbers also refer to use-specific
conditions, which are included as footnotes immediately following the
Use Table.
(g) Accessory use. Only a limited number commonplace accessory uses are
identified by Table 90-310-1. Other customary accessory uses may be
allowed in conjunction with principal uses permitted by right or by
conditional use approval, subject to compliance with all applicable
accessory use regulations of Division 90-330.
§ 90-310.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-310.20
1:675
Table 90-310-1
Use Table
= Permitted by-right = Conditional use
? = Must be above ground
floor — = Prohibited use
USE
CATEGORY Residential Mixed-Use Business Industrial Public Agricul.
Use
subcategory
Specific
Use Type RE RL
RM
RH MX1MX2MX3MX4B1 B2 B3 B4 BP M1 M2 M3 P1 P2 AG1AG2
Description
and
Supplemental
Regulations
RESIDENTIAL
Household living
Single
household
(per lot)
— — — — — — — § 90-320.60(a)
Two
households
(per lot)
— — — — — — — — § 90-320.60(a)
Three or
more
households
(per lot)
— — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.60(a)
Group living
Community
living
arrangement
(up to 8
residents)
— — — — — — — § 90-320.60(b)
Community
living
arrangement
(9 to 15
residents)
— — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.60(b)
Community
living
arrangement
(over 16
residents)
— — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.60(b)
Institutional
residential
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.60(b)
PUBLIC/CIVIC
§ 90-310.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-310.20
1:676
Table 90-310-1
Use Table
= Permitted by-right = Conditional use
? = Must be above ground
floor — = Prohibited use
USE
CATEGORY Residential Mixed-Use Business Industrial Public Agricul.
Use
subcategory
Specific
Use Type RE RL
RM
RH MX1MX2MX3MX4B1 B2 B3 B4 BP M1 M2 M3 P1 P2 AG1AG2
Description
and
Supplemental
Regulations
Airport — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.70(a)
Cemetery — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.70(b)
Club or
lodge
— — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.70(c)
College or
university
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.70(d)
Detention
or
correctional
facility
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.70(e)
Governmental
service
— — — — — § 90-320.70(f)
Hospital — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.70(g)
Library or
cultural
exhibit
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.70(h)
Natural
resource
preservation
§ 90-320.70(i)
Parks and
recreation
— — — § 90-320.70(j)
Religious
assembly
— — — — — — — — § 90-320.70(k)
Safety
service
§ 90-320.70(l)
School — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.70(m)
§ 90-310.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-310.20
1:677
Table 90-310-1
Use Table
= Permitted by-right = Conditional use
? = Must be above ground
floor — = Prohibited use
USE
CATEGORY Residential Mixed-Use Business Industrial Public Agricul.
Use
subcategory
Specific
Use Type RE RL
RM
RH MX1MX2MX3MX4B1 B2 B3 B4 BP M1 M2 M3 P1 P2 AG1AG2
Description
and
Supplemental
Regulations
Utilities
and public
services,
minor
§ 90-320.70(n)
Utilities
and public
services,
major
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.70(n)
COMMERCIAL
Animal service
Boarding — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(a)
Grooming — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(a)
Veterinary — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(a)
Assembly or entertainment
Type 1 — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(b)
Type 2 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(b)
Business
or trade
school
— — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(c)
Commercial service
Consumer
maintenance
and repair
service
— — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(d)
Personal
service
— — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(d)
§ 90-310.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-310.20
1:678
Table 90-310-1
Use Table
= Permitted by-right = Conditional use
? = Must be above ground
floor — = Prohibited use
USE
CATEGORY Residential Mixed-Use Business Industrial Public Agricul.
Use
subcategory
Specific
Use Type RE RL
RM
RH MX1MX2MX3MX4B1 B2 B3 B4 BP M1 M2 M3 P1 P2 AG1AG2
Description
and
Supplemental
Regulations
Studio or
instructional
service
— — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(d)
Day care
Adult day
care
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(e)
Family
day-care
home
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(e)
Day-care
center (up
to 30
enrollees)
— — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(e)
Day-care
center
(more
than 30
enrollees)
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(e)
Financial service
Convenient
cash
business
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(f)
All other
financial
services
— — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(f)
Funeral
or
mortuary
service
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(g)
Lodging
§ 90-310.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-310.20
1:679
Table 90-310-1
Use Table
= Permitted by-right = Conditional use
? = Must be above ground
floor — = Prohibited use
USE
CATEGORY Residential Mixed-Use Business Industrial Public Agricul.
Use
subcategory
Specific
Use Type RE RL
RM
RH MX1MX2MX3MX4B1 B2 B3 B4 BP M1 M2 M3 P1 P2 AG1AG2
Description
and
Supplemental
Regulations
Bed-andbreakfast
inn
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(h)
Hotel or
motel
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(h)
Shortterm
rental
— — — — — — — § 90-320.80(h)
Office
Business
or
professional
— — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(i)
Medical
or health
practitioner
(including
clinics)
— — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(i)
Parking,
nonaccessory
— — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(j)
Restaurants and bars
Restaurant — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(k)
Bar — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(k)
Retail sales
Consumer
shopping
and
convenience
goods
— — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(l)
§ 90-310.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-310.20
1:680
Table 90-310-1
Use Table
= Permitted by-right = Conditional use
? = Must be above ground
floor — = Prohibited use
USE
CATEGORY Residential Mixed-Use Business Industrial Public Agricul.
Use
subcategory
Specific
Use Type RE RL
RM
RH MX1MX2MX3MX4B1 B2 B3 B4 BP M1 M2 M3 P1 P2 AG1AG2
Description
and
Supplemental
Regulations
Building
supplies
and
equipment
— — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(l)
Selfservice
storage
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(m)
Sexually
oriented
business
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(n)
Sports and recreation, participant
Indoor — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(o)
Outdoor — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(o)
Vehicle sales and service
Commercial
vehicle
repair/
maintenance
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(p)
Commercial
vehicle
sales or
rental
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(p)
Fuel sales — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(p)
Personal
vehicle
repair/
maintenance
— — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(p)
§ 90-310.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-310.20
1:681
Table 90-310-1
Use Table
= Permitted by-right = Conditional use
? = Must be above ground
floor — = Prohibited use
USE
CATEGORY Residential Mixed-Use Business Industrial Public Agricul.
Use
subcategory
Specific
Use Type RE RL
RM
RH MX1MX2MX3MX4B1 B2 B3 B4 BP M1 M2 M3 P1 P2 AG1AG2
Description
and
Supplemental
Regulations
Personal
vehicle
sales or
rental
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(p)
Truck
stop
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(p)
Vehicle
body and
paint
finishing
shop
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.80(p)
INDUSTRIAL
Junk/
salvage
yard
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.90(a)
Manufacturing, production and industrial service
Artisan — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.90(b)
Limited — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.90(b)
General — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.90(b)
Intensive — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.90(b)
Mining/
quarrying
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.90(c)
Recycling service
Limited — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.90(d)
General — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.90(d)
Warehousing, wholesaling, freight movement
§ 90-310.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-310.20
1:682
Table 90-310-1
Use Table
= Permitted by-right = Conditional use
? = Must be above ground
floor — = Prohibited use
USE
CATEGORY Residential Mixed-Use Business Industrial Public Agricul.
Use
subcategory
Specific
Use Type RE RL
RM
RH MX1MX2MX3MX4B1 B2 B3 B4 BP M1 M2 M3 P1 P2 AG1AG2
Description
and
Supplemental
Regulations
Indoor — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.90(e)
Outdoor — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.90(e)
Waste-related use
Demolition
debris
landfill
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.90(f)
Solid
waste
separation
facility
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.90(f)
Transfer
station
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.90(f)
AGRICULTURE
Agritourism— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.100(a)
Community
garden
§ 90-320.100(b)
Crop
agriculture
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.100(c)
Horses,
livestock
and farm
animals
(keeping/
raising)
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.100(d);
Division
90-340
OTHER
Drive-in
or drivethrough
establishment
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-320.110(a)
§ 90-310.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-310.20
1:683
Table 90-310-1
Use Table
= Permitted by-right = Conditional use
? = Must be above ground
floor — = Prohibited use
USE
CATEGORY Residential Mixed-Use Business Industrial Public Agricul.
Use
subcategory
Specific
Use Type RE RL
RM
RH MX1MX2MX3MX4B1 B2 B3 B4 BP M1 M2 M3 P1 P2 AG1AG2
Description
and
Supplemental
Regulations
Accessory uses (major)
Backyard
cottage
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-110.140
Home
occupation
— — — — — — — § 90-330.60
Secondary
suite
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — § 90-330.110
§ 90-310.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-310.20
1:684
DIVISION 90-320
Use Classification System
§ 90-320.10. Description of system. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
This division describes the system used to classify and define principal uses
in this zoning chapter.
§ 90-320.20. Use categories. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
This zoning chapter classifies principal land uses into seven major
groupings. These major groupings are referred to as "use categories." The
use categories are as follows:
§ 90-320.30. Use subcategories. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Each use category is further divided into more specific subcategories. Use
subcategories classify principal land uses and activities based on common
functional, product or physical characteristics, such as the type and amount
of activity, the type of customers or residents, and how goods or services
are sold or delivered and site conditions.
§ 90-320.40. Specific use types. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Some use subcategories are further broken down to identify specific types
of uses that are regulated differently than the subcategory as a whole.
§ 90-320.50. Classification of uses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Community Development Director is authorized to assign proposed
land uses to the appropriate category and subcategory based on the
provisions of this division. In doing so, the Community Development
Director is authorized to determine the most similar and thus most
appropriate use category, subcategory or specific use type based on the
actual or projected characteristics of the principal use or activity in
relationship to the use category, subcategory and specific use type
descriptions provided in this division. In making such determinations, the
Community Development Director must consider:
(a) Residential. (See § 90-320.60.)
(b) Public and civic. (See § 90-320.70.)
(c) Commercial. (See § 90-320.80.)
(d) Industrial. (See § 90-320.90.)
(e) Agricultural. (See § 90-320.100.)
(f) Other. (See § 90-320.110.)
(a) The types of activities that typically occur in conjunction with the use;
§ 90-320.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-320.50
1:685
§ 90-320.60. Residential uses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The residential use category includes uses that provide for long-term
residential occupancy by individual households or by groups of people living
together in a nonhousehold setting.
(b) The types of equipment and processes to be used;
(c) The existence, number and frequency of residents, customers or
employees;
(d) Parking demands of the use; and
(e) Other factors deemed relevant to a use determination.
(a) Household living. Household living is residential occupancy of a
dwelling unit by a single household for tenancy periods of 29
consecutive days or more, including single-household, two-household,
three-household, and three-or-more-household uses.
(1) Specific household living use types.
a. Single household: one principal dwelling unit on a single lot,
which may also include an accessory dwelling unit in the form
of a secondary suite or backyard cottage, if allowed by the
subject zoning district.
b. Two households: two principal dwelling units on a single lot.
c. Three or more households: three or more principal dwelling
units occupying a single building on a single lot.
(b) Group living. Group living is residential occupancy of a building or any
portion of a building by a group other than a household. Tenancy is
typically arranged on a long-term (29 consecutive days or longer) basis.
Buildings or spaces occupied by group living uses contain individual
rooms with private or shared bathroom facilities and may also contain
shared kitchen facilities, and/or common dining and living areas for
residents. Residents may or may not receive any combination of care,
training, or treatment, but those receiving such services must reside at
the site. Examples of group living uses include fraternities, sororities,
convents, monasteries, nursing homes and the following:
(1) Specific group living use types.
a. Adult family home: as defined in § 50.01(1), Wis. Stats.
b. Community living arrangement: as defined in § 46.03(22), Wis.
Stats.
c. Foster home/treatment foster home: as defined in §§ 48.02(6)
and 48.02(17q), Wis. Stats.
§ 90-320.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-320.60
1:686
§ 90-320.70. Public and civic uses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The public and civic use category includes public, quasi-public, civic and
institutional uses.
(2) Use-specific conditions of approval. In districts that require
conditional use approval (See Table 90-310-1.), the number of
residents in a group living use may not exceed the number of
bedrooms in the building.
(a) Airport: facilities from which FAA-certified aircraft take off, land and
operate, including customary accessory uses and structures; also
includes passenger ticketing, loading and unloading facilities.
(b) Cemetery: lands and facilities for the interment of humans or domestic
household pets, including columbariums and mausoleums.
(c) Club or lodge: the use of a building or lot by a membership-based
organization that restricts access to its facility to bona fide, dues-paying
members and their occasional guests and in which the primary activity
is a service not carried on as a business enterprise. Clubs and lodges
are characterized by definite membership qualifications, payment of
fees and dues, regular meetings and a constitution and bylaws.
(1) Use-specific conditions of approval. The following conditions apply
in districts that require conditional use approval for club or lodge
uses (See Table 90-310-1.):
a. Clubs and lodges must be located on lots with frontage on
arterial or collector streets.
b. Clubs and lodges are prohibited in open, active tax increment
finance districts.
(d) College or university: academic institutions of higher learning that are
accredited or recognized by the state and offer courses of general or
specialized study.
(e) Detention or correctional facility: an institution operated by the Village,
the state, the federal government or a private party under contract with
the Village, the state or the federal government for the confinement and
punishment and treatment or rehabilitation of offenders under the
jurisdiction of a court.
(f) Governmental service: Village, county, state or federal government
services or facilities that are not otherwise classified under the use
classification system of this division.
(1) Use-specific conditions of approval. In districts that require
conditional use approval for governmental service uses (See Table
90-310-1.), such uses must be located on lots with frontage on
arterial or collector streets.
§ 90-320.60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-320.70
1:687
(g) Hospital: uses providing medical or surgical care to patients and
offering inpatient (overnight) care.
(h) Library or cultural exhibit: museum-like preservation and exhibition of
objects in one or more of the arts and sciences, gallery exhibition of
works of art or library collections of books, manuscripts and similar
materials operated by a public or quasi-public agency.
(i) Natural resource preservation: undeveloped land left in a natural state
for specific use as visual open space or for environmental purposes.
Typical uses include wildlife or nature preserves, arboretums, and flood
management projects.
(j) Parks and recreation: recreational, social or multipurpose uses
associated with public parks and open spaces, including playgrounds,
playfields, play courts, community centers and other facilities typically
associated with public parks and open space areas: also includes public
and private golf courses and tennis clubs.
(k) Religious assembly: the conduct of organized religious services.
Examples include synagogues, temples, mosques and churches.
(1) Use-specific conditions of approval. The following conditions apply
in districts that require conditional use approval for religious
assembly uses (See Table 90-310-1.):
a. All impervious surfaces on the subject count as building
coverage for purposes of determining compliance with
maximum building coverage requisitions.
b. Religious assembly uses are prohibited in open, active tax
increment finance districts.
(l) Safety service. Establishments that provide fire, police or life protection
services, together with the incidental storage and maintenance of
necessary vehicles. Typical uses include fire stations and police
stations.
(1) Use-specific conditions of approval. In districts that require
conditional use approval for safety service use (See Table
90-310-1.), such uses must be located on lots with frontage on
arterial or collector streets.
(m) School: public and private schools at the primary, elementary, middle
school or high school level that provide basic, compulsory, statemandated
education.
(n) Utilities and public services.
(1) Specific utilities and public services use types.
a. Minor: infrastructure services that typically have very limited
adverse visual or operational impacts and that require location
§ 90-320.70 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-320.70
1:688
§ 90-320.80. Commercial uses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The commercial use category includes uses that provide a business service
or involve the selling, leasing or renting of merchandise to the general
public. The commercial use subcategories are as follows.
in or very near the area where the service is provided. Minor
utilities and public service facilities do not regularly have
employees at the site and typically have few if any impacts on
surrounding areas. Typical uses include: underground electric
distribution substations; electric transformers; water
conveyance systems; stormwater facilities and conveyance
systems; telephone switching equipment and emergency
communication warning/broadcast facilities.
b. Major: infrastructure services that typically have substantial
visual or operational impacts on nearby areas. Typical uses
include high-voltage electric substations, utility-scale power
generation facilities and utility-scale water storage facilities,
such as water towers and reservoirs.
(a) Animal service: uses that provide goods and services for care of
animals, including the following use subcategories:
(1) Specific animal service use types.
a. Boarding: the keeping of and care for companion animals for
remuneration or profit. Typical uses include boarding kennels,
pet resorts/hotels, doggy or pet day-care facilities, pet foster
care homes, dog training centers and animal rescue shelters.
b. Grooming: grooming of companion animals, including dog
bathing and clipping salons and pet grooming shops. No
outside animal runs or kennels are allowed unless located in a
zoning district that permits boarding, in which case the
regulations that apply to animal boarding must be met.
c. Veterinary. Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics staffed by
veterinarians.
(2) Use-specific conditions of approval. The following conditions apply
in districts that require conditional use approval for animal service
uses (See Table 90-310-1.):
a. No outside animal runs or kennels are allowed unless located
in a zoning district that permits animal boarding, in which case
the regulations and procedures that apply to animal boarding
must be met.
b. Any building or outdoor enclosure in which animals are
boarded or exercised must be set back at least 100 feet from
any principal residential dwelling unit on an adjacent lot.
§ 90-320.70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-320.80
1:689
(b) Assembly and entertainment: buildings and other facilities that
accommodate public assembly for spectator-oriented sports,
amusement, or entertainment events. Typical uses include auditoriums,
stadiums, banquet halls, event centers, theaters and cinemas.
(1) Specific assembly and entertainment use types.
a. Type 1: indoor assembly and entertainment uses with a seating
or occupant capacity of no more than 250 persons.
b. Type 2: outdoor assembly and entertainment uses and indoor
assembly and entertainment uses with a seating or occupant
capacity of more than 250 persons.
(c) Business or trade school: uses in an enclosed building that focus on
teaching the skills needed to perform a particular job. Examples include
schools of cosmetology, modeling academies, computer training
facilities, vocational schools, administrative business training facilities
and similar uses. Schools and other training facilities that involve
outdoor work or training activities are classified general
manufacturing, production and industrial service uses.
(d) Commercial service: uses that provide low-impact repair, maintenance
and improvement services to individual consumers and small
businesses.
(1) Specific commercial service use types.
a. Consumer maintenance and repair service: uses that provide
maintenance, cleaning and repair services for consumer goods
on a site other than that of the customer (i.e., customers bring
goods to the site of the repair/maintenance business). Typical
uses include laundry and dry cleaning pick-up shops, tailors,
taxidermists, dressmakers, shoe repair, picture framing shops,
copy shops, locksmiths, vacuum repair shops, electronics
repair shops and similar establishments. Businesses that offer
repair and maintenance service for large equipment or
technicians who visit customers' homes or places of business
are classified as classified general manufacturing, production
and industrial service uses.
b. Personal service: uses that provide personal support and
improvement services to individual consumers. Typical uses
include barbers, hair and nail salons, tanning salons, travel
agencies, and day spas; also includes uses involved in
providing tattoos, piercing and similar forms of body art.
c. Studio or instructional service: uses that provide individual or
small group instruction or training in fine arts, music, dance,
drama, fitness, language or similar activities; also includes
dance studios, ballet academies, yoga studios, martial arts
instruction, tutoring, photography studios and other studios
§ 90-320.80 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-320.80
1:690
for artists that do not involve the use of power tools or power
machinery.
(e) Day care: uses licensed by the state and providing care and supervision
for children or adults away from their primary residence for more than
four hours and less than 24 hours per day.
(1) Specific day care use types.
a. Adult day care: a day care for elderly and/or adults with
disabilities.
b. Family day-care home: a day care for eight or fewer individuals
under seven years of age. Family day-care homes are operated
from a residential dwelling unit by one or more members of the
household who reside in the dwelling unit.
c. Day-care center. A day care for nine or more individuals under
seven years of age.
(f) Financial service: uses related to the exchange, lending, borrowing and
safe-keeping of money. Automatic teller machines, kiosks and similar
facilities that do not have on-site employees or amplified sound are not
classified as financial service uses if they meet the criteria for
classification as an accessory use. (See Division 90-330.)
(1) Specific financial service use types.
a. Convenient cash business: establishments that provide
nontraditional, short-term consumer loans in which the
consumer receives cash in exchange for giving the lender a
post-dated check, title to a motor vehicle, or electronic access
to the consumer's bank account for the amount of the loan for a
period of time before negotiating the check or for payment to
the lender of an agreed-upon finance fee or refinancing or
consolidating such transaction. Such businesses expressly
include licensed lenders, pursuant to § 138.09, Wis. Stats.,
pawnbrokers, pursuant to § 138.10, Wis. Stats., payday loan
lenders under § 138.14, Wis. Stats., title loan lenders under
§ 138.16, Wis. Stats., currency exchanges under § 218.05, Wis.
Stats., and similar businesses.
b. Financial institution: any business authorized to do business
under state or federal laws relating to financial institutions,
including, without limitation, banks and trust companies,
savings banks, building and loan associations, savings and loan
associations and credit unions. This term does not include a
convenient cash business.
(g) Funeral and mortuary service: uses that provide services related to the
death of a human or companion animal, including funeral homes and
mortuaries.
§ 90-320.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-320.80
1:691
(h) Lodging: uses that provide temporary overnight or short-term sleeping
accommodations or lodging for guests paying a fee or other form of
compensation. Lodging uses sometimes provide food or entertainment,
primarily to registered guests. Lodging use types include: bed-andbreakfast
inns, hotels and motels, and short-term rentals and overnight
shelters.
(1) Specific lodging use types.
a. Bed-and-breakfast inn: a lodging establishment conducted
within a detached house in which the resident owner/operator
offers six or fewer guest rooms and meal service to overnight
guests. Uses that provide meal service to those who are not
overnight guests are classified as restaurants.
b. Hotel or motel: a lodging establishment other than a bed-andbreakfast
inn or short-term rental. Guest rooms in hotels are
accessed via internal corridors. Guest rooms in motels are
accessed directly from outdoors.
c. Short-term rental: a residential dwelling that is offered for rent
for a fee and for more than six but fewer than 29 consecutive
days. Short-term rentals require a zoning compliance permit
(§ 90-580.20) and all applicable licenses and permits required
by the state.
(i) Office: uses in an enclosed building, customarily performed in an office,
that focus on providing executive, management, administrative,
professional or medical services. Specific office use types include the
following:
(1) Specific office use types.
a. Business or professional office: office uses other than medical,
dental and health practitioners offices. Examples include
corporate offices, law offices, architectural firms, insurance
companies and other executive, management or administrative
offices for businesses and corporations. Also includes:
1. Broadcast and recording studios;
2. Uses engaged in scientific research and testing services
leading to the development of new products and processes
that do not involve the mass production, distribution or
sale of such products or involve the use of hazardous
materials or processes; and
3. Insurance claims adjusters/estimators with no more than
one vehicle inspection bay and no on-site repair facilities.
b. Medical or health practitioner office: office uses related to
diagnosis and treatment of human patients' illnesses, injuries
and physical maladies that can be performed in an office
§ 90-320.80 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-320.80
1:692
setting with no overnight care. Typical uses include offices of
physicians, dentists, psychiatrists, psychologists, chiropractors
and practitioners of massage therapy; also includes:
1. Surgical, rehabilitation and other medical centers that do
not involve overnight patient stays;
2. Medical and dental laboratories;
3. Blood banks; and
4. Dialysis centers.
(j) Parking, nonaccessory: parking that is not provided to comply with
minimum off-street parking requirements of this zoning chapter and
that is not provided exclusively to serve occupants of or visitors to a
particular use, but rather is available to the public at-large. A facility
that provides both accessory parking and nonaccessory parking is
classified as nonaccessory parking.
(k) Restaurants and bars: establishment that serve food or beverages as
their principal business.
(1) Specific restaurant and bar use types.
a. Restaurant: an establishment that serves food or beverages for
on- or off-premises consumption as its principal business.
Typical examples of restaurant uses include sit-down or fine
dining restaurants, cafes, cafeterias, supper clubs, ice cream/
yogurt shops, donut shops, coffee shops and food trucks.
b. Bar: uses that cater primarily to adults 21 years of age and
older and that sell and serve beer, wine or alcoholic liquor for
on-premises consumption as their principal business. Typical
uses include bars, taverns, brewpubs, tasting rooms and
nightclubs; also includes smoking lounges, hookah lounges,
and similar establishments, whether conducted as a principal
or accessory use.
(l) Retail sales: uses involving the sale, lease or rental of new or used
goods to the ultimate consumer. Examples of specific retail use types
include retail sales of convenience goods, consumer shopping goods
and building supplies and equipment.
(1) Specific retail sales use types.
a. Convenience goods: retail sales uses that sell or otherwise
provide 1) sundry goods; 2) products for personal grooming
and for the day-to-day maintenance of personal health; or 3)
food or beverages for off-premises consumption, retail bakeries
and similar uses that provide incidental and accessory food and
beverage service as part of their primary retail sales business.
Typical uses include convenience stores, grocery stores,
§ 90-320.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-320.80
1:693
drugstores, specialty food stores, wine or liquor stores,
newsstands and florists.
b. Consumer shopping goods: retail sales uses that sell or
otherwise provide wearing apparel, fashion accessories,
furniture, household appliances and similar consumer goods,
large and small, functional and decorative, for use,
entertainment, comfort or aesthetics. Typical uses include
clothing stores, department stores, appliance stores, TV and
electronics stores, bike shops, bookstores, costume rental
stores, stationery stores, art galleries, hobby shops, hardware
stores (less than 10,001 square feet), furniture stores, pet
stores and pet supply stores, shoe stores, antique shops,
secondhand stores, record stores, toy stores, sporting goods
stores, variety stores, video stores, musical instrument stores,
medical supplies, office supplies and office furnishing stores
and wig shops.
c. Building supplies and equipment: retail sales uses that sell or
otherwise provide goods to repair, maintain or visually
enhance a structure or premises and that include more than
10,000 square feet of gross floor area or that involve outdoor
storage of goods. Typical uses include home improvement
stores and garden supply stores.
(m) Self-service storage facility: an enclosed use that provides separate,
small-scale, self-service storage facilities leased or rented to individuals
or small businesses. Facilities are designed and used to accommodate
only interior access to storage lockers or drive-up access only from
regular size passenger vehicles and two-axle, noncommercial vehicles.
Facilities with outdoor storage are classified and regulated as outdoor
warehousing, wholesaling and freight movement uses.
(n) Sexually oriented business establishment. Sexually oriented business
establishments include all of the following specific use types.
(1) Specific sexually oriented business establishment use types.
a. Adult amusement or entertainment: amusement or
entertainment that is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on acts or material depicting, describing or relating
to sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas, including but
not limited to topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators or similar
entertainment.
b. Adult bookstore: an establishment wherein 10% or more of its
display area consists of books, films, videos, magazines,
periodicals, games, novelties or other materials that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas
(referred to in this section as "sexually oriented materials"). As
§ 90-320.80 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-320.80
1:694
used in this definition of "adult bookstore," "display area" is
measured as follows:
1. For bookshelves, magazine racks and similar display
devices, display area is calculated by multiplying the
length times the width of such devices. If sexually oriented
materials are mixed with nonsexually oriented materials in
or on such devices, the entire device is considered as
consisting of sexually oriented materials.
2. For table tops, counters, display cases and similar display
devices, display area is calculated by multiplying the
length times the width of each surface on which
merchandise is displayed. If sexually oriented materials
are mixed with nonsexually oriented materials on such
surfaces, the entire surface is considered as consisting of
sexually oriented materials.
3. For walls, display area is the area of the wall enclosed by
the smallest imaginary rectangle that contains each item.
4. The display area of merchandise hanging or suspended
from the ceiling is calculated by multiplying the item's
length or width, whichever is longer, times the item's
height.
c. Adult mini motion-picture theater: an enclosed building with a
capacity of fewer than 50 persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas.
d. Adult motel: a motel in which material is presented, as part of
the motel services, via closed circuit TV or otherwise, that is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas.
e. Adult motion-picture arcade: any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled, still or
motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified
anatomical areas.
f. Adult motion-picture theater: an enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas.
§ 90-320.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-320.80
1:695
g. Massage parlor: any place where, for any form of consideration
or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of
fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other
treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of
or in connection with sexual conduct or where any person
providing such treatment, manipulation or service related
thereto exposes specified anatomical areas.
h. Model studio: any place other than public park, museum or
university or college art classes where, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specified
anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity.
i. Sexual encounter center: any building or structure that
contains, or is used for commercial entertainment where the
patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in
personal contact with or to allow personal contact by,
employees, devices or equipment or by personnel provided by
the establishment that appeals to the prurient interest of the
patron, to include, but not to be limited to bathhouses,
massage parlors, and related or similar activities.
(o) Sports and recreation, participant: provision of sports or recreation
primarily by and for participants. (Spectators are incidental.) Examples
include bowling alleys, health clubs, skating rinks, billiard parlors,
miniature golf courses, batting cages, and go-cart tracks.
(1) Specific participant sports and recreation use types.
a. Indoor: participant sports and recreation uses conducted
entirely within buildings.
b. Outdoor: participant sports and recreation uses conducted
wholly or partially outside of buildings.
(p) Vehicle sales and service: uses that provide for the sale, rental,
maintenance or repair of new or used vehicles and vehicular
equipment. The vehicle sales and service subcategory includes the
following specific use types.
(1) Specific vehicle sales and service use types.
a. Commercial vehicle repair and maintenance: uses, excluding
vehicle paint finishing shops, that repair, install or maintain the
mechanical components or the bodies of large trucks, mass
transit vehicles, large construction or agricultural equipment,
aircraft or similar large vehicles and vehicular equipment;
includes truck stops and fleet vehicle fueling facilities, which
may dispense conventional vehicle fuels and/or alternative
vehicle fuels.
§ 90-320.80 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-320.80
1:696
b. Commercial vehicle sales and rentals: uses that provide for the
sale or rental of large trucks, moving equipment (e.g., U-Haul
and Ryder), construction or agricultural equipment, aircraft, or
similar large vehicles and vehicular equipment.
c. Fuel sales: uses engaged in retail sales of vehicle fuels for
personal vehicles, other than fleet fueling facilities and truck
stops. Fleet vehicle fueling facilities are classified as
commercial vehicle repair and maintenance uses. Fueling
stations may dispense conventional vehicle fuels and/or
alternative vehicle fuels.
d. Personal vehicle repair and maintenance: uses that repair,
install or maintain the mechanical components of automobiles,
small trucks or vans, motorcycles, motor homes or recreational
vehicles, including recreational boats, or that wash, clean or
otherwise protect the exterior or interior surfaces of these
vehicles.
e. Personal vehicle sales and rentals: uses that provide for the
sale or rental of new or used autos, small trucks or vans,
trailers, motorcycles, motor homes or recreational vehicles,
including recreational watercraft. Typical examples include
automobile dealers, auto malls, car rental agencies. Car-share
vehicles that are parked or stored when not being used by
members of a car-share program are not regulated as personal
vehicle sales and rental uses, but are instead considered
accessory parking.
f. Truck stop: facilities providing service to semi-tractors and
other large trucks and vehicles, including the sale of fuel to
intrastate and interstate truck drivers, and provision of
customary support facilities for truck drivers. Truck stops are
designed to accommodate large semi-tractor/trailer
combinations and truck drivers, and may also be utilized by
smaller trucks and other interstate travelers.
g. Vehicle body and paint finishing shop: uses that primarily
conduct motor vehicle body work and repairs or that apply
paint to the exterior or interior surfaces of motor vehicles by
spraying, dipping, flow-coating or other similar means.
(2) Use-specific conditions of approval. The following conditions apply
in districts that require conditional use approval for vehicle sales
and service uses (See Table 90-310-1.):
a. Overnight outdoor vehicle storage is limited to a maximum of
six vehicles.
b. Fuel sales uses are subject to a maximum limit of eight fuel
pumps.
§ 90-320.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-320.90
1:697
§ 90-320.90. Industrial uses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The industrial use category includes uses that produce goods from
extracted materials or from recyclable or previously prepared materials,
including the design, storage and handling of these products and the
materials from which they are produced. It also includes uses that store or
distribute materials or goods as a principal use; recycling and waste-related
uses; and mining, quarrying and other extractive activities.
(a) Junk/salvage yard: an open area where waste or scrap materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or
handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper,
rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junk or salvage yard includes an auto
wrecking yard, but does not include waste-related uses or recycling
facilities.
(b) Manufacturing, production and industrial services: any of the following
specific use types.
(1) Specific manufacturing, production and industrial service use
types.
a. Artisan: production of goods by hand manufacturing, involving
the use of hand tools and small-scale, light mechanical
equipment carried on in a completely enclosed building with
no outdoor operations, storage or regular commercial truck
parking/loading. Typical uses include woodworking and
cabinet shops, ceramic studios, jewelry manufacturing and
similar types of arts and crafts or very small-scale
manufacturing uses that have no negative external impacts on
surrounding properties.
b. Limited: manufacturing of finished parts or products, primarily
from previously prepared materials. Typical uses include:
catering establishments, printing and related support
activities; machinery manufacturing; food manufacturing;
computer and electronic product manufacturing/assembly;
electrical equipment, appliance, component manufacturing/
assembly; furniture and related product manufacturing/
assembly; and other manufacturing and production
establishments that typically have very few, if any, negative
external impacts on surrounding properties.
c. General.
1. Manufacturing of finished or unfinished products,
primarily from extracted or raw materials, or recycled or
secondary materials, or bulk storage and handling of such
products and materials. Typical uses include: textile mills;
textile product mills; apparel manufacturing; leather and
allied product manufacturing; wood product
manufacturing; paper manufacturing; chemical
§ 90-320.90 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-320.90
1:698
manufacturing; plastics and rubber products
manufacturing; nonmetallic mineral product
manufacturing; transportation equipment manufacturing;
primary metal manufacturing; and fabricated metal
product manufacturing; also includes medical, scientific or
technology-related research establishments that produce
odors, dust, vibration, noise, vibration or other external
impacts that are detectable beyond the property lines of
the subject property.
2. Industrial service firms engaged in the repair or servicing
of industrial or commercial machinery, equipment,
products or by-products. Typical uses include: welding
shops; machine shops; industrial tool repair; fuel oil
distributors; solid fuel yards; laundry, dry-cleaning and
carpet cleaning plants; and photofinishing laboratories.
d. Intensive: manufacturing of acetylene, cement, lime, gypsum
or plaster-of-paris, chlorine, corrosive acid or fertilizer,
insecticides, disinfectants, poisons, explosives, paint, lacquer,
varnish, petroleum products, coal products, plastic and
synthetic resins and radioactive materials; also includes
smelting and animal slaughtering.
(c) Mining/quarrying: the extraction of mineral or aggregate resources
from the ground for off-site use. Examples include quarrying or
dredging for sand, gravel or other aggregate materials; mining; and oil
and gas drilling.
(d) Recycling service: any building, portion of building or area in which
recyclable material is collected, stored, or processed for the purpose of
marketing the material for use as raw material in the manufacturing
process of new, reused or reconstituted products.
(1) Specific recycling service use types.
a. Limited: a recycling facility in which recyclable materials are
temporarily stored or collected, or processed by manual
separation. (Note: consumer-oriented collection boxes for
newspapers, cans and glass items are considered an accessory
use and may be allowed in any zoning district.)
b. General: a recycling facility that, in addition to any activity
permitted as part of a limited recycling service, engages in
processing of recyclable materials, such as cleaning, bundling,
compacting or packing of recyclable materials.
(e) Warehousing, wholesaling and freight movement: any of the following:
(1) Establishments engaged in the storage or movement of goods for
themselves or other firms or the sale, lease, or rental of goods
§ 90-320.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-320.90
1:699
§ 90-320.100. Agricultural uses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The agricultural use category includes general farming and community
garden uses.
primarily intended for industrial, institutional, or commercial
businesses.
(2) Establishments engaged in long-term and short-term storage of
goods that do not meet the definition of a self-service storage
facility.
(3) Establishments engaged in the wholesale sales, bulk storage and
distribution of goods. Such uses may also include incidental retail
sales and wholesale showrooms. Expressly includes the following
uses: bottled gas and fuel oil sales, monument sales, and portable
storage building sales.
(f) Waste-related use. Waste-related uses are characterized by the
receiving of solid or liquid wastes from other users and sites for
transfer to another location; by the collection of sanitary wastes, or
other approved waste materials for on-site disposal; or by the
manufacture or production of goods or energy from the composting of
organic material.
(1) Specific waste-related use types.
a. Demolition debris landfill: facility or site used for the disposal
of demolition waste, construction materials, used building
materials, brush, wood waste, soil, rock, concrete and inert
solids soluble in water.
b. Solid waste separation facility: a facility where mixed
municipal solid waste is separated into recovered materials
and other components either manually or mechanically and
further processed for transporting to other facilities, including
a solid waste disposal area.
c. Transfer station: a facility for the transfer and packing of solid
waste from smaller collecting vehicles to larger transport
vehicles.
(2) Use-specific conditions of approval. In districts that require
conditional use approval for waste-related uses (See Table
90-310-1.), all work and waste storage areas must be located in a
completely enclosed building.
(a) Agritourism: farm-related enterprises that operate for the enjoyment
and education of the public and that combine agriculture and tourism
or entertainment-related uses. Agritourism uses include all of the
following specific use types.
(1) Specific agritourism use types.
§ 90-320.90 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-320.100
1:700
a. Agriculture cultural center: a facility established for the
purpose of educating the public about agricultural activities, or
the heritage and culture of agricultural activities. In addition,
this use subcategory includes museums dedicated solely to
agriculture themes and living history farm sites.
b. Agritainment: events and activities that allow for recreation,
entertainment, and tourism in conjunction with agriculture
support and services directly associated with on-going
agricultural activities on-site that are for-profit. Events and
activities include the following: hay rides, corn mazes, hay
mazes, petting zoos (farm animals only) and agricultural
festivals.
c. Eco-tourism enterprise: tourism activities and facilities that
focus on visitation and observation of or education about
natural history, indigenous ecosystems, native plant or animal
species, natural scenery or other features of the natural
environment. Eco-tourism enterprises may include cultural
activities related to such activities or work projects that help
conserve or safeguard the integrity of a natural feature,
habitat, or ecosystem.
d. Restaurant, farm-based: restaurants on tracts occupied by a
working farm that serve food and beverages for on-premises
consumption. Food served at a farm-based restaurant must
primarily come from plants or animals grown or raised on-site
or on tracts that are part of the subject farm.
e. Participatory farms: farm-based, tourism-driven enterprises
where individuals or groups pay to participate on a working
farm.
f. Rural retreat: an establishment that is part of a working farm
that provides temporary overnight accommodations for
individuals or groups engaged in supervised training or
personal improvement activities. Examples include corporate
retreat facilities, educational retreat facilities and working
farm learning centers.
g. Winery, brewery or distillery: a manufacturing facility or
establishment engaged in small-batch preparation of beer,
wine or distilled spirits, including tasting rooms where beer,
wine or liquor products produced on the subject property or on
tracts that are part of the subject farm may be sold for on- or
off-premises consumption.
(b) Community garden: areas of no more than one acre in areas that are
managed and maintained by a group of individuals to grow and harvest
food crops or non-food crops (e.g., flowers). A community garden area
may be divided into separate garden plots for cultivation by one or more
§ 90-320.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-320.100
1:701
§ 90-320.110. Other uses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
This category includes uses that do not fit the other use categories or that
require distinction from other use classifications.
individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group.
Community gardens may be principal or accessory uses.
(c) Crop agriculture: an area managed and maintained by an individual,
group or business entity to grow and harvest food crops or non-food
crops (e.g., flowers) for sale or distribution. Farms may be principal
accessory uses and may be located on land, on a roof or within a
building.
(d) Horses, livestock and farm animals: uses engaged in the feeding,
housing and care of horses, livestock or farm animals for private or
commercial purposes. (See also Division 90-340).
(a) Drive-in or drive-through establishment: a use accessory to a principal
use that offers service directly to occupants of motor vehicles. Such
uses are typically associated with restaurants, banks and pharmacies.
Automatic teller machine kiosks and similar drop-off or pick-up facilities
that do not have on-site employees or amplified sound are not classified
as drive-in or drive-through facilities if they meet the criteria for
classification as an accessory use.
(1) Use-specific conditions of approval. The following conditions apply
in districts that require conditional use approval for drive-in or
drive-through establishments (See Table 90-310-1.):
a. Multiple drive-through lanes are prohibited.
b. Proposals to establish new drive-through lanes require a traffic
impact analysis. (See § 90-420.130.)
§ 90-320.100 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-320.110
1:702
DIVISION 90-330
Accessory Uses and Structures
§ 90-330.10. General regulations. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-330.20. Amateur radio service antennas. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(a) Accessory uses allowed. Accessory uses are allowed only in connection
with lawfully established principal uses.
(b) Allowed uses. Allowed accessory uses are limited to those expressly
regulated in this division or elsewhere in this zoning chapter, as well as
those that, in the determination of the Community Development
Director, satisfy all of the following criteria:
(1) They are customarily found in conjunction with the principal use of
the subject property;
(2) They are subordinate and clearly incidental to the principal use of
the property; and
(3) They serve a necessary function for or contribute to the comfort,
safety or convenience of occupants of the principal use.
(c) Time of construction and establishment. Accessory uses may be
established only after the principal use of the property is in place.
(d) Location. Accessory uses must be located on the same lot as the
principal use to which they are accessory, unless otherwise expressly
stated.
(e) Accessory building and structure regulations.
(1) Accessory buildings and structures are subject to the same
regulations that apply to principal uses and structures on the
subject lot, unless otherwise expressly stated.
(2) Accessory buildings attached to the principal building by a
breezeway, passageway or similar means are considered part of the
primary structure and are subject to the lot and building
regulations that apply to the principal building.
(3) Accessory buildings attached by structures less than 30 inches in
height (e.g., patios, walks, decks without railing) are not
considered part of the primary structure and are subject to
accessory building and structure regulations.
(a) Amateur radio service antennas and supporting towers are expressly
allowed as permitted accessory uses, provided that no such antenna,
including any support upon which it is mounted may exceed a combined
height of 70 feet.
§ 90-330.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-330.20
1:703
§ 90-330.30. Electric vehicle charging stations. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
§ 90-330.40. Farm stands. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(b) All amateur radio service antenna structures must be set back a
distance of at least one-half the height of the tower structure from all
property lines.
(a) General.
(1) Private (restricted-access) electric vehicle (EV) charging stations
are permitted as accessory uses in all zoning districts.
(2) Public EV charging stations are permitted as accessory uses to
allowed nonresidential uses in all zoning districts.
(b) Parking.
(1) Electric vehicle charging stations may be counted toward satisfying
minimum off-street parking space requirements.
(2) Public electric vehicle charging stations must be reserved for
parking and charging electric vehicles. Electric vehicles may be
parked in any space designated for public parking, subject to the
restrictions that apply to any other vehicle.
(c) Equipment. Vehicle charging equipment must be designed and located
so as not to impede pedestrian, bicycle or wheelchair movement or
create safety hazards on sidewalks.
(d) Posted information.
(1) Information must be posted identifying voltage and amperage
levels and any type of use, fees, or safety information related to the
electric vehicle charging station.
(2) Public electric vehicle charging stations must be posted with signs
indicating that the space is reserved for electric vehicle charging
purposes only. For purposes of this provision, "charging" means
that an electric vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging
station and is connected to the battery charging station equipment.
(e) Maintenance. Electric vehicle charging stations must be maintained in
all respects, including the functioning of the equipment. A phone
number or other contact information must be provided on the
equipment for reporting when it is not functioning or other problems
are encountered.
(a) Allowed use. One roadside farm stand is allowed as an accessory use for
each crop farm or community garden use located in an AG or RE
District.
§ 90-330.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-330.40
1:704
§ 90-330.50. Geothermal energy systems. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
§ 90-330.60. Home occupations. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(b) Additional regulations.
(1) Farm stands may be used only for the sale of products raised on the
premises.
(2) Allowed farm stands must be operated by a resident of the subject
property.
(3) Off-street parking must be provided for a minimum of four vehicles.
Driveways and vehicle access points must be located so as to
minimize possible interference with the normal flow of highway
traffic.
(4) Farm stands may not be located in a manner that would create a
traffic hazard or nuisance.
(5) Farm stands must be set back at least 30 feet from street rights-ofway
lines and at least 20 feet from any other lot line.
(a) General. Geothermal energy systems are permitted as an accessory use
in all zoning districts.
(b) Location.
(1) Geothermal energy systems must be located entirely within the lot
lines of the subject property or within appropriate easements.
(2) No portion of a geothermal energy system may be located within a
stream or stream buffer.
(a) Purpose. The home occupation regulations of this section are intended
to allow residents to engage in customary home-based work activities,
while also helping to ensure that neighboring residents are not
subjected to adverse operational and land use impacts (e.g., excessive
noise or traffic or public safety hazards) that are not typical of the
neighborhoods or areas in which the home occupation is located.
(b) Types of home occupations. Three types of home occupations are
defined and regulated under this section:
(1) Type A residential home occupations. Type A residential home
occupations are those in which household residents use the
dwelling unit they occupy as a place of work, but no employees,
customers or clients come to the site.
(2) Type B residential home occupations. Type B residential home
occupations are those in which household residents use the
§ 90-330.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-330.60
1:705
dwelling unit they occupy as a place of work and either one
nonresident employee or customers come to the site.
(3) Rural home occupations. Rural home occupations are those that do
not comply with the Type A or Type B residential home occupation
regulations and in which household residents use the dwelling unit
they occupy or an accessory building as a place of work.
(c) Exemptions.
(1) Group living. Group living uses are not considered home
occupations and are not subject to the residential home occupation
regulations of this section. Group living is allowed as indicated in
Table 90-310-1.
(2) Family day-care homes. Family day-care homes are not considered
home occupations and are not subject to the residential home
occupation regulations of this section. Family day-care homes are
allowed only as indicated in Table 90-310-1.
(3) Bed-and-breakfast inn. Bed-and-breakfast inns are not permitted as
home occupations and are not subject the residential home
occupation regulations of this section. Bed-and-breakfasts are
allowed only as indicated in Table 90-310-1.
(4) Short-term rentals. Short-term rentals are not considered home
occupations and are not subject the residential home occupation
regulations of this section. Short-term rentals are allowed only as
indicated in Table 90-310-1.
(d) Allowed uses. The home occupation regulations of this section establish
regulations and standards for home-based work activities rather than
limit the range or work activities to a specific list of occupations. Uses
that comply with all applicable regulations of this section are allowed
by right unless otherwise expressly stated.
(e) Where allowed.
(1) Type A residential home occupations. Type A residential home
occupations are permitted as of right as an accessory use to a
principal use in the household living use subcategory. Type A
residential home occupations are subject to the general regulations
of Subsection (f) and all other applicable regulations of this section.
More than one Type A residential home occupation is allowed as an
accessory use, but the general regulations of Subsection (f) apply
to the combined residential home occupation uses.
(2) Type B residential home occupations. Type B residential home
occupations may be approved as an accessory use to a principal use
in the household living use subcategory. Type B residential home
occupations are subject to the general regulations of Subsection
(f), the supplemental regulations of Subsection (h) and all other
§ 90-330.60 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-330.60
1:706
applicable regulations of this section. Multiple Type B residential
home occupations are prohibited as an accessory use, and a Type A
residential home occupation may not be conducted in conjunction
with a Type B residential home occupation.
(3) Rural home occupations. Rural home occupations may be approved
as an accessory use to a principal use in the household living use
subcategory or agriculture use category only in the RE, AG-1 or
AG-2 Districts. Rural home occupations are subject to the general
regulations of Subsection (f), the supplemental regulations of
Subsection (i) and all other applicable regulations of this section.
Multiple rural home occupations are prohibited as an accessory
use, and a rural home occupation may not be conducted in
conjunction with a Type B residential home occupation.
(f) General regulations for residential home occupations. All Type A and
Type B residential home occupations are subject to the following
general regulations:
(1) Residential home occupations must be accessory and secondary to
the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes. They may not
change the character of the residential building they occupy or
adversely affect the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
Residential home occupations may not, for example, produce light,
noise, vibration, odor, parking demand, or traffic impacts that are
not typical of a residential neighborhood in Mount Pleasant.
Residential home occupations must be operated so as not to create
or cause a nuisance.
(2) Any tools or equipment used as part of a residential home
occupation must be operated in a manner or sound-proofed so as
not to be audible beyond the lot lines of the subject property.
(3) External structural alterations or site improvements that change
the residential character of the lot upon which a residential home
occupation is located are prohibited. Examples of such prohibited
alterations include construction of parking lots, the addition of
commercial-like exterior lighting or the addition of a separate
building entrance that is visible from abutting streets.
(4) Residential home occupations and all related activities, including
storage (other than the lawful parking or storage of vehicles), must
be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit.
(5) No window display or other public display of any material or
merchandise is allowed.
(6) The use or storage of hazardous substances is prohibited, except at
the "consumer commodity" level, as that term is defined in 49 CFR
171.8.
§ 90-330.60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-330.60
1:707
(7) Only licensed automobiles, passenger vans and passenger trucks
may be used in the conduct of a residential home occupation. No
other types of vehicles may be parked or stored on the premises.
This provision is not intended to prohibit deliveries and pickups by
common carrier delivery vehicles (e.g., postal service, United
Parcel Service, Fed Ex, et al.) of the type typically used in
residential neighborhoods.
(8) The following uses are expressly prohibited as residential home
occupations:
a. Any type of assembly, cleaning, maintenance or repair of
vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines or of
large appliances;
b. Dispatch centers or other businesses where employees come to
the site and are dispatched to other locations;
c. Equipment supply or equipment rental businesses;
d. Taxi, limo, van or bus services;
e. Tow truck services;
f. Eating or drinking places;
g. Funeral or interment services;
h. Animal care, grooming or boarding businesses; and
i. Any use involving the use or storage of vehicles, products,
parts, machinery or similar materials or equipment outside of a
completely enclosed building.
(g) Supplemental regulations for Type A residential home occupations.
(1) All individuals engaged in a Type A residential home occupation
must reside in the dwelling unit in which the residential home
occupation is located as their primary place of residence.
(2) No nonresident employees or customers are allowed except for the
instruction, teaching or tutoring of no more than four students at
one time.
(3) The area devoted to the conduct of all Type A residential home
occupations present on the subject property is limited to 33% of the
dwelling unit's floor area or 750 square feet, whichever is less.
(h) Supplemental regulations for Type B residential home occupations.
(1) Type B residential home occupations are allowed only if reviewed
and approved in accordance with the conditional use procedures of
Division 90-550, provided that instruction, teaching or tutoring of
no more than four students at one time is permitted by right.
§ 90-330.60 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-330.60
1:708
(2) One nonresident employee is allowed with a Type B residential
home occupation if no customers come to the site at any time.
Residential home occupations that have clients, customers or
students coming to the site at any time may not have nonresident
employees. For the purpose of this section, the term "nonresident
employee" includes an employee, business partner, co-owner or any
other person affiliated with the residential home occupation, who
does not live at the site, but who visits the site as part of the
residential home occupation.
(3) Customer visits are allowed only between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
(4) The area devoted to the conduct of all Type B residential home
occupations present on the subject property is limited to 49% of the
dwelling unit's floor area or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less.
(i) Supplemental regulations for rural home occupations.
(1) Rural home occupations are allowed only if reviewed and approved
in accordance with the conditional use procedures of Division
90-550.
(2) A maximum of three nonresident employees are allowed with a
rural home occupation.
(3) Customer visits are allowed only between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
(4) Rural home occupations must be accessory and secondary to the
use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes or accessory to any
on-site agricultural use. They may not change the character of the
property they occupy or adversely affect the character of the
surrounding area. Rural home occupations may not, for example,
produce light, noise, vibration, odor, parking demand, or traffic
impacts that are not typical of a rural or semirural area in Mount
Pleasant. Rural home occupations must be operated so as not to
create or cause a nuisance.
(5) Rural home occupations may be conducted within the principal
dwelling unit or within an accessory building, provided that the
total accessory building floor area occupied by a rural home
occupation may not exceed 3,000 square feet.
(6) Accessory buildings in which rural home occupations are
conducted must be set back at least 150 feet from R-zoned lots.
(7) The following uses are expressly prohibited as rural home
occupations:
a. Any type of motor vehicle repair.
§ 90-330.60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-330.60
1:709
§ 90-330.70. Keeping of bees. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The regulations of this section govern the keeping of honeybees as an
accessory use in all districts except RE, AG-1, and AG-2. See Division 90-340
for regulations that apply in RE, AG-1 and AG-2 Districts.
§ 90-330.80. Keeping of chickens. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The regulations of this section govern the keeping of chickens as an
accessory use in all districts except RE, AG-1, and AG-2. See Division 90-340
for regulations that apply in RE, AG-1 and AG-2 Districts.
b. Dispatch centers or other businesses where employees come to
the site and are dispatched to other locations.
c. Equipment supply or equipment rental businesses.
d. Taxi, limo, van or bus services.
e. Tow truck services.
f. Eating or drinking places.
g. Funeral or interment services.
h. Kennels and dog boarding.
i. Any use involving the use or storage of vehicles, products,
parts, machinery or similar materials or equipment outside of a
completely enclosed building.
(a) No more than six hives may be located on a lot.
(b) Hives may not exceed 20 cubic feet in volume.
(c) Hives must be set back at least three feet from all lot lines.
(d) Hives must be set back at least 10 feet from public sidewalks and at
least 25 feet from a principal building on an adjoining lot.
(e) A constant supply of water must be provided for all hives.
(f) A flyway barrier at least six feet in height must be provided to shield
any part of a property line that is within 25 feet of a hive. The flyway
barrier must consist of a wall, fence, dense vegetation or a combination
of such features.
(g) The owner, operator or tenant must obtain a zoning compliance permit
in accordance with § 90-580.20.
(h) The applicant for the permit must notify all residents of the subject
property and the owner of the subject property if the applicant is not
the owner.
§ 90-330.60 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-330.80
1:710
§ 90-330.90. Residential composting. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) The keeping of up to four chickens is allowed as an accessory use on
lots occupied by three or fewer dwelling units.
(b) The keeping of up to eight chickens is allowed as an accessory use to a
museum or school or day-care center.
(c) The keeping of roosters is prohibited.
(d) On-site slaughter of chickens is prohibited.
(e) Chickens must be provided with a covered enclosure and must be kept
in the covered enclosure or a fenced enclosure at all times.
(f) The enclosure must be located at least 25 feet from any residential
building on an adjacent lot.
(g) The owner, operator or tenant must obtain a zoning compliance permit
in accordance with § 90-580.20.
(h) The applicant for the permit must notify all residents of the subject
property and the owner of the subject property if the applicant is not
the owner.
(a) The residential composting regulations of this section apply to all R
Districts.
(b) The composting of landscape waste (including grass clippings, leaves,
and chipped brush) and food waste (including discarded fruits,
vegetables, and grains) is an allowed accessory use in residential
zoning districts, subject to the regulations of this section.
(c) Only landscape waste generated from plants grown and maintained on
the subject lot may be composted. This provision is not intended to
prohibit property owners from adding outside materials or ingredients
to speed or enhance decomposition.
(d) Only food waste resulting from food preparation or consumption by
residents of the subject lot and their visitors may be composted. This
provision is not intended to prohibit property owners from adding
outside materials or ingredients to speed or enhance decomposition.
Meat products are prohibited in residential compost bins.
(e) All food waste must be placed within rodent-resistant compost bins,
which are prohibited in front and rear yards and must be set back at
least 10 feet from all lot lines.
(f) Landscape waste compost piles may not exceed 125 cubic feet in
volume, and may not exceed five feet in height.
(g) Landscape waste compost piles must be set back at least 10 feet from
all lot lines. Landscape waste compost piles that are not contained
§ 90-330.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-330.90
1:711
§ 90-330.100. Satellite dish antennas. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
within a rodent-resistant compost bin must be set back at least 30 feet
from all dwelling units on abutting lots.
(h) Only animal waste from herbivores is allowed within compost piles or
bins.
(i) Burning of compost piles is not allowed.
(a) Applicability. Satellite dish antennas are subject to compliance with the
regulations of this section.
(b) Location.
(1) In R Districts, satellite dish antennas must be located in the rear
yard or the rear of the principal building. If usable communication
signals cannot be obtained from the rear location, the satellite dish
antenna may be located in the side yard or on the side of the
principal building. If usable satellite television communication
signals cannot be received by locating the antenna to the rear or
side of the principal building, the antenna may be placed in the
front yard or on the front-facing roof of the principal building,
provided that a) the dish diameter does not exceed 18 inches and b)
the Community Development Department Director's approval is
obtained prior to such installation. The Community Development
Department Director is authorized to approve a front yard location
only upon a showing by the applicant that usable communication
signals are not receivable from any location on the property other
than the location selected by the applicant.
(2) In all districts other than R Districts, satellite dish antennas may be
located anywhere upon a building or within the buildable area of
the lot, subject to applicable zoning district setback regulations.
(c) Other regulations.
(1) In all R Districts, satellite dish antennas may not exceed 36 inches
in diameter.
(2) A ground-mounted satellite dish antenna may not exceed 20 feet in
height, including any platform or structure upon which the antenna
is mounted or affixed.
(3) Roof-mounted satellite dish antenna may not exceed the height of
the elevation of the ridgeline of the principal structure.
(4) If usable satellite signals cannot be obtained from an antenna
installed in compliance with the height limitations imposed by this
section, such satellite dish antennas may be installed at a greater
height, provided that the height is approved by the Community
Development Department Director. The Community Development
Department Director is authorized to approve a greater height
§ 90-330.90 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-330.100
1:712
§ 90-330.110. Secondary suites. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
upon a showing by the applicant that installation at a greater
height is necessary for the reception of usable communication
signals.
(5) All satellite dish antennas must comply with all manufacturers'
specifications, be located on noncombustible and corrosionresistant
material, and be erected in a secure, wind-resistant
manner.
(6) All satellite dish antennas must be adequately grounded for
protection against a direct strike of lightning pursuant to the
requirements of the city electrical code.
(a) Description. Secondary suites are accessory dwelling units contained
wholly within the principal dwelling unit on the property (i.e., detached
house).
(b) Applicability. All secondary suites are subject to compliance with the
regulations of this section.
(c) Where allowed. Secondary suites are allowed only on lots occupied by a
single detached house. They are permitted by right in all R Districts.
(d) Creation. Secondary suites may be created by:
(1) Converting existing floor area within the interior of a detached
house (e.g., attic or basement) to an accessory dwelling unit;
(2) Adding floor area to an existing detached house to accommodate an
accessory dwelling unit; or
(3) Constructing a new detached house that includes an accessory
dwelling unit within the principal building.
(e) Zoning district regulations. Secondary suites are subject to all
applicable regulations of the zoning district in which they are located,
unless otherwise expressly stated in this chapter.
(f) Code compliance. Secondary suites must comply with all applicable
building and fire codes.
(g) Number. No more than one secondary suite is permitted on a single lot.
Secondary suites are prohibited on lots occupied by a backyard cottage.
(See § 90-110.140.)
(h) Size. The floor area of a secondary suite may not exceed 40% of the
gross floor area of the principal dwelling unit (excluding any attached
garage).
(i) Number of residents. The total number of residents that reside in the
secondary suite and the principal dwelling unit, combined, may not
exceed the number permitted for a household.
§ 90-330.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-330.110
1:713
§ 90-330.120. Solar energy systems. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(j) Parking. No additional parking is required for a secondary suite. Any
provided parking is subject to the same regulations that apply to the
principal dwelling unit.
(k) Location of entrances. Only one entrance to a detached house
containing a secondary suite may be located on a facade that faces a
street, unless the detached house had an additional street-facing
entrance before the secondary suite was created.
(l) Rental. No more than one of the dwelling units on a lot occupied by a
secondary suite may be a rental dwelling unit. Backyard cottages may
not be rented for periods of less than seven consecutive days.
(a) General.
(1) Accessory solar energy systems must comply with all applicable
building ordinance and electrical code requirements.
(2) Owners of accessory solar energy systems are solely responsible
for negotiating with other property owners for any desired solar
easements to protect access to sunlight. Any such easements must
be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds.
(b) Building-mounted solar energy systems.
(1) Building-mounted solar energy systems may be mounted on
principal and accessory structures.
(2) All applicable setback regulations apply to building-mounted solar
energy systems.
(3) Only building-integrated and/or flush-mounted solar energy system
may be installed on street-facing building elevations.
(4) Solar energy systems may not extend more than three feet above
the applicable maximum building height limit or more than four
feet above the highest point of the roofline, whichever is less.
(c) Ground-mounted solar energy systems.
(1) In residential zoning districts, ground-mounted solar energy
systems may not be located in a required street setback or street
yard.
(2) Ground-mounted solar energy systems may be located within
required interior side and rear setbacks.
(3) Ground-mounted solar energy systems are subject to applicable
accessory structure height and lot coverage regulations.
§ 90-330.110 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-330.120
1:714
DIVISION 90-340
Horses and Farm Animals
§ 90-340.10. Where allowed. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-340.20. Number permitted. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-340.30. Stables and confinement buildings. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Stables and other animal confinement buildings are subject to the setback
regulations of Table 90-340-2.
(a) The keeping of horses (stables), farm animals and livestock is allowed
as of right in RE, AG-1 and AG-2 Zoning Districts.
(b) The keeping of horses (stables), farm animals and livestock is
prohibited in zoning districts other than RE, AG-1 and AG-2. See
§§ 90-330.70 and 90-330.80 for regulations governing the keeping of
honeybees and chickens in other zoning districts.
(a) RE and AG-1 Districts. A maximum of one animal unit is allowed per
acre of lot area in the RE and AG-1 Districts, based on the animal unit
equivalencies established in Table 90-340-1:
Table 90-340-1
Animal Units (AUs)
Animal Type1 Number = 1 AU
Cattle, bison 1
Horse, mule, donkey, burro 1
Horse (34 inches or less at withers) 2
Swine, ostrich 2
Goats, sheep, llama, alpaca 2
Poultry 20
Rabbits 20
Mink and similar fur-bearing animals 20
Bees No AU limit
NOTE:
1 The Community Development Director is authorized to determine
the value in animal units for mature animals not listed above.
(b) AG-2 District. There is no zoning-based limit on the number of animals
that may be kept in the AG-2 District.
§ 90-340.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-340.30
1:715
Table 90-340-2
Stable and Confinement Building Setbacks
Zoning District
Minimum Setback from Non-AG Zoning
District
(feet)
RE 50
AG-1 100
AG-2 200
§ 90-340.40. Sanitation. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Proper sanitation must be maintained for all horses, farm animals and
livestock. Proper sanitation includes:
(a) Not allowing animal waste to accumulate;
(b) Taking necessary steps to ensure that odors resulting from horses, farm
and livestock animals are not detectable beyond property lines; and
(c) Storing all food in metal or other pest-proof containers.
§ 90-340.30 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-340.40
1:716
ARTICLE 400
Village-Wide Regulations
DIVISION 90-410
Sewer and Water Service
§ 90-410.10. Municipal sewer service. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Municipal sewer service is a prerequisite to issuance of building permits for
any development on a parcel within 350 feet of a municipal sanitary sewer,
measured along the public road right-of-way.
§ 90-410.20. Municipal water service. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Property owners are required to extend municipal water service for their
entire parcel frontage before any building permits may be issued if all of the
following conditions are present:
(a) The nearest property boundary of the subject parcel is within 350 feet
of an existing municipal water main, as measured along the public road
right-of-way;
(b) The proposed development (excluding parking, landscaping and
stormwater management facilities) is valued in excess of 50% of the
existing Village improvement assessments on the subject parcel; and
(c) The estimated municipal water main extension costs are less than the
value of the proposed development.
§ 90-410.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-410.20
1:717

DIVISION 90-420
Parking and Access
§ 90-420.10. Purpose; applicability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Purpose.
(1) The regulations of this division establish off-street motor vehicle
and bicycle parking requirements that attempt to encourage transit
use and nonmotorized modes of transportation, while also helping
meet the typical parking needs of shoppers, employees, visitors and
residents. The regulations are also intended to help avoid the
negative impacts that can result from requiring excessive supplies
of off-street parking (e.g., impervious surfaces, stormwater runoff,
heat island effect, visual environment, parking encroachment into
stable neighborhoods).
(2) The regulations are also intended to help protect the public health,
safety and general welfare by:
a. Promoting economically viable and beneficial use of land; and
b. Providing flexible methods of responding to the transportation
and access demands of various land uses in different areas of
the Village.
(b) Applicability.
(1) General. Off-street parking must be provided and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this division. Unless otherwise
expressly stated, the regulations apply to all zoning districts and
uses.
(2) New uses and development. The parking regulations of this division
apply to all new buildings constructed and all new uses established
in all zoning districts.
(3) Change of use. If a new use of a building requires more off-street
parking than the use that most recently occupied the building,
additional off-street parking is required in an amount equal to the
difference between the parking required for the new use and the
parking that would have been required for the previous use if the
parking requirements of this division had been applicable.
(4) Enlargements and expansions.
a. The parking regulations of this division apply whenever an
existing building or use is enlarged or expanded to include
additional dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity or other
units of measurement used in establishing off-street parking
requirements.
§ 90-420.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-420.10
1:719
§ 90-420.20. Parking ratios. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Off-street motor vehicle and bicycle parking spaces must be provided in
accordance with the ratios established in Table 90-420-1. For uses requiring
conditional use approval, the Plan Commission is authorized to recommend
and the Village Board is authorized to approve different minimum and
maximum requirements than stated in Table 90-420-1. No use is required to
provide more than 30 short-term or 30 long-term bicycle parking spaces,
Table 90-420-1
Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking Ratios
USE CATEGORY Motor Vehicle Parking
Minimum Bicycle
Parking Spaces
Use subcategory
Specific use type
Minimum
Spaces
Maximum
Spaces
Short-
Term Long-Term
RESIDENTIAL
Household living
Single household
and two households
(per lot)
1 per DU No
maximum
None None
Three or more
households (per lot)
1.1 per DU No
maximum
2 + 1 per
30 DUs
1 per 2 DUs
Group living 1 per 4
beds
No
maximum
None None
PUBLIC/CIVIC
Airport None No
maximum
None None
Cemetery None No
maximum
None None
Club or lodge Same as
retail
No
maximum
Same as
retail
None
College or
university
None No
maximum
None None
Detention or
correctional facility
None No
maximum
None None
b. In the case of enlargements or expansions that trigger
requirements for additional parking, additional spaces are
required only to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the
entire building or use. There is no requirement to address
parking deficits associated with existing, lawfully established
buildings or uses.
§ 90-420.10 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-420.20
1:720
Table 90-420-1
Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking Ratios
USE CATEGORY Motor Vehicle Parking
Minimum Bicycle
Parking Spaces
Use subcategory
Specific use type
Minimum
Spaces
Maximum
Spaces
Short-
Term Long-Term
Governmental
service
None No
maximum
None None
Hospital 1 per 4
beds
No
maximum
2 + 1 per 4
beds
Same as
office
Library or cultural
exhibit
None No
maximum
Same as
retail
None
Natural resource
preservation
None No
maximum
None None
Parks and
recreation
None No
maximum
None None
Religious assembly 1 per 6
seats
No
maximum
2 + 1 per
30 seats
None
Safety service None No
maximum
None None
School None No
maximum
2 + 2 per
classroom
None
Utilities and public
services, minor and
major
None No
maximum
None None
COMMERCIAL
Animal service Same as
retail
No
maximum
Same as
retail
None
Assembly or
entertainment
Type 1 1 per 6
seats
No
maximum
1 per 30
seats
None
Type 2 1 per 10
seats
No
maximum
1 per 30
seats
None
Business or trade
school
None No
maximum
None None
Commercial service Same as
retail
4 per 1,000
square feet
of floor area
Same as
office
Same as
office
§ 90-420.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-420.20
1:721
Table 90-420-1
Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking Ratios
USE CATEGORY Motor Vehicle Parking
Minimum Bicycle
Parking Spaces
Use subcategory
Specific use type
Minimum
Spaces
Maximum
Spaces
Short-
Term Long-Term
Day care None No
maximum
None None
Financial service Same as
office
No
maximum
Same as
office
Same as
office
Funeral or
mortuary service
1 per 6
seats
No
maximum
None None
Lodging (except
short-term rentals)
1 per guest
room; none
for shortterm
rental
No
maximum
2 2 + 1 per 30
rooms
Office
1 per 500
square feet
for first
4,000
square feet
of floor
area, plus 1
per 1,000
square feet
of floor
area in
excess of
4,000
square feet
4 per 1,000
square feet
of floor area
2, plus 1
per 25,000
square feet
for floor
area in
excess of
30,000
square feet
1 per
10,000
square feet
for floor
area in
excess of
30,000
square feet
(none if
smaller)
Parking,
nonaccessory
None No
maximum
None None
Restaurants and
bars
Same as
retail
No
maximum
Same as
retail
None
§ 90-420.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-420.20
1:722
Table 90-420-1
Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking Ratios
USE CATEGORY Motor Vehicle Parking
Minimum Bicycle
Parking Spaces
Use subcategory
Specific use type
Minimum
Spaces
Maximum
Spaces
Short-
Term Long-Term
Retail sales
1 per 1,000
square feet
of floor
area
5 per 1,000
square feet
of floor area
2, plus 1
per 10,000
square feet
of floor
area
1 per
10,000
square feet
for floor
area in
excess of
30,000
square feet
(none if
smaller)
Self-service storage None No
maximum
Sexually oriented
business
Same as
retail
No
maximum
Same as
retail
None
Sports and
recreation,
participant
Same as
retail
No
maximum
Same as
retail
None
Vehicle sales and
service
None No
maximum
None None
INDUSTRIAL
All types None No
maximum
None None
AGRICULTURE
All types None No
maximum
None None
OTHER
All types
None
(stacking
spaces
required in
accordance
with
§ 90-420.120)
No
maximum
None None
§ 90-420.30. Calculation of parking requirements. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-420.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-420.30
1:723
§ 90-420.40. Parking credits and reductions. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(a) Floor area. Parking requirements based on floor area must be
calculated on the basis of gross floor area, minus parking and loading
areas and areas of a building occupied exclusively by mechanical
equipment, utilities, or service areas that are not intended for human
occupancy.
(b) Multiple uses. Lots containing more than one use or tenant must
provide parking in an amount equal to the total aggregate number of
spaces required for each use or tenant on the lot except when a shared
parking arrangement is approved in accordance with the shared
parking provisions of § 90-420.40.
(c) Fractions and rounding. See the fraction and rounding rules of
§ 90-610.20.
(d) Capacity and occupancy-based standards. For the purpose of
computing parking requirements based on seating or occupants,
calculations must be based on the building-code-rated capacity.
(e) Unlisted uses. Upon receiving a development or permit application for a
use not specifically listed, the Community Development Director is
authorized to apply the off-street parking ratio specified for the listed
use that the Director deems most similar to the proposed use.
(a) On-street parking. Where on-street motor vehicle parking is allowed,
nonresidential uses may count on-street parking spaces on public street
rights-of-way abutting the subject property towards satisfying off-street
motor vehicle parking requirements. One off-street parking space
credit may be taken for each striped parking space on the abutting
right-of-way. When on-street parking spaces are not striped (e.g.,
parallel parking), one off-street parking space credit may be taken for
each 20 linear feet of abutting street right-of-way. Only space on the
same side of the street as the subject use may be counted.
(b) Long-term bicycle parking. Each six long-term bicycle parking spaces
provided in accordance with § 90-420.60 is credited as one motor
vehicle space.
(c) Public parking. Nonresidential uses are credited for motor vehicle
parking spaces within a nearby public parking lot or public parking
garage, as follows:
(1) Minimum motor vehicle parking requirements for the subject use
are reduced by one parking space for every four motor vehicle
parking spaces within the public parking lot or garage, not to
exceed a total reduction of more than 25 spaces;
§ 90-420.30 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-420.40
1:724
(2) The nearest pedestrian entrance to the public parking lot or garage
must be located within 1,000 feet of the lot on which the subject
use is located; and
(3) The parking facility must be open to the general public from at
least 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(d) Motorcycle and scooter parking. In parking lots containing more than
eight motor vehicle parking spaces, the provision of motorcycle or
scooter parking spaces may be credited toward satisfying the minimum
off-street parking ratios of Table 90-420-1 at the rate of one motor
vehicle parking space for each two motorcycle or scooter parking
spaces. The maximum credit allowed under this provision is two spaces
or 10% of the total minimum motor vehicle parking requirement for the
subject property, whichever is greater. To receive credit, each
motorcycle and scooter space must have a concrete surface and
minimum dimensions of four feet by eight feet. Areas restricted to
motorcycle and scooter parking must be identified by signs. Motorcycle
and scooter parking spaces are not counted against maximum allowed
parking ratios.
(e) Off-site parking. Off-site motor vehicle parking spaces owned or rented
by the property owner or business owner of the subject use may be
counted towards satisfying off-street motor vehicle parking
requirements. Such off-site spaces must:
(1) Be located within 1,000 feet of the use, as measured along the
shortest pedestrian route from the corner of the nearest parking
space to the main public entrance of the use served;
(2) Be located in zoning districts that permit nonaccessory parking or
that permit the principal use to be served by the off-site parking
spaces; and
(3) Be under the same ownership as the lot containing the use to be
served by the parking or be the subject of a legal instrument
authorizing use of the off-site parking spaces.
(f) Shared parking.
(1) General. Shared parking refers to the practice of two or more users
who need parking at different times making use of the same motor
vehicle parking spaces. Shared parking is encouraged as a means
of conserving land resources, reducing stormwater runoff,
reducing the heat island effect caused by large paved areas and
improving community appearance.
(2) Eligibility. Shared parking facilities are allowed for mixed-use
projects and for uses with different times of peak parking demand,
subject to approval by the Community Development Director.
(3) Submittal requirements and methodology.
§ 90-420.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-420.40
1:725
a. Applicants proposing to use shared parking as a means of
reducing overall motor vehicle parking requirements must
submit:
1. The names and addresses of the uses and of the owners or
tenants that are sharing the parking.
2. The location and number of parking spaces that are being
shared.
3. A shared parking analysis.
4. A legal instrument authorizing use of the shared parking
spaces.
b. The required shared parking analysis must be based on the
latest edition of the Urban Land Institute (ULI) shared parking
model or by surveys or other studies prepared by individuals
with expertise in parking and transportation.
c. The shared parking analysis must demonstrate that the peak
parking demands of the subject uses occur at different times
and that the parking area will be large enough for the
anticipated demands of all users.
(4) Location. Shared parking may be located on-site or off-site. Off-site
parking is subject to the regulations of Subsection (e) of this
section (§ 90-420.40).
(g) Other alternatives. The minimum motor vehicle and bicycle parking
ratios of Table 90-420-1 are not intended to be a barrier to development
or redevelopment or to make development and redevelopment
economically impractical or negatively impact the viability of
businesses. In order to allow for flexibility in addressing the actual
expected parking demand of specific uses, the Community Development
Director or Plan Commission, as applicable, is authorized to approve
alternatives to minimum parking requirements through the site plan
review process if:
(1) The applicant submits a parking study demonstrating that the
minimum off-street parking ratios of Table 90-420-1 do not
accurately reflect the actual day-to-day parking demand that can
reasonably be anticipated for the proposed use based on field
surveys of observed parking demand for similar use within the
Village or on external data from credible research organizations,
such as the Urban Land Institute (ULI) or the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE);
(2) The Community Development Director or Plan Commission, as
applicable, determines that the other allowed parking reduction
and credit provisions of this section are infeasible or do not apply;
and
§ 90-420.40 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-420.40
1:726
§ 90-420.50. Parking increases. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The maximum motor vehicle parking ratios of Table 90-420-1 are not
intended to negatively impact the viability of businesses. In order to allow
for flexibility in addressing the actual expected parking demand of specific
uses, the Community Development Director or Plan Commission, as
applicable, is authorized to approve alternatives to maximum parking
regulations through the site plan review process if the Community
Development Director or Plan Commission, as applicable, determines that
at least one of the following criteria is met:
§ 90-420.60. Bicycle parking. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(3) The Community Development Director or Plan Commission, as
applicable, determines that the reduced parking ratios proposed
are not likely to cause material adverse impacts on traffic
circulation and safety or on the general welfare of property owners
and residents in the surrounding area.
(a) The additional spaces will be located in a parking garage;
(b) A parking demand study indicates that provision of more than the
maximum number of spaces is warranted by anticipated parking
demand; or
(c) The site on which the parking lot is located will contain additional
facilities for the handling or treatment of stormwater runoff and the
adverse environmental effects of allowing additional parking spaces
will be offset by implementation of stormwater best management
practices.
(a) Purposes.
(1) Short-term bicycle parking. Short-term bicycle parking is generally
intended to serve the needs of cyclists who park their bicycles for
short time periods, including customers, clients, students and other
short-term visitors.
(2) Long-term bicycle parking. Long-term bicycle parking is generally
intended to serve the needs of cyclists who park their bicycles for
long time periods, primarily employees and residents.
(b) Floor area used for bicycle parking. Areas within a building that are
used to provide bicycle parking that complies with the bicycle parking
design and location requirements of this section are not counted as
floor area for the purpose of calculating motor vehicle parking
requirements.
(c) Design and location.
(1) General. All short-term and long-term bicycle parking spaces are
subject to the following general design and location requirements.
§ 90-420.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-420.60
1:727
a. Bicycle parking spaces must be illuminated if accessible to
users after dark.
b. Bicycle parking spaces must be located to be readily visible by
the public or by building users, except in the case of long-term
parking spaces located in secure areas accessible only to
employees, staff or residents.
c. Bicycle parking spaces must be accessible without climbing
stairs, going up or down a slope of more than 12%, and via a
route on the property that is designed to minimize conflicts
with motor vehicles and pedestrians.
d. All bike racks must be located at least two feet in all directions
from any obstruction, including other bike racks, walls, doors,
posts, or columns.
e. Nonresidential uses may use up to one required automobile
parking space as space for providing bicycle parking.
f. All required bicycle parking spaces must have minimum
dimensions of two feet in width by six feet in length, with a
minimum overhead vertical clearance of seven feet.
(2) Short-term bicycle parking. In addition to the general bicycle
parking design and location requirements of this section, all
required short-term bicycle parking must meet the following
requirements:
a. Short-term bicycle parking must be visible from the main
public building entrance and as conveniently located as the
nearest nondisabled motor vehicle parking space serving the
use. If no vehicle parking is provided, short-term bicycle
parking spaces must be located within 75 feet of a building
entrance.
b. Short-term bicycle parking spaces must be located on private
property unless the Community Development Director
approves a location within the public right-of-way.
(3) Long-term bicycle parking. In addition to the general bicycle
parking design and location requirements of this section, all
required long-term bicycle parking must meet the following
requirements:
a. Long-term bicycle parking spaces may not be inside of
dwelling units or on dwelling unit balconies.
b. Unless clearly visible from the main building entrance, a sign
indicating the location of all long-term bicycle parking spaces
must be prominently displayed near the main entrance to the
building or facility, and additional signs must be provided as
necessary to ensure easy way-finding.
§ 90-420.60 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-420.60
1:728
§ 90-420.70. Sidewalks and pedestrian circulation. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
c. Long-term bicycle parking spaces must protect the entire
bicycle, its components and accessories against theft and
inclement weather, including wind-driven rain and snow.
Acceptable forms of protection include
1. Individual bicycle lockers;
2. Attended parking areas;
3. Video-monitored parking areas;
4. Restricted-access parking areas; or
5. Other comparable arrangements approved by the
Community Development Director.
d. Except in the case of bicycle lockers with a separate access
door for each bike or attended facilities, all long-term bicycle
parking spaces must be designed to allow bicycles to be
securely locked to a bicycle rack.
(a) Sidewalks. Sidewalks or multi-use pathways must be provided along all
sides of every lot that abuts a public street.
(b) Internal pedestrian circulation. An internal circulation system for
pedestrian and nonmotorized travel must be provided on all lots except
those occupied solely by residential buildings containing fewer than
four dwelling units.
(c) Connection to public sidewalks. The internal pedestrian circulation
system must connect the main building entrance to all sidewalks
located along street frontages abutting the site. Required connections
must follow a direct route and not involve significant out-of-direction
travel for system users.
(d) Internal connections. The internal pedestrian circulation system must
connect all buildings on the site and provide connections to other areas
of the site likely to be used by pedestrians and nonmotorized travel,
such as parking areas, bicycle parking, usable open spaces, recreation
areas, and similar amenity features.
(e) Design. Required internal pedestrian circulation facilities must be
designed and constructed in accordance with the regulations of this
subsection.
(1) The internal pedestrian circulation system must be ADA-compliant.
(2) When the internal pedestrian circulation system crosses drive
aisles, it must be clearly differentiated through the use of elevation
changes, different paving material or other equally effective
§ 90-420.60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-420.70
1:729
§ 90-420.80. Accessible parking. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Accessible parking facilities (for persons with disabilities) must be provided
in accordance with all applicable state and federal regulations.
§ 90-420.90. Use of off-street parking areas. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
§ 90-420.100. Parking area layout and design. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
methods of safely accommodating nonmotorized travel, as
approved by the Community Development Director. Striping alone
does not meet this requirement.
(3) When the internal pedestrian circulation system is parallel and
adjacent to a motor vehicle travel lane, it must be a raised path at
least eight inches above the vehicle travel lane surface or be
separated from the vehicle travel lane by a raised curb, bollards,
landscaping or another physical barrier. If a raised path is used, the
ends of the raised portions must be equipped with accessible curb
ramps.
(a) Required off-street parking spaces are intended to serve residents,
tenants, patrons, employees, or guests of the principal use. Required
off-street parking areas may be used solely for the temporary parking of
licensed motor vehicles in operating condition.
(b) Required off-street parking spaces may not be used for the storage,
display or sale of goods equipment or materials. No motor vehicle
repair work of any kind is permitted in a required parking space.
(c) The Community Development Director is authorized to issue a permit
for temporary seasonal use of off-street parking areas for display and
sales of holiday and seasonal items (e.g., spring gardening supplies and
Christmas trees).
(d) Required spaces may be used for electric vehicle charging.
(a) Applicability. The parking layout and design regulations of this section
apply to all off-street parking lots for motor vehicles, whether
containing required or nonrequired parking spaces.
(b) Ingress and egress. All parking areas must be designed to allow
vehicles to enter and exit a street and cross public sidewalks in a
forward motion, except that this requirement does not apply when
motor vehicle access is to a local street.
(c) Parking stall size.
(1) Standard spaces. Except as expressly allowed for compact spaces
or universal spaces in the following Subsection (c)(2) and (3) or as
§ 90-420.70 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-420.100
1:730
expressly required for accessible parking spaces, parking spaces
must be designed as standard size spaces, in accordance with Table
90-420-2. Up to two feet of the front of a standard parking space,
as measured from a line parallel to the direction of the bumper
of a vehicle using the space, may be landscaped area instead of
paved. Such areas count toward interior parking lot landscaping
requirements.
(2) Compact spaces. Up to 20% of the parking spaces in parking lots
containing more than 10 parking spaces may be designated and
designed as compact parking spaces. Compact parking spaces
must be designed in accordance with Table 90-420-2. When
compact parking spaces are used, at least 80% of the total number
of parking spaces provided must be standard-size parking spaces.
(3) Universal spaces. Universal-size parking spaces may be used only
in parking lots containing more than 10 parking spaces. When
universal size parking spaces are used, no compact spaces are
allowed. All universal parking spaces must designed in accordance
with Table 90-420-2.
(d) Parking dimensions.
(1) Parking areas must be designed in accordance with Table 90-420-2,
which shows minimum dimensions for various parking layouts
(angles). Requirements for layouts or angles not shown in Table
90-420-2 may be interpolated from the layouts shown, as approved
by the Community Development Director.
Table 90-420-2
Parking Dimensions
Stall Type Stall Angle Stall Width Stall Length Aisle Width
Compact 7.5 18.0 12.0
Standard 9.0 20.0 12.0
Universal
0°
8.5 20.0 12.0
Compact 7.5 16.0 12.0
Standard 9.0 17.0 11.0
Universal
45°
8.5 17.0 12.0
Compact 7.5 16.0 16.0
Standard 9.0 17.0 15.0
Universal
60°
8.5 17.0 16.0
Compact 75° 7.5 16.0 21.0
§ 90-420.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-420.100
1:731
Table 90-420-2
Parking Dimensions
Stall Type Stall Angle Stall Width Stall Length Aisle Width
Standard 9.0 17.0 20.0
Universal 8.5 17.0 21.0
Compact 7.5 16.0 24.0
Standard 9.0 17.0 22.0
Universal
90°
8.5 17.0 23.0
Figure 90-420-1
Parking Dimensions
(e) Vertical clearance. All required parking spaces must have overhead
vertical clearance of at least seven feet.
(f) Marking. In all parking lots containing more than four parking spaces,
the location of each parking space must be identified by surface
markings at least four inches in width and be maintained so that they
are visible at all times.
(g) Surfacing. All off-street parking areas and access drives must be
surfaced and maintained with an asphaltic or Portland concrete
pavement or other hard, dust-free surface approved by the Village
Engineer.
(h) Landscape and screening. Off-street parking areas must be landscaped
and screened in accordance with the applicable provisions of Division
90-430.
(i) Tandem and stacked parking.
§ 90-420.100 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-420.100
1:732
§ 90-420.110. RV and heavy vehicle parking. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(1) Tandem parking spaces may be used to satisfy parking
requirements for household living uses when the tandem parking
spaces are assigned to the same dwelling unit.
(2) Tandem and stacked parking spaces may be used to satisfy offstreet
parking requirements for other use types when an attendant
is on duty during all hours of operation.
(j) Curbs and barriers. Curbs or similar barriers approved by the
Community Development Director must be provided to prevent motor
vehicles from encroaching into required setbacks and landscape areas,
as follows:
(1) All open off-street parking areas must provide a six-inch curb or
approved wheel barrier when abutting required setbacks,
landscape areas and adjoining property lines.
(2) Wheel barriers must be located at least two feet from the edge of
pavement or the area to be protected from encroachment.
(k) Plans. All applications for a building permit must be accompanied by a
fully dimensioned and scaled plan showing parking, driveway and
loading facilities provided to comply with this zoning chapter. If no
building permit is required, such plans must be submitted with the
zoning compliance permit application.
(a) Applicability. The regulations of this section apply in all R Zoning
Districts.
(b) Recreational vehicles and yard maintenance equipment. Boats, mobile
homes, motor homes, motor coaches, truck campers, trailers of any
type, tent campers, folding campers, yard maintenance equipment and
similar equipment or vehicles and cases or boxes used to transport such
vehicles or equipment may be parked or stored outside of a completely
enclosed building only if less than 41 feet in length and only in
compliance with the following regulations:
(1) If the vehicle or equipment is less than 22 feet in length:
a. It may be parked only in side or rear yards or on a hardsurfaced
driveway in the front yard; and
b. Only two such vehicles are permitted per 20,000 square feet of
parcel area.
(2) If the vehicle or equipment is between 22 feet and 40 feet in length:
a. It may be parked only in side or rear yards and set back at least
two feet from any lot line;
§ 90-420.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-420.110
1:733
§ 90-420.120. Stacking spaces. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
b. Only one such vehicle is permitted per 20,000 square feet of
parcel area;
c. During the period from May 1 to September 30, such vehicles
and equipment may be parked or stored on a hard-surfaced
driveway in the front yard;
d. During the period from October 1 to April 30, such vehicles and
equipment may be parked or stored in a driveway for loading
or unloading only and not to exceed 48 hours; and
e. Such vehicles and equipment must be located outside of public
rights-of-way, vision clearance triangles and drainage and
utility easements.
(c) Heavy vehicles. Heavy trucks, semitrucks, construction equipment,
farm equipment or commercial trucks over 14,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight rating (GVWR) are permitted on R-zoned lots only if parked or
stored within a completely enclosed building.
(1) GVWR is to be determined by the vehicle's license plate
classification and registration.
(2) All vehicles must be in good working, operable condition and
legally registered and licensed.
(3) Vehicles covered by the exceptions set forth in § 346.50, Wis.
Stats., are excepted from the prohibitions of this section. Vehicles
engaged in construction work are exempt from the prohibitions of
this section only when engaged directly in construction work.
Vehicles actively engaged in loading and unloading are also
exempted from this section. Vehicles that have been approved by
the Police Department as necessary for on-call service in
responding to police and fire emergencies are also exempt from the
prohibition of this section.
(a) Drive-through and drive-in uses. Drive-through and drive in uses are
allowed only as indicated in Table 90-420-3.
(b) Spaces required. Drive-through uses must provide stacking spaces for
each drive-through station in accordance with Table 90-420-3.
Table 90-420-3
Stacking Space Requirements
Use
Minimum Space
(per lane)
Automated teller machine 2 (from ATM)
Bank 3 (from service area)
§ 90-420.110 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-420.120
1:734
§ 90-420.130. Traffic impact analyses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Table 90-420-3
Stacking Space Requirements
Use
Minimum Space
(per lane)
Car wash 3 (from vehicle entrance)
Drugstore 2 (from pick-up window)
Restaurant drive-through 3 (from order board); bypass lane
required
Kiosks 2 (from service window)
Other As approved by Community
Development Director
(c) (Reserved)
(d) Dimensions. Each lane of drive-through stacking spaces must be at
least nine feet in width and 18 feet in length. Stacking lanes must be
delineated with pavement markings.
(e) Bypass lane. Drive-through restaurants must include a bypass lane
designed to allow vehicles to circumvent or leave the drive-through
stacking lane without waiting for other queued vehicles to exit. The
bypass lane must have a minimum width of 10 feet.
(f) Location and design. Stacking lanes must be located on the subject
property. They may not be located within required driveways or drive
aisles, parking spaces or loading areas and may not interfere with
access to parking and ingress and egress from the street. Stacking
lanes and drive-through windows may not be located between the
principal building and the front street.
(g) Pedestrian access. Drive-through stacking lanes may not obstruct any
sidewalk that provides pedestrian access from a public sidewalk to a
building entrance.
(h) Noise. Sound attenuation walls, landscaping or other mitigation
measures may be required by the Village to ensure that the drivethrough
facility will not have adverse noise-related impacts on nearby
residential uses.
(a) General. A traffic impact analysis (TIA) is required for proposed
developments that meet any of the following thresholds:
(1) Residential developments proposing 100 or more lots/dwelling
units;
§ 90-420.120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-420.130
1:735
§ 90-420.140. Loading. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(2) New residential or nonresidential developments or expansions of
existing developments that would result in average daily traffic
counts of 1,000 or more vehicles per day (ADT) or 100 plus trips
during peak traffic hours (PHT). This traffic count must be based on
the latest version of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE)
Trip Generation Manual;
(3) New schools with an enrollment of more than 150 students; or
(4) Includes one or more drive-through lanes.
(b) Areas of special traffic or safety concern. For sites of special traffic
concern (such as those found along blind curves, streets that exceed
their design capacity, or when driveways will be in close proximity to an
existing traffic signal, etc.), the Community Development Director is
authorized to require a technical memo or signal warrant analysis,
prepared by a traffic engineer or transportation planner.
(c) Scope. Before preparing the TIA, the developer must hold a scoping
meeting with Village staff to identify the area and needs that must be
addressed in the analysis. At a minimum, TIAs must provide an
evaluation of the impacts that the proposed development will have on
motor vehicle traffic, transit users, pedestrians and bicyclists.
(a) General. All uses that regularly receive materials or merchandise
carried by delivery vehicles must provide off-street loading facilities.
(b) Regulations. Off-street loading areas must be designed so that all
vehicle maneuvering and loading/unloading operations will occur on
private property and not interfere with or create safety hazards for
motorized or nonmotorized circulation.
(1) Unenclosed off-street loading areas must be setback at least 25 feet
from any abutting R-zoned properties.
(2) Loading spaces are prohibited in front yard areas.
(3) All loading areas and access drives must be surfaced and
maintained with an asphaltic or Portland cement binder concrete
or other dustless, all-weather surface approved by the Village
Engineer.
§ 90-420.130 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-420.140
1:736
DIVISION 90-430
Landscape and Screening
§ 90-430.10. Purposes. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The landscape and screening regulations of this division establish minimum
requirements for landscaping and screening. The regulations are intended
to advance the general purposes of this zoning chapter and to help:
§ 90-430.20. Applicability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Maintain and enhance the Village's appearance;
(b) Mitigate possible adverse impacts of higher-intensity land uses
abutting lower-intensity land uses;
(c) Reduce the impacts of noise and glare;
(d) Maintain and improve air quality;
(e) Protect surface water quality and reduce the negative impacts of
stormwater runoff by providing vegetated areas that filter and absorb
stormwater;
(f) Moderate heat by providing shade; and
(g) Encourage preservation and replacement of existing trees and
vegetation.
(a) The landscape and screening regulations of this division apply to lots
occupied by multi-unit residential, mixed-use and nonresidential
buildings in all zoning districts when:
(1) Any new building or vehicular use area is established. When a new
principal building is added to a lot, and the new building occupies
10% of more of the lot area, the entire lot must be brought into
compliance with the requirements of this division;
(2) The area of any existing vehicular use area is expanded and the
total resulting vehicular use area after expansion includes more
than six parking spaces or more than 2,500 square feet of paved
area;
(3) An existing or portion of an existing vehicular use area containing
more than 12 parking spaces or more than 5,000 square feet of
paved area is repaved or reconstructed in any of the following
ways:
a. Removing the top layer of asphalt and replacing with new
asphalt;
b. Applying a surface course of new asphalt on top of existing
asphalt; or
§ 90-430.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-430.20
1:737
§ 90-430.30. Vehicular use area screening. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
c. Pulverizing and stabilizing existing asphalt; or
(4) A use, activity, or feature requiring screening changes, or an
additional use, activity, or feature requiring screening is added, in
which case the entire site on which that use, activity, or feature is
located must be brought into compliance with the landscape and
screening regulations of this division.
(b) The following are expressly exempt from compliance with the
landscape and screening regulations of this division:
(1) Agricultural uses;
(2) Single-household and two-household uses;
(3) Public parks, open spaces, or natural resource areas;
(4) Reconstruction of any building that is damaged or destroyed by
fire, natural disaster or other means beyond the reasonable control
of the property owner; and
(5) Any other uses, site features or activities that are expressly
exempted under this zoning chapter.
(a) Purpose. A "vehicular use area" is an outdoor area on a lot that is used
for storage and operation of motor vehicles, including parking lots,
vehicle storage areas, vehicle display areas, loading areas, driveways,
and drive-through lanes. The vehicular use area screening regulations
of this section are intended to help mitigate the visual and operational
impacts of vehicular use areas located near streets or residential zoning
districts.
(b) Street frontage screening requirements.
(1) When required. The street frontage screening requirements of this
section apply to vehicular use areas located within 50 feet of any
(non-alley) street right-of-way. The requirements do not apply if
there are buildings or other site features that effectively block
views of the vehicular use area from the right-of-way.
(2) Options. Screening must be installed and maintained between the
vehicular use area and the street by one of the options described in
Table 90-430-1 or by a combination of those options.
§ 90-430.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-430.30
1:738
Table 90-430-1
Street Frontage Screening Options (Vehicular Use Areas)
Regulation Option A Option B Option C
Minimum width of
landscaped area
(feet)
10 5 None
Type and minimum
number of plants
required in
landscaped area
4 low shrubs or 8
perennials/
ornamental
grasses per 10
linear feet
4 low shrubs or 8
perennials/
ornamental
grasses per 20
linear feet
None
Minimum number of
canopy trees
required
1 per 25 linear
feet
1 per 25 linear
feet
1 per 50 linear
feet
Fence/wall required None Ornamental
metal fence
Masonry wall
Minimum fence/wall
height (feet)
None 3 3
Fence/wall opacity Above 4 feet
must be at least
50% open
Above 4 feet
must be at least
50% open
3 feet and lower
must be at least
50% opaque;
above 3 feet
must be at least
50% open
Figure 90-430-1
Street Frontage Screening Options (Vehicular Use Areas)
§ 90-430.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-430.30
1:739
(3) Existing vehicular use areas. When street frontage screening
requirements are triggered by repaving or reconstruction, a
change in the use being screened or a substantial improvement to
an existing building, the following exceptions apply:
a. The minimum width of the landscaped area in Table 90-430-1
may be reduced by up to 50% if necessary to maintain existing
pavement. No reduction is permitted for a principal use
vehicular use area or when the maximum number of parking
spaces allowed is exceeded.
b. When the existing pavement is less than five feet from the
right-of-way line, an ornamental metal fence with masonry
piers may be used in lieu of a masonry wall under Option C of
Table 90-430-1.
(4) Vehicular use area visibility. In order to promote visibility and
surveillance of vehicular use areas and public streets, low shrubs,
perennials or ornamental grasses may not be allowed to grow taller
than four feet, and portions of fences or walls above four feet in
height may not exceed 50% opacity. Trees must be maintained so
that the lowest branches are at least six feet above the ground
beneath the tree.
(5) Tree placement. Canopy trees required along on-street frontage
screening areas may be planted at regular or irregular intervals,
but in no case may trees be spaced more than 75 feet on center.
Trees adjacent to the vehicular use area may be counted as part of
required screening if they are within 20 feet of the right-of-way line
and within 20 feet of the vehicular use area.
(6) Public amenities. Public amenities, such as transit shelters,
benches, bicycle racks, sculptures, fountains and similar features,
may be integrated as part of the required screening. Screening
requirements may be reduced as needed to accommodate such
public amenities and streetscape features.
(c) R District screening requirements.
(1) When required. The R District screening requirements of this
section apply to vehicular use areas located within 25 feet of any Rzoned
lot. The requirements do not apply if there are buildings or
other site features that effectively block views of the vehicular use
area from the R-zoned lot.
(2) Options. Screening must be installed and maintained between the
vehicular use area and the R-zoned lot by one of the options
described in Table 90-430-2 or by a combination of those options.
§ 90-430.30 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-430.30
1:740
Table 90-430-2
R District Screening Options (Vehicular Use Areas)
Regulation Option A Option B Option C
Adjacent to side or rear yard
Minimum width
of landscaped
area (feet)
10 5 None
Type and
minimum
number of
plants required
1 evergreen tree
or 2 tall shrubs
per 5 linear feet
1 evergreen tree
or 2 tall shrubs
per 10 linear feet
None
Fence/wall
required
None Opaque fence or
wall
Masonry wall
Minimum fence/
wall height
(feet)
None 4 4
Fence/wall
opacity
None 4 feet and lower
must be 100%
opaque
4 feet and lower
must be 100%
opaque
Adjacent to front yard
Minimum width
of landscaped
area (feet)
10 5 None
Type and
minimum
number of
plants required
2 low shrubs or 4
perennials/
ornamental
grasses per 5
linear feet
2 low shrubs or 4
perennials/
ornamental
grasses per 10
linear feet
None
Fence/wall
required
None Ornamental fence
or opaque fence
or wall
Masonry wall
Minimum fence/
wall height
(feet)
None 3 3
Fence/wall
opacity
None Above 4 feet must
be at least 50%
open
3 feet and lower
must be 50%
opaque; above 4
feet must be at
least 50% open
§ 90-430.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-430.30
1:741
§ 90-430.40. Interior parking lot landscaping. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Figure 90-430-2
R District Screening Options (Vehicular Use Areas)
(3) Vacant lots. Screening is required regardless of whether a building
exists on the R-zoned lot that triggers the requirement for R
District screening, unless the Community Development Director
determines that such screening is unnecessary because the vacant
lot is unlikely to be developed with residential or other sensitive
land uses. Areas adjacent to the required minimum front setback
area on a vacant lot must be screened as if such areas were
adjacent to a front yard area.
(d) Materials, installation and maintenance. See §§ 90-430.70 and
90-430.80.
(a) Purpose. The interior parking lot landscaping regulations of this section
are intended to help mitigate the visual and stormwater runoff impacts
of parking lots and provide shade for parked vehicles and pedestrians.
(b) When required. The interior parking lot landscaping regulations of this
section apply as stated in § 90-430.20.
(c) Trees and landscape areas required. A minimum of one canopy tree and
100 square feet of landscape area is required for every four parking
spaces or fraction thereof, provided that:
(1) Parking spaces within structures, designated motorcycle parking
spaces and bicycle parking spaces are not included when
determining the minimum amount of landscaping required.
(2) Trees and landscaped areas used to meet the screening
requirements of this section are counted toward total parking lot
landscaping requirements.
§ 90-430.30 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-430.40
1:742
(d) Location and distribution. Trees, landscaped areas and green
infrastructure used to meet the requirements of this division must be
located within 50 feet of the parking lot. No portion of a parking lot may
be more than 100 feet from an interior or perimeter landscaped area or
more than 150 feet from an interior or perimeter canopy tree. Large
parking lots must be divided into areas of not more than 50,000 square
feet each through the use of landscaped islands, peninsulas or medians.
(e) Landscape areas. Landscaped areas must be planted with low shrubs,
perennials or ornamental grasses. A minimum of four low shrubs, or
eight perennials or ornamental grasses, are required per 100 square
feet of landscaped area. Equivalent combinations of plants may be
used, with two perennials or ornamental grasses equivalent to one low
shrub.
(f) Green infrastructure incentives. The interior parking lot landscaping
requirement of this division may be reduced to not less than one tree
and 100 square feet of landscaped area per eight parking spaces if the
following amounts of green infrastructure features are provided as a
substitute for trees and landscaped areas:
(1) Permeable paving. One hundred square feet of permeable paving
may be substituted for one tree and 100 square feet of landscaped
area.
(2) Rain gardens. One hundred square feet of rain garden with a
rainwater catchment area of at least 1,000 square feet may be
substituted for one tree and 100 square feet of landscaped area.
(3) Bioswales. Fifty cubic feet (375 gallons) of bioretention capacity
with a rainwater catchment area of at least 1,000 square feet may
be substituted for one tree and 100 square feet of landscaped area.
(g) Existing parking lots. When interior parking lot landscaping
requirements are triggered by repaving or reconstruction, a change in
the use being screened or a substantial improvement to an existing
building and compliance with the requirements of this subsection would
result in a loss of more than 10% of total parking spaces or would result
in the number of spaces being reduced to below the minimum number
required for the subject use, the amount of landscaping required by
Subsection (c) may be reduced to a minimum of one tree and 100
square feet of landscaped area per eight parking spaces, and may be
further reduced to not less than one tree and 100 square feet of
landscaped area per 16 parking spaces through the use of green
infrastructure features as specified in Subsection (f). This provision
does not apply to principal use parking lots or when the maximum
number of parking spaces allowed is exceeded.
(h) Elements, installation and maintenance. See §§ 90-430.70 and
90-430.80.
§ 90-430.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-430.50
1:743
§ 90-430.50. Outdoor storage and work area screening. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Purpose. The outdoor storage and work area screening regulations of
this section are intended to help mitigate the visual and operational
impacts of outdoor storage and work areas located near streets or
nonindustrial zoning districts.
(b) Street frontage screening requirements.
(1) When required. The street frontage screening requirements of this
section apply to outdoor storage areas and outdoor work areas
associated with any public or civic, commercial, or industrial use
when such areas are visible from any (non-alley) street rights-ofway.
The requirements do not apply if there are buildings or other
site features that effectively block views of such outdoor storage
and work areas from the right-of-way.
(2) Options. Screening must be installed and maintained between
outdoor storage and work areas and the street by one of the options
described in Table 90-430-3 or by a combination of those options.
Table 90-430-3
Street Frontage Screening Options (Outdoor Storage and Work
Areas)
Regulation Option A Option B Option C
Minimum width of
landscaped area
(feet)
20 10 5
Type and minimum
number of plants
required in
landscaped area
1 evergreen tree
or 2 tall shrubs
per 5 linear feet
1 evergreen tree
or 2 tall shrubs
per 10 linear
feet
None
Minimum number of
canopy trees
required
1 per 25 linear
feet
1 per 25 linear
feet
1 per 50 linear
feet
Fence/wall required None Opaque fence or
wall
Masonry wall
Minimum fence/wall
height (feet)
None 6 6
Fence/wall opacity
requirement
None Below 6 feet
must be 100%
opaque
Below 6 feet
must be 100%
opaque
§ 90-430.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-430.50
1:744
Figure 90-430-3
Street Frontage Screening Options (Outdoor Storage and Work Areas)
(3) Tree placement. Canopy trees required along on-street frontage
screening areas may be planted at regular or irregular intervals,
but in no case may trees be spaced more than 75 feet on center.
Trees adjacent to outdoor storage and work areas may be counted
as part of required screening if they are within 20 feet of the rightof-
way line and within 20 feet of the outdoor storage or work area.
(c) Nonindustrial district screening requirements.
(1) When required. The nonindustrial district screening requirements
of this section apply to outdoor storage areas and outdoor work
areas associated with any public or civic, commercial, or industrial
use when such areas are visible from any abutting nonindustrialzoned
lot. The requirements do not apply if there are buildings or
other site features that effectively block views of the outdoor
storage areas and outdoor work areas from the abutting
nonindustrial-zoned lot.
(2) Options. Screening must be installed and maintained between
outdoor storage areas and outdoor work areas and abutting
nonindustrial-zoned lots by one of the options described in Table
90-430-4 or by a combination of those options.
§ 90-430.50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-430.50
1:745
§ 90-430.60. Trash, recycling and mechanical equipment screening.
[Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Table 90-430-4
Nonindustrial District Screening Options (Outdoor Storage and
Work Areas)
Regulation Option A Option B Option C
Minimum width of
landscaped area
(feet)
20 10 None
Type and minimum
number of plants
required
1 evergreen tree
or 2 tall shrubs
per 5 linear feet
1 evergreen tree
or 2 tall shrubs
per 10 linear
feet
None
Fence/wall required None Opaque fence or
wall
Masonry wall
Minimum fence/wall
height (feet)
None 6 6
Fence/wall opacity
requirement
None Below 6 feet
must be 100%
opaque
Below 6 feet
must be 100%
opaque
Figure 90-430-4
Nonindustrial District Screening Options (Outdoor Storage and Work Areas)
(d) Elements, installation and maintenance. See §§ 90-430.70 and
90-430.80.
(a) Purpose. The trash, recycling and mechanical equipment screening
regulations of this section are intended to help mitigate the visual and
operational impacts of mechanical equipment, trash and recycling
§ 90-430.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-430.60
1:746
§ 90-430.70. Landscape and screening elements. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
equipment and dumpster storage areas located near streets or
nonindustrial zoning districts.
(b) When required. The trash, recycling and mechanical equipment
screening requirements of this section apply to trash, recycling and
mechanical equipment areas that are visible from any public street or
abutting nonindustrial-zoned lot. The requirements do not apply to
areas located on an R-zoned lot that contains three or fewer dwelling
units or when there are buildings or other site features that effectively
block views of the trash, recycling and mechanical equipment areas
from streets or abutting nonindustrial-zoned lots.
(c) Options. Screening must be installed and maintained between outdoor
storage areas and outdoor work areas and abutting nonindustrial-zoned
lots by one of the options described in Table 90-430-5 or by a
combination of those options.
Table 90-430-5
Trash, Recycling and Mechanical Equipment Screening Options
Regulation Option A Option B Option C
Minimum width of
landscaped area
(feet)
10 5 None
Type and minimum
number of plants
required
1 evergreen
tree or 2 tall
shrubs per 5
linear feet
1 evergreen
tree or 2 tall
shrubs per 10
linear feet
None
Fence/wall
required
None Opaque fence
or wall
Masonry wall
Minimum fence/
wall height (feet)
None 4 4
Fence/wall opacity
requirement
None Below 4 feet
must be 100%
opaque
Below 4 feet
must be 100%
opaque
(d) Elements, installation and maintenance. See §§ 90-430.70 and
90-430.80.
(a) Applicability. The landscape and screening element provisions of this
section apply to all trees, plant materials, and other materials and
features used to satisfy the landscaping and screening requirements of
this zoning chapter.
(b) Canopy trees.
§ 90-430.60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-430.70
1:747
(1) General. Canopy trees used to satisfy the requirements of this
division must be of a deciduous street tree variety with a leaf and
branch structure that creates a uniform crown and an opaque tree
canopy.
a. Tree species are subject to approval by the Community
Development Director.
b. The planting of ash trees is expressly prohibited.
c. Ornamental trees may be used to satisfy canopy tree
requirements if they meet the minimum size requirements.
Ornamental trees must be set back at least five feet from all
sidewalks. No more than 50% of total trees provided may be
ornamental trees.
d. Trees in the abutting public right-of-way immediately adjacent
to the subject property may be counted towards the
landscaping and screening requirements of this division if
approved by the Community Development Director.
(2) Tree size. Canopy trees must be at least 2.5-inch-caliper size at the
time of planting, except that two canopy trees of at least 1.5-inchcaliper
size may be substituted for one tree of 2.5-inch-caliper size.
(3) Planting areas. Any area used for planting canopy trees must have
surface area of at least 100 square feet and at least 150 cubic feet
of planting soil per tree. Planting areas for canopy trees may
include modular suspended pavement systems that contain healthy
noncompacted soil, and the permeable surface area of such
systems may be counted toward the minimum surface area
required.
(4) Credit for existing trees. An existing canopy tree on the subject lot
may be counted towards the minimum canopy tree requirements if
it complies with the regulations of this subsection and no soil within
five feet of the tree is disturbed. In addition:
a. Any existing canopy tree greater than twelve-inch-caliper size
may be counted as two trees if no soil within 10 feet of the tree
is disturbed; and
b. An existing canopy tree greater than eighteen-inch-caliper size
may be counted as three trees if no soil within 15 feet of the
tree is disturbed.
(5) Tree diversity. When a site has 10 or more trees, no single species
may comprise more than 50% of the trees used to meet the
requirements of this section.
(c) Landscaped areas.
§ 90-430.70 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-430.70
1:748
(1) General. Landscaped areas consist of planting beds filled with lowlevel
or eye-level plants. Low-level plants include low shrubs,
perennials and ornamental grasses. Eye-level plants include
evergreen trees and tall shrubs. When used for screening, low-level
plants are intended to define spaces and allow for natural
surveillance, while eye-level plants are intended to obscure the
view of the area being screened. The type and number of plants
required is determined by the area being screened, the presence of
a fence or wall and the size of the landscaped area.
(2) Shrubs.
a. Low shrubs are deciduous shrubs or evergreen shrubs that are
expected to grow to a mature height of no more than four feet.
Perennials or ornamental grasses may be substituted for
required low shrubs at the rate of two perennials or two
ornamental grasses per one low shrub. Evergreen trees may be
substituted for low shrubs at the rate of one evergreen tree per
two low shrubs.
b. Tall shrubs are deciduous shrubs or evergreen shrubs that are
expected to grow to a mature height of not less than six feet.
Evergreen trees may be substituted for tall shrubs at the rate
of one evergreen tree per two tall shrubs.
(3) Planting soil. Landscaped areas must have healthy noncompact
planting soil at least 18 inches deep.
(4) Plant combinations. When landscaped areas allow for multiple
plant types, any equivalent combination of the permitted plant
types may be used.
(5) Plant size. Minimum and maximum plant sizes for low-level and
eye-level plants are specified in Table 90-430-6.
Table 90-430-6
Plant Size
Plant Type
Minimum
Container Size
at Time of
Planting
(gallons)
Minimum
Height at Time
of Planting
(feet)
Maximum
Height at
Maturity
(feet)
Perennials/
ornamental grasses
1 1 4
Low shrubs 3 1.5 4
Tall shrubs 3 4 None
Evergreen trees NA 6 None
§ 90-430.70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-430.70
1:749
(d) Fences and walls.
(1) General. When a masonry wall, ornamental metal fence or opaque
fence is used to meet the screening requirements of this division, it
must be consistent with the type of fence required, the opacity and
height standards for the area being screened, and the screening
method selected. When no fence is required, a fence or wall of any
type is permitted if otherwise permitted in the zoning district. If
any fence other than an ornamental metal fence is present between
an area requiring screening and a right-of-way line, the fence must
be set back behind the required landscaped area, as viewed from
the street.
(2) Masonry walls. A masonry wall is intended to replace low-level and
eye-level plants when space for sufficient planting does not exist.
When a masonry wall is used to meet minimum screening
requirements, it must be constructed of attractive, high-quality,
durable-finish materials, such as brick, cast stone, decorative block
or stucco over standard concrete masonry blocks. The color,
texture and type of materials used on masonry walls must be
similar to or compatible with the materials used on the principal
building on the subject lot. If the principal building on the lot is not
of masonry construction, a solid wall at least eight inches thick
constructed of nonmasonry materials may be used if approved by
the Community Development Director. An ornamental metal fence
may be constructed atop a masonry wall, or a masonry wall may
have openings consisting of ornamental metal fencing if the fence
or wall meets the opacity requirements for the area being screened
and the screening method selected. When plants are not required
due to the presence of a masonry wall, they are permitted.
(3) Ornamental metal fences. An ornamental metal fence is intended to
complement low-level and eye-level plants when space for planting
is limited. When an ornamental metal fence is used to meet
minimum screening requirements, it must have decorative metal
pickets at least 0.75 inch wide and spaced no farther apart than an
average of six inches on center. The standards for picket width and
spacing may be waived by the Community Development Director
for custom metal fences with an opacity of at least 15%. When a
custom fence has an opacity of more than 50%, it must be set back
behind the required landscaping, as viewed from the street. An
ornamental metal fence may include piers constructed of masonry,
stone, or wood. An ornamental metal fence may be constructed
atop a masonry wall or have solid portions consisting of masonry if
the fence meets the opacity requirements for the area being
screened and the screening method selected. In an industrial
district, a welded wire metal fence may be used as an alternative to
an ornamental metal fence. A welded wire metal fence must be
rigid and composed of architectural metal panels or heavy-duty
§ 90-430.70 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-430.70
1:750
welded wire mesh with coated metal wires at least 1/8 inch in
diameter (10-gauge or less).
(4) Opaque fences. An opaque fence is intended to completely obscure
the view of the area being screened. An opaque fence may be
constructed of masonry, stone, metal, wood, vinyl or composite
material, gabions filled with stone material, or a combination of
such materials. Chain-link fences with slats or mesh screening are
not considered opaque fences.
(5) Masonry piers. An ornamental metal fence or opaque fence used to
meet minimum screening requirements must have masonry piers if
used as an alternative to masonry walls. Masonry piers must be
spaced no more than 25 feet apart and also provided on corners
and at changes in direction. Masonry piers must be at least 16
inches wide and 16 inches deep with a minimum height of three
feet. The color, texture and type of materials used on masonry piers
must be similar to or compatible with the materials used on the
principal building located on the subject lot. If the principal
building is not of masonry construction, the piers may be omitted or
constructed of nonmasonry materials if approved by the
Community Development Director.
(6) Prohibited fence or wall materials. A fence or wall used to meet the
minimum screening requirements may not include corbeled
masonry blocks or other dry stack blocks, structural corrugated
metal, metal siding or a metal panel and batten system, or exterior
insulation and finish systems (EIFS) or simulated stucco products.
(7) Gaps in fences and walls. When a fence or wall is used to meet the
minimum screening requirements of this division, such fence or
wall must be provided throughout the length of the landscaped
area except in the following circumstances:
a. Adjacent to canopy trees. In order to facilitate proper growth
of canopy trees, a fence or wall is not required within five feet
of new or existing trees.
b. Access points. Gaps in a fence or wall may occur as necessary
to accommodate vehicle and pedestrian access, bicycle
parking spaces and transit shelters. A fence or wall is not
required within 10 feet of an access drive.
c. Public amenities. Gaps in a fence or wall may occur as
necessary to accommodate public art, water features, street
furniture or other public amenities.
(8) Grade changes. If there is an elevation difference between an area
or object being screened and the street or adjacent property, the
height of fences and walls must be measured from the point of
highest elevation.
§ 90-430.70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-430.70
1:751
§ 90-430.80. Installation and maintenance. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(e) Green infrastructure. Green infrastructure is any combination of
landscaping, facilities, or equipment that captures rainwater at or near
the site where it falls by infiltration into the soil, evapotranspiration by
plants, or storage for reuse. The following green infrastructure features
may be used for interior parking landscaping, as described in
§ 90-430.40:
(1) Permeable paving. Permeable paving is a surface paved with
permeable pavers, porous concrete or porous asphalt that allows
water infiltration into the soil.
(2) Rain garden. A rain garden is a landscaped area specifically
designed to capture and infiltrate stormwater and filled with deeprooted
plants.
(3) Bioswale. A bioswale is a depressed area designed to capture and
infiltrate stormwater runoff and remove pollutants. Constructed
wetlands and other bioretention facilities may also be considered
bioswales for the purposes of this division.
(4) Rainwater catchment area. A rainwater catchment area is an area
from which rainfall flows into a rain garden, bioswale or other
bioretention facility.
(f) Other landscaping and screening elements.
(1) Berms. Berms are permitted in all zoning districts. A berm may not
be used to meet the minimum screening requirements of this
section.
(2) Bollards. Bollards are permitted in all circumstances but may not
be used to meet the minimum requirements of this section.
(3) Boulders. Boulders and other hard, round elements greater than 18
inches in diameter with irregular surfaces meant to appear eroded
by nature are prohibited within 10 feet of a street right-of-way.
Masonry objects and structures with flat, finished surfaces are
permitted as a means to mark a gateway condition, provide
pedestrian seating, or to define a street edge. Retaining walls
consisting of boulders or stones are permitted, but may not be used
to meet the minimum screening requirements of this division.
(a) Installation.
(1) Required landscaping must be installed in accordance with an
approved landscape plan.
(2) All trees and plant material must be installed in accordance with
sound nursery practices, in a manner designed to encourage
vigorous growth.
§ 90-430.70 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-430.80
1:752
(3) All landscaped areas that are adjacent to pavement must be
protected with curbs or equivalent barriers. Flush curbs, curb cuts,
or other methods must be used to direct stormwater to landscape
areas that abut paved areas.
(4) Landscaping may not obstruct traffic visibility at street
intersections or driveways and must comply with all applicable
intersection sight distance regulations.
(5) When landscaping is placed or installed within the public right-ofway,
the Village has no obligation to replace or repair such
landscaping if removed or damaged by Village field operations or
other governmental functions. The Village also has no obligation to
maintain aboveground or below-ground improvements or
landscaping within the public right-of-way.
(b) Encroachment into right-of-way. Landscaped areas may encroach into
the public right-of-way, but fences and walls used for screening may not
be constructed in the public right-of-way. No tree or shrub may be
planted in the public right-of-way unless such planting is authorized by
the Community Development Director. Plants or other landscaping
elements may not obstruct or encroach on public sidewalks.
(c) Protection. All landscape areas provided to meet the requirements of
this zoning chapter must be protected from potential damage by
adjacent uses and development, including parking and storage areas.
(d) Timing of installation. All required landscape and screening elements
must be installed as soon as practical, preferably prior to occupancy. A
delay in the installation of plantings may be authorized by the
Community Development Director for up to six months after permit
issuance.
(e) Maintenance.
(1) Required landscaping and screening must be continuously
maintained, including necessary watering; weeding; pruning; pest
control; litter and debris cleanup; and replacement of dead,
diseased or damaged plant material.
(2) Failure to comply with an approved landscaping plan, including
failure to maintain required landscaping and screening and failure
to replace dead, diseased or damaged landscaping, constitutes a
violation of this zoning chapter.
(3) The property owner is responsible for maintenance of trees and
landscaping in accordance with the approved landscape plan and
the regulations of this zoning chapter. Any dead, diseased or
damaged trees, landscaping or screening materials must be
removed and replaced by the property owner within 90 days of the
date that written notice of the obligation to remove and replace
required landscaping is issued by the Village. Property owners
§ 90-430.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-430.80
1:753
§ 90-430.90. Landscape plans. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-430.100. Alternative compliance. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
have no obligation to replace or restore required landscaping that
is damaged or destroyed as a direct result of government action or
lawful action of a franchise utility provider.
(a) Required information. All site plans and building permit applications for
sites requiring landscaping must include a landscape plan that complies
with the landscape plan submittal requirements specified by the
Community Development Director.
(b) Administrative review. After receipt of a complete landscape plan, the
Community Development Director must:
(1) Approve the landscape plan as complying with the requirements of
this division;
(2) Approve the landscape plan with conditions of approval that will
bring it into compliance with the requirements of this division; or
(3) Reject the landscape plan as failing to comply with the
requirements of this division.
(a) To accommodate creativity in landscape and screening design and to
allow for flexibility in addressing site-specific development/
redevelopment challenges, the Community Development Director is
authorized to approve alternative compliance landscape plans sealed by
a landscape architect licensed to practice in the State of Wisconsin. In
order to approve an alternative compliance landscape plan, the
Community Development Director must determine that one or more of
the following conditions or opportunities are present:
(1) The subject site has space limitations, an unusual shape or other
factors that make strict compliance with applicable landscaping
and screening regulations impossible or impractical;
(2) Physical conditions on or adjacent to the site, such as topography,
soils, vegetation or existing structures or utilities, are such that
strict compliance is impossible, impractical or of no value in terms
of advancing the general purposes of this division;
(3) Safety considerations, such as intersection visibility, utility
locations, etc., make alternative compliance necessary; or
(4) Creative, alternative landscape plans will provide an equal or
better means of meeting the intent of the landscaping and
screening regulations of this division.
(b) The Community Development Director is expressly authorized to
approve alternative compliance landscape plans for projects
implementing low-impact development practices or seeking sustainable
§ 90-430.80 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-430.100
1:754
development or green building certification from nationally recognized
organizations, such as the International Code Council, the U.S. Green
Building Council, the International Living Future Institute, the U.S.
Green Building Initiative or SITES.
§ 90-430.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-430.100
1:755

DIVISION 90-435
Fences and Walls
§ 90-435.10. Applicability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The fence and wall regulations of this division apply to all fences and walls.
See also § 90-430.70 for the specifications governing fences and walls used
to satisfy landscape and screening regulations of Division 90-430.
§ 90-435.20. Prohibited locations. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-435.30. General regulations. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-435.40. Fences and walls in residential districts. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-435.50. Fences and walls in districts other than residential
districts. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Fences and walls in districts other than R Districts are subject to a
maximum height limit of eight feet. The Plan Commission is authorized
(a) Fences and walls may not encroach upon any public property or rightsof-
way.
(b) Solid or opaque fences and walls may not be constructed or remain in a
position in violation of the intersection visibility regulations of Division
90-437.
(a) The finished or more aesthetically pleasing side of all fences must face
the adjacent neighbor, public right-of-way or Village-approved private
drive.
(b) Shrubs, trees, or hedges planted to function as a opaque fence or wall
are subject to the applicable fence and wall height regulations of this
division.
(c) Fence heights are measured in accordance with § 90-610.160.
(a) Front yard. Fences and walls are permitted in the front yard area of a
lot in an R District only if such fence or wall does not exceed 3.5 feet in
height. All other front yard fences and walls in R Districts are
prohibited. For purposes of this provision, the front yard area is
considered the area forward of the street-side-facing wall of the
principal building (between the principal building and the street). On
corners lots, only one of the street yards is required to be designated as
a front yard area for purposes of these fence and wall regulations.
(b) Side and rear yards. Fences or walls erected along the interior side lot
line, in the interior side yard (between abutting properties), along the
rear lot line, or in the rear yard may not exceed six feet in height.
§ 90-435.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-435.50
1:757
security fences and walls up to 10 feet in height in accordance with the Plan
Commission site plan procedures of Division 90-540.
§ 90-435.60. Materials. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Unless otherwise expressly stated in this zoning chapter, fences, walls,
screens, and retaining walls may be constructed of wood, masonry,
concrete, wrought-iron, or chain-link. The Community Development
Director is authorized to approve the use of alternative materials,
provided that the material offered is at least the equivalent of the
above-prescribed materials in suitability, strength and durability.
(b) No electrified, barbed wire, razor wire, or any other type of fence
designed to cause bodily harm is allowed in any district, except that the
Community Development Director is authorized to approve such
fencing in A2, M2, M3, or P2 Districts, subject to administrative site
plan approval.
§ 90-435.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-435.60
1:758
DIVISION 90-437
Intersection Visibility
§ 90-437.10. Applicability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The intersection visibility regulations of this division apply to lots in all
zoning districts except MX3 and MX4.
§ 90-437.20. Visibility triangles established. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
An imaginary intersection visibility triangle is established on corner lots at
the intersection of all streets. Nothing may be erected, placed, planted, or
allowed to grow between a height of 2.5 feet and 10 feet above the elevation
of the center point of the street intersection within the defined visibility
triangle area. This prohibition does not apply to highway and traffic signs,
and public utility lines and nonopaque fences.
§ 90-437.30. Visibility triangles defined. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Intersection visibility triangles are formed by two lines that begin at the
point of intersection of the subject lot's street lot lines. These lines extend
for a distance of 20 feet along each street lot line. A third connecting line
completes the triangle.
Figure 90-437-1
Intersection Visibility
§ 90-437.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-437.30
1:759

DIVISION 90-440
Signs
§ 90-440.10. General provisions. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Scope and purpose.
(1) The sign regulations of this division establish regulations for the
fabrication, construction, and use of signs in the Village. The
regulations govern the location, type, size, and height of signs
within the Village.
(2) These sign regulations do not regulate every form and instance of
visual communication that may be displayed. Rather, they are
intended to regulate those forms and instances that are most likely
to meaningfully affect one or more general purposes or findings set
forth in this division.
(b) Findings. The adoption of this division reflects the formal findings by
the Plan Commission and Village Board that these sign regulations
advance the following compelling governmental interests:
(1) Protecting Village residents. Signs can obstruct views, distract
motorists, displace alternative uses for land, and pose other
problems that legitimately require regulation.
(2) Protecting property values. Regulating signs preserves the
character of various neighborhoods, creates a harmonious
community, and encourages economic development. This division
allows adequate communication through signage while
encouraging aesthetic quality in the design, location, size and
purpose of all signs.
(3) Promoting public health, safety and general welfare. Regulating
signs helps protect all persons using public thoroughfares and
rights-of-way within the Village in relation to the signage displayed
thereon, or overhanging, or projecting into such public spaces.
(c) Interpretation and administration. The regulations of this division must
be interpreted and administered in a manner consistent with the First
Amendment guarantee of free speech.
(d) Content neutrality. Any sign allowed under this chapter may contain, in
lieu of any other message or copy, any lawful noncommercial message,
as long as the sign complies with all size, height, location and other
applicable regulations of this division.
(e) Compliance required. The sign regulations of this division and all local
and state building codes apply to all signs in all zoning districts, except
as may be otherwise expressly stated in this chapter.
(f) General government exemption. The sign regulations of this division
are not intended to and do not apply to signs erected, maintained or
§ 90-440.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-440.10
1:761
§ 90-440.20. Prohibited signs and sign characteristics. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The following signs and sign characteristics are prohibited except as
otherwise expressly stated:
otherwise posted, owned or leased by the Village, state, or federal
government. The inclusion of the term "government" in describing
some types of signs does not subject the government to regulation but
instead is intended to help clarify the types of signs that are exempt
under this general government exemption.
(a) Signs for which no required permit has been issued;
(b) Signs that by reason of position, shape, color or design interfere with,
obstruct the view of, or may be confused with any authorized traffic
sign, signal or device;
(c) Signs that use words such as "stop," "look," "danger," or any other
word, phrase, symbol, or character in a manner that interferes with,
misleads, or confuses users of streets or highways;
(d) Fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating, or otherwise moving signs,
such as windsocks, motorized signs, pennants, pinwheels, festoons,
inflatables, and streamers (does not apply to banner signs);
(e) Signs that project above the building parapet or eave;
(f) Flashing, scrolling, or animated signs;
(g) Beacons and search lights;
(h) Nonaccessory signs (also known as "billboards" and "off-premises
advertising signs");
(i) Abandoned signs;
(j) Signs mounted on platforms with wheels, including portable trailer
signs;
(k) Signs that prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or
fire escape;
(l) Signs attached to a standpipe or fire escape;
(m) Roof signs;
(n) Signs attached to or painted on a licensed motor vehicle if the sign:
(1) Directs attention to a business, service, commodity, or activity
offered or sold on the premises; and
(2) If the vehicle is parked closer to the street than the nearest
building wall (does not apply to vehicles parked for the purpose of
immediate loading and unloading).
§ 90-440.10 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-440.20
1:762
§ 90-440.30. Construction, maintenance and appearance. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(o) Signs attached to or painted on an inoperable or unlicensed vehicle
(motorized or nonmotorized) located in view of the right-of-way.
(p) Signs located in or obstructing required parking or loading spaces, or
that otherwise obstruct vehicular or pedestrian access or circulation, or
that pose any other hazard to motorized or nonmotorized travel;
(q) Signs that violate the intersection visibility regulations of Division
90-437;
(r) Signs located in or that project into the right-of-way of a public street,
except as expressly allowed under this division or as otherwise
permitted by the Village; and
(s) Sign displays with a brightness of such intensity or brilliance that they
impair the vision or endanger the safety and welfare of any pedestrian,
cyclist, or person operating a motor vehicle.
(a) All signs must be constructed, mounted, and maintained so as to comply
with all applicable provisions of the building code and electrical code.
(b) The base or supports of all ground-mounted signs must be securely
anchored to a concrete base or footing and must meet applicable
minimum wind load capabilities.
(c) The footing and related support structure of a permanent freestanding
sign, including bolts, flanges, and brackets, must be concealed by
landscaping.
(d) Signs must be mounted so that the method of installation is concealed.
(e) Signs must be anchored to minimize any lateral movement that would
cause wear on the sign face or supporting members or connections.
(f) All permanent signs and their supporting members must be constructed
of standardized sign materials.
(g) No combustible materials other than approved plastics may be used in
the construction of electric signs.
(h) All signs must remain in a state of proper maintenance, including the
absence of loose materials (including peeling paint, paper or other
material), the lack of excessive rust, the lack of excessive vibration or
shaking, and the presence of the original structural integrity of the
sign, its frame and other supports, its mounting, and all other
components.
(i) Any signs that are rotted, unsafe, or that are not in a state of proper
maintenance must be repaired or removed by the licensee or owner of
§ 90-440.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-440.30
1:763
§ 90-440.40. Sign permits. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-440.50. Signs allowed without sign permit. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
The following signs may be erected and maintained without a sign permit
as long as they do not constitute a hazard or nuisance. Such signs are not
counted as signs for purposes of determining the number of signs or amount
of signage on a lot.
the sign or owner of the property upon which the sign stands, upon
notice of the Village.
(j) All signs erected or installed after September 24, 2018, must display in
a conspicuous place thereon the date of erection, the manufacturer's
name, the permit number, and the voltage of any electrical apparatus
used in connection with the sign.
(k) The owner, lessee, or manager of a sign, and the owner of the land on
which the same is located, must keep grass or weeds and other growth
cut and debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the site on
which the sign is located.
(l) If a permitted sign is suspended or projects above a public right-of-way,
the issuance and continuation of a sign permit must be conditioned on
the sign owner agreeing to hold the Village harmless and obtaining and
maintaining in force liability insurance for such a sign in an amount of
at least $500,000 per occurrence per sign or such greater amount as
the Village may reasonably determine.
(a) A sign permit must be obtained for any and all signs that are located,
erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or
structurally altered, unless otherwise expressly stated in this division.
(b) Sign permits are not required for repainting, changing of parts, and
preventive maintenance of signs if such activities result in absolutely no
change in the appearance of the sign from that which was originally
approved.
(a) Signs erected and maintained pursuant to the discharge of
governmental functions, or that are required by law, ordinance, or
government regulation, or that are required to be posted in order to
effectuate a legal right.
(b) Operational signs designating entrances, exits, service areas, parking
areas, restrooms and other such signs relating to the functional
operation of the subject building or premises, including "no
trespassing" and warning signs;
(c) Signs, plaques, or carvings that are affixed to a building with identifying
information of a building or occupants, addresses, or dates of
construction that are necessary to the public interest and that:
§ 90-440.30 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-440.50
1:764
§ 90-440.60. Nonresidential and multi-unit residential signs. [Ord.
No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Table 90-440-1 establishes general regulations governing the type, size,
height and allowed location of signs allowed on lots occupied by
nonresidential uses and/or lots occupied by three or more households.
These regulations govern unless otherwise expressly stated under the
regulations of this zoning chapter. Lots occupied by one or two households
are not governed by the regulations of Table 90-440-1 but instead are
allowed to display signs and flags in accordance with applicable provisions
of §§ 90-440.50, 90-440.70, and 90-440.80.
Table 90-440-1
Nonresidential and Multi-Unit Residential Signs
(See § 90-440.60)
Maximum Sign Area and Height
(by zoning district)
Sign Type
Number of
Signs
Allowed
Sign Area
Formula
Allowed
Where RL
AG-1, RE,
RM, RH,
B-1, MX-1
AG-2, B-2,
P-1, MX-2,
M-1
B-3, B-4,
B-P, M-2,
M-3, P-2,
MX-3,
MX-4
Freestanding
1 per street
frontage or
driveway
access point
1 square
foot per
linear foot
of lot
frontage1
Street yard2
Area: 50
square feet
Height: 6
feet
Area: 50
square feet
Height: 6
feet
Area: 100
square feet
Height: 8
feet
Area: 200
square feet
Height: 10
feet
Onbuilding3
2 per
business
per street
frontage
wall
1 square
foot per
linear foot
of building
frontage4
Streetfacing
building
facade
Area: 50
square feet
Area: 50
square feet
Area: 100
square feet
Area: 200
square feet5
(1) Are not illuminated; and
(2) Do not exceed two square feet in area per sign.
(d) Interior and inside-window signs intended for viewing from inside or
outside the building, provided that such signs are permitted only on
buildings occupied by nonresidential uses and may cover or obscure no
more than 40% of the subject building facade's total window area; and
(e) Fuel price signs on lots occupied by fueling stations, as required by
§ 100.18(8), Wis. Stats.
§ 90-440.50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-440.60
1:765
Table 90-440-1
Nonresidential and Multi-Unit Residential Signs
(See § 90-440.60)
Maximum Sign Area and Height
(by zoning district)
Sign Type
Number of
Signs
Allowed
Sign Area
Formula
Allowed
Where RL
AG-1, RE,
RM, RH,
B-1, MX-1
AG-2, B-2,
P-1, MX-2,
M-1
B-3, B-4,
B-P, M-2,
M-3, P-2,
MX-3,
MX-4
Pedestrian
1 per
business
Subject to
maximum
district
limits
Within 6
feet of
customer
entrance
Area: 12
square feet
Area: 12
square feet
Area: 14
square feet
Area: 16
square feet
Highway
1 per
business
1 square
foot per
linear foot
of lot
frontage
Allowed
only within
1,000 feet of
I-94;
minimum
setback
equal to
sign height2
Not
allowed
Area: 100
square feet
Height: 20
feet
Area: 150
square feet
Height: 25
feet
Area: 200
square feet
Height: 40
feet
NOTES:
1 If approved at time of site plan review, signs not relating to a specific
use, but to a grouping of uses, (i.e., project signs for multitenant
centers) may combine their freestanding sign allowances (height and
area) and be up to 50% taller and larger than the maximum allowed by
the subject district, provided that they do not exceed the allowance for
highway signs.
2 Freestanding and highway signs must be set back at least 10 feet from
side lot lines or in accordance with the accessory building side setback
regulation of the subject zoning district, whichever is less.
3 On-building sign may not extend beyond the curbline or more than
six feet from the building facade, and must have a minimum vertical
clearance of at least eight feet above ground surface below.
4 Sign area allowance applies only to ground floor uses, per linear foot
of building facade, per business use, per each street frontage of the
business, projected at right angles to the street (no transferring of
unused sign area allowance from one street facade to another). A retail
or service business facade facing a customer parking area qualifies as a
front street.
§ 90-440.60 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-440.60
1:766
5 Minimum sign allowance is 50 square feet regardless of actual building
frontage.
§ 90-440.70. Temporary signs. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Temporary signs allowed at any time.
(1) Up to three square feet of temporary window signage or temporary
window signage covering up to 25% of the window, whichever is
greater, is allowed per window.
(2) Up to six square feet of (nonwindow) temporary signage is allowed
per 100 feet of lot frontage.
(b) Additional temporary signs during election season. Up to three
additional square feet of temporary signage is allowed per 100 feet per
lot frontage per ballot issue and per candidate for election during the
periods of 30 days before and 15 days after an election involving:
(1) Candidates for a federal, state or local office representing the area
in which the subject property is located;
(2) A ballot issue on the ballot of a federal, state or local election
affecting voters of the area in which the subject property is located.
(c) Additional temporary signs on property for sale, rent or lease. In
addition to the other temporary signs allowed under this section, up to
six additional square feet of temporary signage is allowed per 100 feet
of lot frontage in a residential district and up to 32 square feet of
additional temporary signage is allowed in a nonresidential district per
100 feet of lot frontage in the following cases:
(1) The owner consents and that property is being offered for sale, rent
or lease through a licensed real estate agent or through advertising
in a local newspaper of general circulation.
(2) For up to 15 days following the date on which a contract of sale has
been executed by a person purchasing the property.
(3) During the time between the issuance of a building permit for
construction on the subject property and issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
(4) Up to 30 days immediately following issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the subject property.
(5) When a property is offered for sale and being opened to the general
public, including a period of 72 hours before that opening.
(d) Additional temporary signs on property being opened to the public. In
addition to the other temporary signs allowed under this section, six
additional square feet of temporary signage per 100 feet per street
frontage may be located on the owner's property on a day when the
§ 90-440.60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-440.70
1:767
§ 90-440.80. Flags. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-440.90. Way-finding signs. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
A single permanent sign placed by the property owner for the purpose
of serving the public welfare through way-finding is permitted in all
nonresidential zoning districts. Such way-finding signs may not exceed 12
square feet in area, except that such signs may be up to 30 square feet in
area if a substantial landscape area is provided around the base of the sign
property owner is opening the property to the public; provided,
however, that the owner may not use this type of sign in a residential
district on more than nine days in a year and may not use this type of
sign in any commercial district for more than 30 days in a year. For
purposes of this section, a year is counted from the first day on which
the sign is erected counting backwards and from the last day on which
the sign exists counting forward.
(e) General regulations. Under the temporary sign regulations of this
section (§ 90-440.70):
(1) Any street frontage under 100 feet is counted as 100 feet.
Additional allowances are per 100 feet and not awarded at a ratio.
(2) Each street frontage of a corner lot or double-frontage lot is
counted separately and is given its own allowances.
(3) Additional signage allowances are not mutually exclusive;
properties that meet multiple conditions that allow for additional
temporary signage are allowed additional signage for each.
(4) Any temporary sign allowances under section can be subdivided or
combined among individual signs, so long as any one sign does not
exceed 12 square feet in a residential district or 32 square feet in
any nonresidential district.
(5) The lessor of a property is considered the owner of the subject
property if the lessor holds a right to use exclusive of others (or the
sole right to occupy).
(a) Residential zoning districts. In a RE, RL, RM and RH Zoning Districts, a
maximum of two flags and one flagpole is permitted per lot. Flags in R
Zoning Districts may not exceed 15 square feet in area.
(b) Nonresidential zoning districts. In nonresidential zoning districts, a
maximum of one flag per 25 feet of street frontage is permitted, up to a
maximum of six flags and six flagpoles per lot. Flags in nonresidential
zoning districts may not exceed 24 square feet in area.
(c) Location and maximum height generally. The height of a flagpole may
not exceed the maximum allowed maximum building height in the
subject zoning district.
§ 90-440.70 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-440.90
1:768
and illumination on each side is limited to exterior lighting, not exceeding
1,100 lumens per 15 square feet of sign area.
§ 90-440.100. Drive-through signs. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Drive-through signs are permitted in conjunction with drive-through uses,
in accordance with the following regulations:
§ 90-440.110. Sign illumination. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Drive-through signs must be located within 10 feet of a drive-through
lane.
(b) One primary drive-through sign not to exceed 36 square feet in area or
eight feet in height is allowed per order station up to a maximum of two
primary drive-through signs per lot. One secondary drive-through sign
not to exceed 15 square feet in area or six feet in height is allowed per
lane.
(c) Drive-through signs must be set back at least 25 feet from residential
zoning districts.
(d) Drive-through signs must be oriented to be visible by motorists in
allowed drive-through lanes.
(e) Internal illumination is permitted only when the sign is completely
screened from view of abutting R-zoned lots.
Figure 90-440-1
Drive-Through Sign
(a) Signs may not be erected or maintained if they contain, include, or are
illuminated by any flashing light, electronic change in messages,
electronic change in background colors, electronic change in light
intensity, or electronic video display, except for electronic messaging
signs permitted under § 90-440.120.
(b) External light sources used to illuminate signs must be effectively
shielded so as to prevent:
(1) Beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the
traveled way of any roadway; or
§ 90-440.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-440.110
1:769
§ 90-440.120. Electronic signs. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(2) Beams of light of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or
impair vision of the operator of any motor vehicle.
(a) Prohibited electronic signs. The following types of electronic signs are
prohibited:
(1) Video display signs; and
(2) Off-site electronic messaging signs.
(b) Electronic messaging signs. Unless otherwise expressly prohibited
under this division, a freestanding sign or on-building sign allowed
under Table 90-440-1 may be an electronic messaging sign or include
electronic messaging elements, subject to compliance with the
following regulations:
(1) An electronic messaging sign or sign element may not exceed 30%
of the maximum sign area allowed for the subject sign type, as
established in Table 90-440-1.
(2) The electronic display background color tones, lettering, logos,
pictures, illustrations, symbols, and any other electronic graphic or
video display may not blink, flash, rotate, scroll, change in
illumination intensity, or otherwise change in outward appearance,
except when the electronic message or display is changed to
another message or display.
(3) The images and messages displayed on an electronic messaging
sign must have a minimum dwell time of at least 20 seconds and
may not contain any movement, animation, audio, video,
pyrotechnics or other special effects. The images and messages
displayed must be complete in and of themselves within the
required dwell time.
(4) The transition or change from one message to another must occur
in two seconds or less and involve no animation or special effects.
(5) Electronic messaging signs must be equipped with a default
mechanism that will stop the messaging or freeze the image in one
position when a malfunction in electronic programming occurs.
(6) Electronic messaging signs must have a nonilluminated
background.
(7) The maximum illumination level of the display on an electronic
messaging signs may not exceed 0.3 footcandle above ambient
light levels, measured as follows:
a. At least 30 minutes past sunset, and with the electronic display
either turned off, showing all black copy, or blocked, a
footcandle (light) meter must be used to record the area's
§ 90-440.110 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-440.120
1:770
§ 90-440.130. Nonconforming signs. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
See § 90-460.50.
§ 90-440.140. Measurements. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
ambient light level. An ambient reading will be taken with
the meter aimed directly at the electronic display and at the
following distance:
Electronic Display Area
(square feet)
Measurement Distance
(feet)
Up to 100 100
More than 100 150
b. (Reserved)
c. To establish the illumination level, the electronic display must
be turned on to show all white copy and a second reading
taken. The difference between the two readings is the
electronic display's illumination level.
(8) Electronic messaging signs must have an automatic dimmer
control to produce a distinct illumination change from a higher
illumination level to a lower level for the time period between 1/2
hour before sunset and 1/2 hour after sunrise.
(9) Audio speakers are not allowed with any electronic messaging sign.
(10) Any form of pyrotechnics is prohibited in association with an
electronic messaging sign.
(a) Measurement of sign area. Sign area is calculated as follows:
(1) The area of a sign enclosed in a frame or cabinet is determined
based on the outer dimensions of the frame or cabinet surrounding
the sign face.
Figure 90-440-2
Sign Area
(2) When the sign faces of a multisided sign are parallel or within 30°
of parallel, only one side of the sign is counted for the purpose of
§ 90-440.120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-440.140
1:771
determining the area and number of signs. If the sign faces are
not parallel or within 30° of parallel, all sign faces are counted in
determining the number and area of signs on the subject lot.
Figure 90-440-3
Multisided Sign
(3) The area of a sign comprised of individual letters or elements
attached to a wall is determined by calculating the area of the
smallest square, rectangle, or circle that can be drawn around the
letters and graphic elements of the sign. Signs consisting of
individual letters and/or graphic elements will be measured as one
sign when the distance between the letters and/or elements is less
than the largest dimension of the largest sign letter.
Figure 90-440-4
Individual Letter Signs
(4) Spherical, free-form, sculptural or other nonplanar sign area is
measured as 50% of the sum of the areas using only the four
vertical sides of the smallest four-sided polyhedron that will
encompass the sign structure.
§ 90-440.140 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-440.140
1:772
Figure 90-440-5
Nonplanar Signs
(b) Assignment of sign area: multitenant buildings. The allowable area for
signs is based on the linear feet of a building facade assigned to each
tenant.
(c) Measurement of sign height. The height of a sign is measured by
calculating the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the
top of the sign face. Normal grade is the lower of:
(1) The existing grade prior to construction; or
(2) The newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any
filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of
locating the sign.
§ 90-440.140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-440.140
1:773

DIVISION 90-450
Performance Standards
§ 90-450.10. Purpose. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The performance standards of this division are intended to mitigate any
potential adverse environmental or public safety impacts associated with
the operation of businesses and uses.
§ 90-450.20. Applicability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
All buildings, structures and uses are subject to the performance standards
of this division.
§ 90-450.30. Air pollution. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
All activities that emit air pollutants in excess of the standards permitted by
the Racine County Air Pollution Control Ordinance are prohibited.
§ 90-450.40. Fire and explosive hazards. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
All activities involving the manufacturing, utilization, processing or storage
of flammable and explosive materials must be provided with adequate
safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and with adequate
firefighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices that are standard in
the industry. All materials that range from active to intense burning must be
manufactured, utilized, processed and stored only in compliance with state
Administrative Code standards.
§ 90-450.50. Glare and heat. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
All activities that emit glare or heat that is visible or measurable outside the
premises of the activity are prohibited, except activities in the M Districts,
which may emit sky-reflected glare that is not visible at ground level outside
the premises.
§ 90-450.60. Water quality. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
All activities that locate, store, discharge or permit the discharge of any
treated, untreated or inadequately treated liquid, or gaseous or solid
materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity or temperature
that might run off, seep, percolate or wash into surface or subsurface waters
so as to contaminate, pollute or harm such waters or cause nuisances,
such as objectionable shore deposits, floating or submerged debris, oil or
scum, color, odor, taste or unsightliness or be harmful to human, animal,
plant or aquatic life are prohibited. In addition activities that withdraw
water or discharge any liquid, gaseous or solid materials so as to exceed
or contribute toward the exceeding minimum standards and the application
of such standards set forth in the Wisconsin Administrative Code for the
following waters and their uses are prohibited.
§ 90-450.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-450.60
1:775
Table 90-450-1
Water Quality Standards
Water Body Standard
Sorensen Creek Minimum standards
Lake Michigan For public water supply.
For fish and other aquatic life.
For whole body contact recreation.
For industrial and cooling water use.
§ 90-450.70. Noise. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) All activities in an M District that produce a sound level outside the
property boundary that exceeds the sound levels shown in Table
90-450-2, when measured by a sound level meter and associated octave
band filter, are prohibited.
Table 90-450-2
M District Noise Limits
Octave Band Frequency
(cycles per second)
Sound Level
(decibels)
0 to 75 79
75 to 150 74
150 to 300 66
300 to 600 59
600 to 1,200 53
1,200 to 2,400 47
2,400 to 4,800 41
Above 4,800 39
(b) (Reserved)
(c) In zoning districts other than M Districts, activities that produce a
sound level outside the property boundary that exceeds the sound
levels shown in Table 90-450-3, when measured by a sound level meter
and associated octave band filter, are prohibited.
§ 90-450.60 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-450.70
1:776
§ 90-450.80. Odors. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
All activities that emit any odorous matter of such nature or quantity as to
be offensive, obnoxious or unhealthful outside the premises of such activity
are prohibited. The guide for determining odor measurement and control is
Chapter NR 154 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
§ 90-450.90. Radioactivity and electrical disturbances. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
All activities that emit radioactivity or electrical disturbances outside the
premises of such activity that are dangerous or adversely affect the use of
neighboring premises, including radio and television receiver operation are
prohibited.
§ 90-450.100. Vibrations. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
All activities in non-M districts that emit vibrations discernible without
instruments outside the premises of such activity are prohibited. All
activities in M Districts that emit vibrations that exceed the limits shown
in Table 90-450-4, measured with a three-component measuring system are
prohibited.
Table 90-450-3
Non-M District Noise Limits
Octave Band Frequency
(cycles per second)
Sound Level
(decibels)
0 to 75 73
75 to 150 67
150 to 300 59
300 to 600 52
600 to 1,200 46
1,200 to 2,400 40
2,400 to 4,800 34
Above 4,800 32
(d) (Reserved)
(e) All noise sources must be shielded, buffered, or otherwise controlled so
as not to become objectionable due to intermittence, duration, beat
frequency, impulse character, period character or shrillness.
§ 90-450.70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-450.100
1:777
Table 90-450-4
M District Vibration Limits
Frequency
(cycles per second) Outside Premises
0 to 10 0.0020
10 to 20 0.0010
20 to 30 0.0006
30 to 40 0.0004
40 to 50 0.0003
50 and over 0.0002
§ 90-450.100 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-450.100
1:778
DIVISION 90-460
Nonconformities
§ 90-460.10. General provisions. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Scope. The regulations of this division govern nonconformities, which
are lots, uses and structures that were lawfully established but,
because of the adoption of new or amended regulations, no longer
comply with one or more provisions of this zoning chapter.
(b) Purpose. Occasionally, lots, uses, structures, signs and other features
that were lawfully established (i.e., in compliance with all regulations in
effect at the time of their establishment) are made nonconforming
because of changes in the zoning regulations that apply to the subject
property (e.g., through Zoning Map changes or amendments to the text
of the zoning chapter). The regulations of this division are intended to
clarify the effect of this nonconforming status and avoid confusion with
illegal buildings and uses (i.e., those established in violation of
applicable zoning regulations). The regulations of this division are also
intended to:
(1) Recognize the interests of landowners in continuing to use their
property for uses and activities that were lawfully established;
(2) Promote maintenance, reuse and rehabilitation of existing
buildings; and
(3) Place reasonable limits on nonconformities that have the potential
to adversely affect surrounding properties.
(c) Authority to continue. Any nonconformity that existed on the effective
date specified in § 90-10.30 or any situation that becomes
nonconforming upon adoption of any amendment to this zoning chapter
may be continued in accordance with the regulations of this division
unless otherwise expressly stated.
(d) Determination of nonconformity status.
(1) The burden of proving a nonconformity was lawfully established
and that the situation has not lost its nonconforming status rests
entirely with the subject landowner.
(2) The Community Development Director is authorized to determine
whether adequate proof of nonconforming status has been
provided by the subject landowner.
(3) Appeals of the Community Development Director's decision on
nonconforming status determinations may be appealed in
accordance with the appeal procedures of Division 90-570.
(e) Repairs and maintenance.
(1) Nonconformities must be maintained to be safe and in good repair.
§ 90-460.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-460.10
1:779
§ 90-460.20. Nonconforming lots. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-460.30. Nonconforming structures. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(2) Repairs and normal maintenance that do not increase the extent of
nonconformity and that are necessary to keep a nonconformity in
sound condition are permitted unless otherwise expressly
prohibited by this zoning chapter.
(3) Nothing in this division is intended to prevent nonconformities
from being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe
condition in accordance with an order from a duly authorized
Village official.
(f) Change of tenancy or ownership. Nonconforming status runs with the
land and is not affected solely by changes of tenancy, ownership or
management.
(a) Description. A nonconforming lot is a lawfully created lot that does not
comply with currently applicable minimum lot area or minimum lot
width regulations of this zoning chapter.
(b) Use of nonconforming lots.
(1) A single dwelling unit and allowed accessory structures may be
constructed on a nonconforming lot that has never been developed
in any zoning district that permits detached houses by right,
subject to compliance with all applicable setback and building
regulations (e.g., coverage, height, floor area, etc.).
(2) Nonconforming lots in districts that do not permit detached houses
by right may be used in accordance with the use regulations that
apply in the subject zoning district, and buildings may be erected,
subject to compliance with all applicable setback and building
regulations (e.g., coverage, height, floor area, etc.).
(a) Description. A nonconforming structure is any building or structure,
other than a sign, that was lawfully established but no longer complies
with the lot and building regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.
(b) General. Nonconforming structures may remain, subject to the
regulations of this section.
(c) Alterations and expansions. Alterations, including enlargements and
expansions, are prohibited unless the proposed alteration or expansion
complies with all applicable lot and building regulations, and does not
increase the extent of the existing nonconformity. A building with a
nonconforming front setback, for example, may be expanded to the rear
as long as the rear expansion complies with applicable rear setback
standards and all other applicable lot and building regulations. On the
§ 90-460.10 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-460.30
1:780
§ 90-460.40. Nonconforming uses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
other hand, building additions on the front may not increase or extend
the front setback nonconformity.
(d) Use. A nonconforming structure may be used for any use allowed in the
zoning district in which the structure is located.
(e) Movement.
(1) A nonconforming structure may be moved in whole or in part to
another location on the same lot only if the movement or relocation
eliminates or reduces the extent of nonconformity.
(2) A nonconforming structure may be moved to another lot only if the
structure complies with the zoning regulations that apply to that
(relocation) lot.
(f) Replacement. If a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed by
violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, infestation, or other
calamity, the nonconforming structure may be reestablished to the
extent it existed before the damage or destruction, provided that no
new or greater nonconformities are created and a permit application to
allow the reestablishment is filed within one year of the date of damage
or destruction.
(a) Description. A nonconforming use is a land use that was lawfully
established in accordance with all zoning regulations in effect at the
time of its establishment but that is no longer allowed by the use
regulations of the zoning district in which the use is now located.
Lawfully established uses that do not comply with any applicable
separation (or spacing) distance requirements (e.g., those that require
one land use to be located a certain minimum distance from another
land use) are also deemed to be nonconforming uses.
(b) Change of use. A nonconforming use may only be changed to another
use if the new (changed) use is allowed in the subject zoning district.
Once changed to a conforming use, a nonconforming use may not be
reestablished.
(c) Expansion of use. A nonconforming use may not be expanded unless
such expansion would eliminate or reduce the extent of nonconformity,
except that a nonconforming use of a building may be extended into
those interior parts of the building that were manifestly designed for
such use before the date that the use became nonconforming.
(d) Remodeling and improvements. A building in which a nonconforming
use is located may be remodeled or otherwise improved as long as the
remodeling or improvements do not violate the other regulations of this
zoning chapter.
(e) Movement.
§ 90-460.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-460.40
1:781
(1) A nonconforming use may be moved in whole or in part to another
location on the same lot only if the movement or relocation does not
create additional or new nonconformities.
(2) A nonconforming use may be moved to another lot only if the use
would comply with the zoning regulations that apply to that
(relocation) lot.
(f) Loss of nonconforming status.
(1) Abandonment.
a. Once a nonconforming use is abandoned, its nonconforming
status is lost and any new, replacement use must comply with
the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
b. A nonconforming use is presumed abandoned when the use is
discontinued or ceases for a continuous period of 12 months or
more.
c. The presumption of abandonment may be rebutted upon
showing, to the satisfaction of the Community Development
Director, that during such period the owner of the land or
structure has been:
1. Maintaining the land and structure in accordance with all
applicable municipal code requirements and did not intend
to discontinue the use;
2. Actively and continuously marketing the land or structure
for sale or lease for that particular nonconforming use; or
3. Engaged in other activities that affirmatively prove there
was not intent to abandon.
d. Any period of discontinued use caused by government action,
acts of God, unintended fire or other causes beyond the control
of the subject property owner are not counted in calculating
the length of discontinuance.
(2) Change to conforming use. If a nonconforming use is changed to a
conforming use, no matter how short the period of time, all
nonconforming use rights are lost and re-establishment of the
nonconforming use is prohibited.
(3) Reestablishment.
a. Intentional destruction. When a building containing a
nonconforming use is intentionally destroyed, razed or
dismantled by a deliberate act of the owner or the owner's
agent, reestablishment of the nonconforming use is prohibited.
b. Accidental destruction. Unless a building containing a
nonconforming use loses its nonconforming use rights
§ 90-460.40 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-460.40
1:782
§ 90-460.50. Nonconforming signs. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
pursuant to § 90-460.30, the building and use may be restored
or repaired, provided that no new nonconformities are created
and that the existing degree of nonconformity is not increased.
A building permit to reconstruct a destroyed or damaged
building must be obtained within two years of the date of
occurrence of such damage.
(a) Description. A nonconforming sign is a sign that was lawfully
established but that no longer complies with applicable sign regulations
because of annexation or the adoption or amendment of regulations
after the sign was established.
(b) Loss of nonconforming status.
(1) General.
a. All nonconforming sign lose their nonconforming status if one
or more of the following occurs:
1. The sign is abandoned.
2. The sign is structurally altered in any way that brings the
sign further out of compliance with these sign regulations
than it was before alteration.
3. The sign is relocated; however, relocation of a sign
pursuant to the exercise or the threat or exercise of
eminent domain by a governmental authority does not
result in a nonconforming sign losing its nonconforming
status if the sign is relocated to an area on the same lot
and as close as practicable to the original site acquired by
government action;
4. The sign fails to conform to this zoning chapter regarding
maintenance and repair, abandonment, or dangerous or
defective signs.
b. On the date of occurrence of any of the above, the sign must be
immediately brought in compliance with this division with a
new permit secured or it must be removed.
(2) Special regulations.
a. Nonaccessory signs, except way-finding signs as permitted in
accordance with § 90-440.90, lose their nonconforming status
on September 24, 2021. No later than September 24, 2021, the
owners of nonaccessory signs or the owners of property on
which nonaccessory signs are located must cause the removal
of those signs. Upon failure of the sign owner or subject
property owner to remove nonaccessory signs by September
24, 2021, the Community Development Director is authorized,
§ 90-460.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-460.50
1:783
§ 90-460.60. Nonconforming development features. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
following 60 days' written notice to either owner, to cause the
sign to be removed, and to bill the expense for such removal to
the owner of the sign.
b. No later than September 24, 2021, all freestanding signs that
are nonconforming as to location must either be moved to
conform to the locational requirements of the subject zoning
district or be removed by the sign owner or subject property
owner. Upon failure of the sign owner or subject property
owner to remove such sign, the Community Development
Director is authorized, following 60 days' written notice to
either owner, to cause the sign to be removed, and to bill the
expense for such removal to the owner of the sign.
(a) Description. A nonconforming development feature is any aspect of a
development, other than a nonconforming lot, nonconforming structure
or nonconforming use, that was lawfully established in accordance with
zoning regulations in effect at the time of its establishment but that no
longer complies with one or more regulations of this zoning chapter.
Common examples of nonconforming development features are offstreet
parking or loading areas that contain fewer spaces than required
by current regulations and sites that do not comply with current
landscaping or screening requirements.
(b) General. Nonconforming development features may remain except as
otherwise expressly stated in this zoning chapter, but the nature and
extent of nonconforming site features may not be increased except as
otherwise expressly stated in this zoning chapter.
§ 90-460.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-460.60
1:784
DIVISION 90-480
Bluff and Ravine Setbacks
§ 90-480.10. Purpose. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Requiring structures and soil absorption fields to be set back from the top
of bluffs and ravines along Lake Michigan helps reduce erosion hazards
and related damages to structures and property. Compliance with the
regulations of this division does not guarantee or warrant that development
will be free from all erosion damage over the useful life of a structure.
§ 90-480.20. Setbacks from bluffs. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The minimum required bluff setback is based on the bluff recession distance
expected over a sixty-year period, plus the distance needed to establish
a stable slope, plus a minimum structure setback from the edge of the
computed stable slope, as follows:
§ 90-480.30. Setbacks from ravines. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
All structures and soil absorption fields must be set back from the top of
a ravine. The required ravine setback is based on the distance needed to
establish a stable slope plus a minimum structure setback from the edge of
the computed stable slope, as follows:
(a) The bluff recession distance for a sixty-year period must be calculated
using a minimum recession rate of one foot per year, unless site-specific
information justifying a greater distance is established by the
Community Development Director or Public Works Director. The bluff
recession distance must be measured from the toe of the bluff.
(b) The distance required to achieve a stable slope must be based on a ratio
of one foot vertical distance to 2.5 feet horizontal distance. The
measurement must be made from the landward edge of the bluff
recession distance.
(c) Soil absorption fields and structures, except those listed in the
following Subsection (d), must be set back at least 100 feet from the
landward edge of the stable slope distance.
(d) Storage sheds, driveways, walkways, patios, and fences accessory to a
principal use are permitted within the bluff setback area.
(a) For ravines having a depth of 10 feet or more, as measured from the
bottom of the ravine to the horizontal level of the land adjacent to the
ravine, the distance required to achieve a stable slope must be based on
a ratio of one foot vertical distance to 2.5 feet horizontal distance. The
measurement must be made from the center of the deepest part of the
ravine.
(b) For ravines having a depth less than 10 feet, as measured from the
bottom of the ravine to the horizontal level of the land adjacent to the
§ 90-480.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-480.30
1:785
§ 90-480.40. Modifications. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Modification of the minimum bluff and ravine setbacks may be approved
in accordance with the conditional use approval procedures of this zoning
chapter, upon submittal of a detailed report by a registered professional
engineer with demonstrated geotechnical expertise documenting lower
recession rates, more stable slope conditions, plans for structural protection
against wave attack, or plans for stabilization of the bluff or shoreline.
Engineering studies evaluating slope stability must use the top of the lake
sediments or 75% of the height of the bluff, whichever is greater, as the
groundwater surface. The required 100-foot setback from the top of bluffs
and ravines must be provided from the landward edge of the modified stable
slope distance.
ravine, the distance required to achieve a stable slope must be based
on a ratio of one foot vertical distance to three feet horizontal distance.
The measurement must be made from the center of the deepest part of
the ravine.
(c) Soil absorption fields and structures, except those listed in the
following Subsection (d), must be set back at least 100 feet from the
landward edge of the stable slope distance determined in accordance
with Subsection (a) or (b), above.
(d) Storage sheds, driveways, walkways, patios, and fences accessory to a
principal use are permitted within the ravine setback area.
§ 90-480.30 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-480.40
1:786
DIVISION 90-490
Flood Protection
§ 90-490.10. Introductory provisions. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Statutory authorization. This division is adopted pursuant to the
authorization in § 61.35, Wis. Stats., for villages and the requirements
in § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
(b) Findings of fact. Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains
and rivers of the Village of Mount Pleasant would impair the public
health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base.
(c) Purpose. This division is to regulate floodplain development for
following purposes:
(1) Protecting life, health and property;
(2) Minimizing expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
(3) Minimizing rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of
the taxpayers;
(4) Minimizing business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
(5) Minimizing damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
(6) Minimizing the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the
floodplain;
(7) Discouraging the victimization of unwary land and home buyers;
(8) Preventing increases in flood heights that could increase flood
damage and result in conflicts between property owners; and
(9) Discouraging development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the
floodplain.
(d) Title. This division shall be known as the "Floodplain Zoning Ordinance
for the Village of Mount Pleasant, Racine County, Wisconsin."
(e) Areas to be regulated. This division regulates all areas that would be
covered by the regional flood or base flood as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map. Note: Base flood elevations are derived from the
flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study. Regional flood elevations
may be derived from other studies. Areas covered by the base flood are
identified as A Zones on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(f) Official maps and revisions. The boundaries of all floodplain districts
are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30 on the maps based on the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) listed below and the revisions in the
Village of Mount Pleasant Floodplain Appendix and the Lake Michigan
Coastal Erosion Management Study for Racine County, Wisconsin;
§ 90-490.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.10
1:787
Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission Report
Number 86. Any change to the base flood elevations (BFE) or any
changes to boundaries of the floodplain or floodway in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must
be reviewed and approved by the DNR and FEMA before it is effective.
No changes to regional flood elevations (RFEs) on non-FEMA maps
shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions
are on file in the office of the Community Development Department.
If more than one map or revision is referenced, the most restrictive
information shall apply.
(1) Official maps based on the FIS.
a. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Panel Number
55101C0089D, 55101C0093E, 55101C0094E, 5101C0113E,
55101C0114D, 55101C0202D, 55101C0204E, 55101C0206E,
55101C0207E, 55101C0208E, 55101C0209D, 55101C0212D,
55101C0216D, 55101C0217D, 55101C0226E, 55101C0227D,
55101C0228D, 55101C0229D, 55101C0233D, 55101C0236D,
55101C0237D and 55101C0241D, dated May 2, 2012, for
FIRM Suffix D and February 1, 2019, for FIRM Suffix E; with
corresponding profiles that are based on the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) dated February 1, 2019 (55101 CV001 B).
Approved by the DNR and FEMA.
(2) Official maps based on other studies. Any maps referenced in this
section must be approved by the DNR and be more restrictive than
those based on the FIS at the site of the proposed development.
a. A Lake Michigan Coastal Erosion Management Study for
Racine County, Wisconsin; Southeastern Wisconsin Regional
Planning Commission Report Number 86. Approved by: the
DNR and FEMA.
b. Flood Storage Area Map Phases 1-9 - North Branch of the Pike
River FIS, prepared by Hey and Associates, Inc. Approved by:
the DNR and FEMA.
c. Flood Storage Area Map - Bartlett Branch Tributary to the Pike
River FIS, prepared by Hey and Associates, Inc. Approved by:
the DNR and FEMA.
(g) Establishment of districts. The regional floodplain areas are divided
into four districts as follows:
(1) The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to
carry the regional floodwaters.
(2) The Flood-Fringe District (FF) is that portion of the floodplain
between the regional flood limits and the floodway.
§ 90-490.10 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.10
1:788
(3) The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that have been
or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood.
(4) The Flood Storage District (FSD) is that area of the floodplain
where storage of floodwaters is calculated to reduce the regional
flood discharge.
(h) Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between boundaries on
the official Floodplain Zoning Map and actual field conditions shall be
resolved using the criteria in Subsection (h)(1) or (h)(2) below. If a
significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to
§ 90-460.130, Amendments. The Zoning Administrator can rely on a
boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use
permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual
predevelopment field conditions and the basis upon which the district
boundary was determined and for initiating any map amendments
required under this section. Disputes between the Zoning
Administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be
settled according to the boundary dispute provisions of § 90-490.110
and the criteria in Subsection (h)(1) and (2), below. Where the flood
profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM,
FEMA must also approve any map amendment pursuant to
§ 90-490.130, Amendments.
(1) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall
determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood
elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
(2) Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall
be determined by the map scale.
(i) Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the provisions of
this division shall not be grounds for removing land from the floodplain
unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base flood
elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the
map is amended pursuant to § 90-490.130, Amendments. Note: This
procedure does not remove the requirements for the mandatory
purchase of flood insurance. The property owner must contact FEMA to
request a letter of map change (LOMC).
(j) Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this
division shall be in compliance with the terms of this division, and other
applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
(k) Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all entities within the Village of Mount Pleasant are
required to comply with this division and obtain all necessary permits.
State agencies are required to comply if § 13.48(13), Wis. Stats.,
applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of
state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation are exempt when § 30.2022, Wis. Stats., applies.
§ 90-490.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.10
1:789
(l) Abrogation and greater restrictions.
(1) This division supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under § 61.35, Wis. Stats., for villages or
§ 87.30, Wis. Stats., which relate to floodplains. If another
ordinance is more restrictive than this division, that ordinance shall
continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater
restrictions, but not otherwise.
(2) This division is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this division
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this division shall
prevail.
(m) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this division are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor
of the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other
powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a provision of this division,
required by Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, is unclear, the provision shall
be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the
adoption of this division or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this division.
(n) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards in
this division are based on engineering experience and scientific
research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased
by man-made or natural causes. This division does not imply or
guarantee that nonfloodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be
free from flooding and flood damages. Nor does this division create
liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the Village of Mount
Pleasant or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
may result from reliance on this division.
(o) Severability. Should any portion of this division be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this division shall not be affected.
(p) Annexed areas for cities and villages. The Racine County floodplain
zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in
effect and shall be enforced by the Village of Mount Pleasant for all
annexed areas until the Village of Mount Pleasant adopts and enforces
an ordinance which meets the requirements of Ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm.
Code and the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed
lands are described on the Village of Mount Pleasant's official Zoning
Map. County floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference
for the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office
of the Village of Mount Pleasant Planning Department. All plats or maps
of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the location of
the floodway.
(q) General development standards. The Village of Mount Pleasant shall
review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building
§ 90-490.10 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.10
1:790
§ 90-490.20. Regulations of general applicability. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building
site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage; be constructed by methods
and practices that minimize flood damages; and be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for
compliance with the above standards. All subdivision proposals
(including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood
elevation and floodway data for any development that meets the
subdivision definition of this division. Adequate drainage shall be
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and all public utilities
and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
(a) Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses.
(1) Except as allowed in Subsection (a)(3), below, no floodplain
development shall:
a. Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development,
increasing regional flood height; or
b. Increase regional flood height due to floodplain storage area
lost.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined that
the proposed development will obstruct flow or increase regional
flood heights, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other
adopted map, unless the provisions of Subsection (a)(3) are met.
(3) Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments
are made to this division, the official Floodplain Zoning Maps,
floodway lines and water surface profiles in accordance with
§ 90-490.130, Amendments. Note: This section refers to
obstructions or increases in base flood elevations as shown on the
officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map. Any such alterations
must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR.
(b) Watercourse alterations.
(1) No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped
floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in
writing all adjacent municipalities, the Department and FEMA
§ 90-490.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.20
1:791
regional offices and required the applicant to secure all necessary
state and federal permits. The flood-carrying capacity of any
altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
(2) As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the
date of the watercourse alteration or relocation, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting
appropriate technical or scientific data in accordance with NFIP
guidelines that shall be used to revise the FIRM, risk premium
rates and floodplain management regulations as required.
(c) Chapter 30 and 31, Wis. Stats. Development which requires a permit
from the Department under Chs. 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., such as docks,
piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be
allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the
floodway lines, water surface profiles, BFEs established in the FIS, or
other data from the officially adopted FIRM, or other floodplain zoning
maps or the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance are made according to
§ 90-490.130, Amendments.
(d) Public or private campgrounds. Public or private campgrounds shall
have low flood damage potential and shall meet the following
provisions:
(1) The campground is approved by the Department of Health
Services.
(2) A land use permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning
Administrator.
(3) The character of the river system and the elevation of the
campground are such that a seventy-two-hour warning of an
impending flood can be given to all campground occupants.
(4) There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground
that offers the minimum notice required under this section to all
persons in the campground. This procedure shall include a written
agreement between the campground owner, the municipal
emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement
official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall
occur, personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types
of warning systems to be used and the procedures for notifying atrisk
parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for
conducting the evacuation.
(5) This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at
which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated by the
officials identified in Subsection (d)(4) above to remain in
compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the
Department of Health Services and all other applicable regulations.
§ 90-490.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.20
1:792
§ 90-490.30. Floodway District (FW). [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(6) Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready
for highway use are allowed.
(7) The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for
more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping unit
must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours.
(8) All camping units that remain on-site for more than 30 days shall be
issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a
written copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such
authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a period
not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the
provisions of this section.
(9) The Village of Mount Pleasant shall monitor the limited
authorizations issued by the campground operator to assure
compliance with the terms of this section.
(10) All camping units that remain in place for more than 180
consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in either
§ 90-490.30, 90-490.40, or 90-490.50 through 90-490.70 for the
floodplain district in which the structure is located.
(11) The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances
warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation
when a flood warning is issued.
(12) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection,
electrical service, natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems
and wells, shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed
to the flood protection elevation.
(e) Public information.
(1) Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during
the regional flood.
(2) All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and
widely distributed.
(3) All real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district
any real property is in.
(a) Applicability. This section applies to all floodway areas on the
Floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified pursuant to
§ 90-490.60(d).
(b) Permitted uses. The following open space uses are allowed in the
Floodway District and the floodway areas of the General Floodplain
District, if: they are not prohibited by any other ordinance; they meet
§ 90-490.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.30
1:793
the standards in Subsections (c) and (d) of this section; and all permits
or certificates have been issued according to § 90-490.90:
(1) Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading
areas, parking areas and airport landing strips.
(3) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis
courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming
areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing
areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill
limitations of Subsection (c).
(4) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as
historic structures that comply with Subsections (c) and (d) of this
section.
(5) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that complies with
Subsection (c) of this section.
(6) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or
wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river
crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Chs.
30 and 31, Wis. Stats.
(7) Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with Subsection (c)
of this section.
(c) Standards for developments in floodway areas.
(1) General.
a. Any development in floodway areas shall comply with
§ 90-490.20 and have low flood damage potential.
b. Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the
effects of the proposal:
1. A cross-section elevation view of the proposal,
perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the proposed
development will obstruct flow; or
2. An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on
regional flood height.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit application if
the project will cause any increase in the elevations upstream
or downstream, based on the data submitted for Subsection
(c)(1)b above.
§ 90-490.30 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.30
1:794
(2) Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or
functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by
permit if the structures comply with the following criteria:
a. The structure is not designed for human habitation and does
not have a high flood damage potential;
b. It must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement;
c. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
d. It must not obstruct the flow of floodwaters or cause any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional
flood.
e. Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls
having a total net area not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area, and the bottom of all such
openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The
openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
(3) Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets and
bridges may be allowed by permit, if:
a. Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood
protection elevation; and
b. Construction meets the hydraulic and hydrologic standards of
§ 90-490.20.
(4) Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may
be allowed by permit, if:
a. The hydraulic and hydrologic standards of § 90-490.20 are met;
b. No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a
permit is issued by the Department pursuant to Ch. 30, Wis.
Stats., and a permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1344, has been issued, if applicable, and the other
requirements of this section are met;
c. The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
d. The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
(d) Prohibited uses. All uses not listed as permitted uses in Subsection (b)
of this section are prohibited, including the following uses:
§ 90-490.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.30
1:795
§ 90-490.40. Flood-Fringe District (FF). [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(1) Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential,
or those not associated with permanent open-space uses;
(2) Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious
to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other
aquatic life;
(3) Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the
adjoining districts;
(4) Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that
are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with
recreational areas and Department-approved campgrounds that
meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Ch. SPS 383,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(5) Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water,
except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of
local ordinances and Chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
(6) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(7) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those
permitted under § NR 110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code;
(8) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service
existing or proposed development located outside the floodway
which complies with the regulations for the floodplain area
occupied.
(a) Applicability. This section applies to all flood-fringe areas shown on the
Floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified pursuant to
§ 90-490.60(d).
(b) Permitted uses. Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in
the Flood-Fringe District if the standards in Subsection (c) of this
section are met, the use is not prohibited by this chapter or any other
ordinance or regulation and all permits or certificates specified in
§ 90-490.90 have been issued.
(c) Standards for development in flood-fringe areas. The hydraulic and
hydrologic standards of § 90-490.20 apply in addition to the following
requirements according to the use requested. Any existing structure in
the flood fringe must meet the requirements of § 90-490.80,
Nonconforming uses.
(1) Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home,
which is to be newly constructed or moved into the flood fringe,
shall meet or exceed the following standards. Any existing
§ 90-490.30 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.40
1:796
structure in the flood fringe must meet the requirements of
§ 90-490.80, Nonconforming uses.
a. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation on fill. The fill shall be one foot or more
above the regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet
beyond the limits of the structure.
b. The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional
flood elevation if it is floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is allowed below the
regional flood elevation;
c. Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a structure
to land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in
Subsection (c)(1)d below.
d. In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations
make compliance with Subsection (c)(1)c impractical, the
Village of Mount Pleasant may permit new development and
substantial improvements where access roads are at or below
the regional flood elevation, if:
1. The Village of Mount Pleasant has written assurance from
police, fire and emergency services that rescue and relief
will be provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles
during a regional flood event; or
2. The Village of Mount Pleasant has an emergency
evacuation plan approved by Wisconsin Emergency
Management and the Department.
(2) Accessory structures or uses. An accessory structure which is not
connected to a principal structure may be constructed on fill with
its lowest floor at or above the regional flood elevation.
(3) Commercial uses. Any commercial structure which is erected,
altered or moved into the flood-fringe area shall meet the
residential development requirements of Subsection (c)(1) of this
section. Subject to the materials storage requirements of
Subsection (c)(5) of this section, surface parking lots and other
such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning
system exists to protect life and property.
(4) Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing or
industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the
flood-fringe area shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above
the flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing measures
in § 90-490.120. Subject to the materials storage requirements of
Subsection (c)(5) of this section, surface parking lots and other
such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning
system exists to protect life and property.
§ 90-490.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.40
1:797
(5) Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal,
plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood
protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with
§ 90-490.120. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that
such materials will not enter the water body during flooding.
(6) Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and bridges
shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans; and
a. When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would
endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are
deemed essential, construction of and substantial
improvements to such facilities may only be permitted if they
are floodproofed in compliance with § 90-490.120 to the flood
protection elevation;
b. Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at
lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces
to the regional flood elevation.
(7) Sewage systems. All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be
floodproofed, pursuant to § 90-490.120, to the flood protection
elevation and shall meet the provisions of all local ordinances and
Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
(8) Wells. All wells shall be floodproofed, pursuant to § 90-490.120, to
the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Chs.
NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(9) Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is
prohibited in flood-fringe areas.
(10) Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this division.
(11) Manufactured homes.
a. Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to
minimize flood damage, and prepare, secure approval and file
an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape
routes, with local emergency management authorities.
b. In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes,
replacement homes on existing pads, and substantially
improved homes shall:
1. Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection
elevation; and
§ 90-490.40 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.40
1:798
§ 90-490.50. Other floodplain districts. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Other floodplain districts may be established under the chapter and
reflected on the Floodplain Zoning Map. These districts may include general
floodplain districts and flood storage districts.
§ 90-490.60. General Floodplain District (GFP). [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
2. Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally
during a flood.
c. Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new
manufactured home parks and all single units outside of
existing parks, all new, replacement and substantially
improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential
development standards for flood-fringe area in Subsection
(c)(1) of this section.
(12) Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that
are on-site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not fully
licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and
anchoring requirements in Subsection (c)(11) of this section. A
mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quickdisconnect
utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.
(a) Applicability. The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains
mapped as A, AO or AH Zones.
(b) Permitted uses. Pursuant to § 90-490.60(d), it shall be determined
whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or flood-fringe
area. Those uses permitted in floodway [§ 90-490.30(b)] and floodfringe
areas [§ 90-490.40(b)] are allowed within the General Floodplain
District, according to the standards of § 90-490.60(c), provided that all
permits or certificates required under § 90-490.90 have been issued.
(c) Standards for development in the General Floodplain District. Section
90-490.30 applies to floodway areas. Section 90-490.40 applies to floodfringe
areas. The rest of this division applies to either district.
(1) In AO/AH Zones, the structure's lowest floor must meet one of the
conditions listed below whichever is higher:
a. At or above the flood protection elevation; or
b. Two feet above the highest adjacent grade around the
structure; or
c. The depth as shown on the FIRM.
§ 90-490.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.60
1:799
§ 90-490.70. Flood Storage District. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Flood Storage District delineates that portion of the floodplain where
storage of floodwaters has been taken into account and is relied upon to
reduce the regional flood discharge. The district protects the flood storage
areas and assures that any development in the storage areas will not
decrease the effective flood storage capacity which would cause higher
flood elevations.
(2) In AO/AH Zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to
guide floodwaters around structures.
(d) Determining floodway and flood-fringe limits. Upon receiving an
application for development within the General Floodplain District, the
Zoning Administrator shall:
(1) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph
or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to
the General Floodplain District limits, stream channel, and existing
floodplain developments, along with a legal description of the
property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and
floodproofing measures;
(2) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the
proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation
and to determine floodway boundaries:
a. A typical valley cross section showing the stream channel, the
floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, the crosssectional
area to be occupied by the proposed development,
and all historic high water information;
b. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and layout of all proposed and existing structures on
the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply, and
sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information;
c. Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream;
d. Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage,
water supply and sanitary facilities.
e. A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in § 90-490.90.
(a) Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all areas within the
Flood Storage District (FSD), as shown on the official Floodplain Zoning
Maps.
§ 90-490.60 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.70
1:800
§ 90-490.80. Nonconforming uses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(b) Permitted uses. Any use or development which occurs in a Flood
Storage District must meet the applicable development standards in
Subsection (c) of this section.
(c) Standards for development in Flood Storage Districts.
(1) Development in a Flood Storage District shall not cause an increase
equal to or greater than 0.00 of a foot in the height of the regional
flood.
(2) No development shall be allowed which removes flood storage
volume unless an equal volume of storage as defined by the
predevelopment ground surface and the regional flood elevation
shall be provided in the immediate area of the proposed
development to compensate for the volume of storage which is lost,
(compensatory storage). Excavation below the groundwater table
is not considered to provide an equal volume of storage.
(3) If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not be
developed unless the entire area zoned as Flood Storage District,
on this waterway, is rezoned to the Flood-Fringe District. This must
include a revision to the floodplain study and map done for the
waterway to revert to the higher regional flood discharge
calculated without floodplain storage, as per § 90-490.130,
Amendments, of this division.
(4) No area may be removed from the Flood Storage District unless it
can be shown that the area has been filled to the flood protection
elevation and is contiguous to other lands lying outside of the
floodplain.
(a) General.
(1) Applicability. If these standards conform to § 62.23(7)(h), Wis.
Stats., for villages, they shall apply to all modifications or additions
to any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any
structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of this
division or any amendment thereto.
(2) The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this division may continue
subject to the following conditions:
a. No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or
structure shall be permitted unless they comply with this
division. The words "modification" and "addition" include, but
are not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification,
structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such
existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Ordinary
maintenance repairs are not considered an extension,
§ 90-490.70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.80
1:801
modification or addition; these include painting, decorating,
paneling and the replacement of doors, windows and other
nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or
replacement of existing private sewage or water supply
systems or connections to public utilities. Ordinary
maintenance repairs do not include any costs associated with
the repair of a damaged structure. The construction of a deck
that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is adjacent to
the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension,
modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend
over a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and
egress to the principal structure.
b. If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure
is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer
permitted and any future use of the property, and any structure
or building thereon, shall conform to the applicable
requirements of this division.
c. The Village of Mount Pleasant shall keep a record which lists
all nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their
present equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications
or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage of
the structure's total current value those modifications
represent.
d. No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or
any structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of
the structure would equal or exceed 50% of its present
equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the entire
structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure
with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this division. Contiguous dry land access must
be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance
with residential development standards for flood-fringe areas
[§ 90-490.40(c)(1)]. The costs of elevating a nonconforming
building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood
protection elevation are excluded from the 50% provisions of
this subsection.
e. Except as provided in the following Subsection (a)(2)f, if any
nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged, it
cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and
the structure meet the current ordinance requirements. A
structure is considered substantially damaged if the total cost
to restore the structure to its predamaged condition equals or
exceeds 50% of the structure's present equalized assessed
value.
§ 90-490.80 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.80
1:802
f. For nonconforming residential structures that are substantially
damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or
reconstruction of any such nonconforming residential
structure shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size
and use in effect prior to the damage event, provided that the
minimum federal code requirements below are met and all
required permits have been granted prior to the start of
construction. Such residential structure:
1. Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings,
columns, posts or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must
meet the requirements of § 90-490.120(b).
2. Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy
and shall be constructed with methods and materials
resistant to flood damage.
3. Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other
service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
4. In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data
available from a federal, state or other source.
5. In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in
§ 90-490.60(c)(1).
6. In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from the structure.
g. For nonconforming nonresidential structures that are
substantially damaged or destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the
repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming
nonresidential structure shall be permitted in order to restore
it to the size and use in effect prior to the damage event,
provided that the minimum federal code requirements below
are met and all required permits have been granted prior to
the start of construction. Such nonresidential structure:
1. Shall meet the requirements of § 90-490.80(a)(2)f1, f2, f5
and f6.
2. Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or,
§ 90-490.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.80
1:803
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall
meet the standards in § 90-490.120(a) or (b).
3. In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in
§ 90-490.60(c)(1).
h. A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the
alteration will not preclude the structures continued
designation as an historic structure, the alteration will comply
with the general standards for development in floodway areas
[§ 90-490.30(c)], flood-resistant materials are used, and
construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply
with § 90-490.120 are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures shall be exempt from the development standards of
§ 90-490.80(a)(2)e if it is determined that the proposed repair
or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
i. No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would
equal or exceed 50% of the present equalized assessed value,
shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently
changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential
and commercial uses in compliance with the flood-fringe area
development standards of § 90-490.40(c).
j. If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done
under § 90-490.80(a)(2)d and g equals or exceeds 50% of the
present equalized assessed value, the work shall not be
permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed
to a conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance
with the applicable requirements of this chapter. Contiguous
dry land access must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with the flood-fringe area
development standards of § 90-490.40(c).
(b) Floodway areas.
(1) Modifications and additions.
a. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any
nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use in a floodway area, unless such
modification or addition:
1. Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all
ordinance requirements.
§ 90-490.80 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.80
1:804
2. Meets the general requirements of § 90-490.80(a).
3. Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional
flood height.
b. Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed,
pursuant to § 90-490.120, by means other than the use of fill, to
the flood protection elevation.
c. If any part of the foundation below the flood protection
elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
1. The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered
architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and
exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A
minimum of two openings must be provided with a
minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one
square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the
opening can be no more than 12 inches above the adjacent
grade;
2. The parts of the foundation located below the flood
protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant
materials;
3. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation;
and
4. The use must be limited to parking, building access or
limited storage.
(2) No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing
on-site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been
ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to public
health, shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement,
repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal
system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements
of all Village of Mount Pleasant ordinances, § 90-490.120(c) and
Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
(3) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain
potable water shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any
replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing well in a
floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all Village
of Mount Pleasant ordinances, § 90-490.120(c) and Chs. NR 811
and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(c) Flood-fringe areas.
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such
modification or addition has been granted a permit or variance by
§ 90-490.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.80
1:805
§ 90-490.90. Zoning Administrator. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
the Village of Mount Pleasant, and the modification or addition
shall be placed on fill or floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation in compliance with the standards for that particular use
in §§ 90-490.40(c) and 90-490.120, except where Subsection (c)(2),
below is applicable.
(2) Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection (c)(1) would
result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will
not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood
damage potential, the Zoning Board of Appeals, using the
procedures established in § 90-490.110, may grant a variance from
those provisions of Subsection (c)(1) for modifications or additions,
using the criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are
protected to elevations lower than the flood protection elevation
may be permitted if:
a. No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for
residential or commercial structures;
b. Human lives are not endangered;
c. Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed;
d. Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
e. Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
f. The structure will not be used for storage of materials as
described in the flood-fringe area development standards of
§ 90-490.40(c).
(3) All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to,
replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal
system shall meet all the applicable provisions of all Village of
Mount Pleasant ordinances and Ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
(4) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of
a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this division,
specifically the provisions of § 90-490.120(c) and Chs. NR 811 and
NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(d) Flood storage areas. No modifications or additions shall be allowed to
any nonconforming structure in a flood storage area unless the
standards outlined in § 90-490.70 are met.
(a) General powers and duties. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to
administer this division and shall have the following duties and powers:
(1) Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing
permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood
§ 90-490.80 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.90
1:806
elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit
applications.
(2) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this division and issue certificates of compliance
where appropriate.
(3) Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a
substantial damage assessment to determine if substantial damage
to the structures has occurred.
(4) Keep records of all official actions such as:
a. All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved.
b. Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations for floodplain development.
c. Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and
ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures, including
changes, appeals, variances and amendments.
d. All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures.
e. Floodproofing certificates.
(5) Submit copies of the following items to the Department regional
office:
a. Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or
text amendments.
b. Copies of any case-by-case analyses, and any other information
required by the Department, including an annual summary of
the number and types of floodplain zoning actions taken.
c. Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all
related correspondence concerning the assessments. Note:
Information on conducting substantial damage assessments is
available on the DNR website.
(6) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this division
to the Village of Mount Pleasant Plan Commission and Attorney for
prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the
Department regional office.
(7) Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial reports to
the FEMA regional office.
(b) Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any new
development or any repair or change in the use of a building or
§ 90-490.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.90
1:807
structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated.
Application to the Zoning Administrator shall include:
(1) General information.
a. Name and address of the applicant, property owner and
contractor.
b. Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification.
(2) Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be
submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
a. Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
b. Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
c. Location of any structures with distances measured from the
lot lines and street center lines;
d. Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems;
e. Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
f. Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from
the official Floodplain Zoning Maps;
g. The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any
fill using vertical datum from the adopted study, either
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD);
h. Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in
NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to
determine whether or not the requirements of § 90-490.30 or
90-490.40 are met; and
i. Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or
discharge according to the hydraulic and hydrologic standards
of § 90-490.20. This may include any of the general information
noted in § 90-490.30.
(3) Hydraulic and hydrologic studies. All hydraulic and hydrologic
studies shall be completed under the direct supervision of a
professional engineer registered in the state. The study contractor
shall be responsible for the technical adequacy of the study. All
studies shall be reviewed and approved by the Department.
a. Zone A floodplains.
§ 90-490.90 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.90
1:808
1. Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the
standards in § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code, Hydrologic
Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
2. Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Elevation, and the following:
i. Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic
model shall be based on detailed study information for
downstream structures (dam, bridge, culvert) to
determine adequate starting WSEL for the study.
ii. Channel sections must be surveyed.
iii. Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall
be used for the development of cross-section overbank
and floodplain mapping.
iv. A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross
sections is allowed in developed areas with additional
intermediate cross sections required at transitions in
channel bottom slope, including a survey of the
channel at each location.
v. The most current version of HEC RAS shall be used.
vi. A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of
road is required at each structure.
vii. Additional cross sections are required at the
downstream and upstream limits of the proposed
development and any necessary intermediate
locations based on the length of the reach if greater
than 500 feet.
viii. Standard accepted engineering practices shall be
used when assigning parameters for the base model,
such as flow, Manning's N values, expansion and
contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The
base model shall be calibrated to past flooding data
such as high-water marks to determine the
reasonableness of the model results. If no historical
data is available, adequate justification shall be
provided for any parameters outside standard
accepted engineering practices.
ix. The model must extend past the upstream limit of the
difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles
in order to provide a tie-in to existing studies. The
height difference between the proposed flood profile
§ 90-490.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.90
1:809
and the existing study profiles shall be no more than
0.00 feet.
3. Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be
provided, showing all cross section locations, floodway/
floodplain limits based on best available topographic data,
geographic limits of the proposed development and
whether the proposed development is located in the
floodway.
i. If the proposed development is located outside of the
floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on
the regional flood elevation.
ii. If any part of the proposed development is in the
floodway, it must be added to the base model to show
the difference between existing and proposed
conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients
remain the same as in the existing model, unless
adequate justification based on standard accepted
engineering practices is provided.
b. Zone AE floodplains.
1. Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the
existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be
based on § NR 116.07(3), Wis. Adm. Code, Hydrologic
Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
2. Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in § NR 116.07(4), Wis. Adm. Code,
Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Elevation, and the following:
i. Duplicate effective model. The effective model shall be
reproduced to ensure correct transference of the
model data and to allow integration of the revised data
to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and
downstream of the revised reach. If data from the
effective model is available, models shall be generated
that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations
shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS report to
within 0.1 foot.
ii. Corrected effective model. The corrected effective
model shall not include any man-made physical
changes since the effective model date, but shall
import the model into the most current version of
HEC-RAS for Department review.
iii. Existing (pre-project conditions) model. The existing
model shall be required to support conclusions about
§ 90-490.90 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.90
1:810
the actual impacts of the project associated with the
revised (post-project) model or to establish more upto-
date models on which to base the revised (postproject)
model.
iv. Revised (post-project conditions) model. The revised
(post-project conditions) model shall incorporate the
existing model and any proposed changes to the
topography caused by the proposed development. This
model shall reflect proposed conditions.
v. All changes to the duplicate effective model and
subsequent models must be supported by certified
topographic information, bridge plans, construction
plans and survey notes.
vi. Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to
the stream reach for which the revision is being
requested. Cross sections upstream and downstream
of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the
effective model and result in water surface elevations
and top widths computed by the revised models
matching those in the effective models upstream and
downstream of the revised reach as required. The
effective model shall not be truncated.
c. Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be
submitted to the Department for review which meet the
following conditions:
1. Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the
revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the revised
flood profiles, topographic work map, annotated FIRMs
and/or Flood Boundary Floodway Maps (FBFMs),
construction plans, bridge plans.
2. Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour
interval, and a planimetric map showing the applicable
items. If a digital version of the map is available, it may be
submitted in order that the FIRM may be more easily
revised.
3. Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised 1% and 0.2%
annual chance floodplains and floodway boundaries.
4. If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital mapping
data (GIS or CADD) are used, then all supporting
documentation or metadata must be included with the
data submission along with the Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM) projection and State Plane Coordinate
System in accordance with FEMA mapping specifications.
§ 90-490.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.90
1:811
§ 90-490.100. Plan Commission. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
5. The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the
effective floodplain boundaries.
6. All cross sections from the effective model shall be labeled
in accordance with the effective map and a cross section
lookup table shall be included to relate to the model input
numbering scheme.
7. Both the current and proposed floodways shall be shown
on the map.
8. The stream center line or profile baseline used to measure
stream distances in the model shall be visible on the map.
d. Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this
division shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The
permit may be extended for a maximum of 180 days for good
and sufficient cause.
(c) Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and no
building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified,
repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of
compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator, except where no
permit is required, subject to the following provisions:
(1) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the
provisions of this division.
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit.
(3) If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance
shall be issued within 10 days after written notification that the
permitted work is completed.
(4) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a Wisconsin
registered professional engineer, registered architect or registered
land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing elevations
are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures
also require certification by a Wisconsin registered professional
engineer or registered architect that floodproofing measures meet
the requirements of § 90-490.120.
(d) Other permits. The applicant must secure all necessary permits from
federal, state, and local agencies, including those required by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
(a) The Village of Mount Pleasant Plan Commission shall:
§ 90-490.90 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.100
1:812
§ 90-490.110. Zoning Board of Appeals. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(1) Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning Administrator; and
(2) Review and advise the Village Board on all proposed amendments
to this division, maps and text.
(b) The Plan Commission shall not:
(1) Grant variances to the terms of the chapter in place of action by the
Zoning Board of Appeals; or
(2) Amend the text or Zoning Maps in place of official action by the
Village Board.
(a) General powers and duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals, created
under § 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., for villages, is hereby authorized or
shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this division. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall adopt rules for the conduct of business and
exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin Statutes, including the
following:
(1) Appeals: hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of
this division.
(2) Boundary disputes: hear and decide disputes concerning the
district boundaries shown on the official Floodplain Zoning Map.
(3) Variances: hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the
chapter standards.
(b) Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Appeals to the Zoning Board of
Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer or
department of the Village of Mount Pleasant affected by any decision of
the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal
shall be taken within 30 days, unless otherwise provided by the rules of
the Zoning Board of Appeals, by filing with the official whose decision is
in question and with the Zoning Board of Appeals a notice of appeal
specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in
question shall transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all records
regarding the matter appealed.
(1) Notice and hearing for appeals and variances.
a. Notice. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall:
1. Fix a reasonable time for the hearing.
2. Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes,
specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing.
§ 90-490.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.110
1:813
3. Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest
and the Department regional office at least 10 days in
advance of the hearing.
b. Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall:
1. Resolve boundary disputes according to § 90-490.110(c).
2. Decide variance applications according to § 90-490.110(d).
3. Decide appeals of permit denials according to
§ 90-490.110(e).
(2) Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
a. Be made within a reasonable time.
b. Be sent to the Department regional office within 10 days of the
decision.
c. Be a written determination signed by the Chairman or
Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
d. State the specific facts which are the basis for the Zoning
Board of Appeals decision.
e. Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part,
dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the
variance application.
f. Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a
variance, clearly stated in the recorded minutes of the Zoning
Board of Appeals proceedings.
(c) Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the
Zoning Board of Appeals in hearing disputes concerning floodplain
district boundaries:
(1) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or
detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall
prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist, other evidence may
be examined.
(2) In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical
evidence to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Zoning Board of Appeals
should inform the Plan Commission or the person contesting the
§ 90-490.110 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.110
1:814
boundary location to petition the Village Board for a map
amendment according to § 90-490.130.
(d) Variance.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals may, upon appeal, grant a variance
from the standards of this division if an applicant convincingly
demonstrates that:
a. Literal enforcement of the ordinance provisions will cause an
unnecessary hardship;
b. The hardship is due to adoption of the Floodplain Ordinance
and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots
or premises;
c. The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
d. The variance is consistent with the purpose of this division.
(2) In addition to the criteria in Subsection (d)(1), above, to qualify for
a variance under FEMA regulations, the following criteria must be
met:
a. The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood
elevation;
b. Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than onehalf
acre and are contiguous to existing structures constructed
below the RFE;
c. Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall
not cause increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall
not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall not be
contrary to the purpose of the ordinance.
(3) A variance shall not:
a. Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district.
b. Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or
loss.
c. Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
d. Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the
area.
e. Allow actions without the amendments to this division or
map(s) required in § 90-490.130, Amendments.
§ 90-490.110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.110
1:815
§ 90-490.120. Floodproofing. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
f. Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use,
which would preclude its continued designation as an historic
structure.
(4) When a floodplain variance is granted, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase flood
insurance premiums and risks to life and property. A copy shall be
maintained with the variance record.
(e) Appeals of permit denials.
(1) The Plan Commission shall review all data related to the appeal.
This may include:
a. Permit application data listed in § 90-490.90.
b. Floodway/flood-fringe determination data in § 90-490.60(d).
c. The general information and data listed in § 90-490.30 where
the applicant has not submitted this information to the Zoning
Administrator.
d. Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the
Zoning Board of Appeals with the appeal.
(2) For appeals of all denied permits, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall:
a. Follow the procedures of this section (§ 90-490.110);
b. Consider Plan Commission recommendations; and
c. Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
(3) For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall:
a. Uphold the denial where the Zoning Board of Appeals agrees
with the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases
may only be allowed after amending the flood profile and map
and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all
adversely affected property owners as per requirements of
§ 90-490.130, Amendments.
b. Grant the appeal where the Zoning Board of Appeals agrees
that the data properly demonstrates that the project does not
cause an increase, provided that no other reasons for denial
exist.
(a) No permit or variance shall be issued for a nonresidential structure
designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the
applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer
§ 90-490.110 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.120
1:816
§ 90-490.130. Amendments. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure
or development to the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA
floodproofing certificate.
(b) For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or
variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan that either:
(1) Is certified by a professional engineer or architect; or
(2) Meets or exceeds the following standards:
a. A minimum of two openings having a total area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding;
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(c) Floodproofing measures shall be designed to:
(1) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces and other regional flood factors;
(2) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
(3) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement; and
(4) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
(5) Minimize or eliminate discharges into floodwaters.
(d) Floodproofing measures could include:
(1) Reinforcing walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse caused by
water pressure or floating debris.
(2) Adding mass or weight to prevent flotation.
(3) Placing essential utilities above the flood protection elevation.
(4) Installing surface or subsurface drainage systems to relieve
foundation wall and basement floor pressures.
(5) Constructing water supply wells and waste treatment systems to
prevent the entry of floodwaters.
(6) Putting cutoff valves on sewer lines or eliminating gravity flow
basement drains.
§ 90-490.120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.130
1:817
(a) General.
(1) Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments
are made to this chapter, the official Floodplain Zoning Maps,
floodway lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with this
section (§ 90-490.130).
(2) In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases
shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to
this chapter, the official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines
and water surface profiles, in accordance with this section
(§ 90-490.130). Any such alterations must be reviewed and
approved by FEMA and DNR.
(3) In A Zones increases equal to or greater than one foot may only be
permitted if the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the
official Floodplain Maps, floodway lines, and water surface profiles,
in accordance with this section (§ 90-490.130).
(4) The Village Board may change or supplement the floodplain zoning
district boundaries and this division in the manner outlined in
§ 90-490.130(b). Actions which require an amendment to the
chapter and/or submittal of a Letter of Map Change include, but
are not limited to, the following:
a. Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse
alterations on the FIRM.
b. Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain map
listed in § 90-490.20.
c. Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles
and Floodplain Zoning Maps.
d. Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled
area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and
is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain.
e. Any fill or floodplain encroachment that obstructs flow,
increasing regional flood height.
f. Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by
§ NR 116.05, Wis. Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or
for changes by the Village of Mount Pleasant.
g. All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter
floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the
flood fringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a FIRM
requires prior approval by FEMA.
(b) Procedures.
§ 90-490.130 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-490.130
1:818
§ 90-490.140. Enforcement and penalties. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Any violation of the provisions of this division by any person shall be
unlawful and shall be referred to the Village of Mount Pleasant Attorney
who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon
conviction, forfeit to the Village of Mount Pleasant a penalty of not less
than $25 and not more than $50, together with a taxable cost of such
action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Every violation of this division is a public nuisance and the creation may be
enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the Village
of Mount Pleasant, the State of Wisconsin, or any citizen thereof pursuant
to § 87.30, Wis. Stats.
(1) Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any
interested party in accordance with the provisions of § 62.23, Wis.
Stats., for villages. Such petitions shall include all necessary data
required by §§ 90-490.60(d) and 90-490.90.
(2) The proposed amendment shall be referred to the Plan Commission
for a public hearing and recommendation to the Village Board. The
amendment and notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the
department regional office for review prior to the hearing. The
amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of § 62.23,
Wis. Stats., for villages.
(3) No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and
approved by the Department.
(4) All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow
shall obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal
arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and
notify local units of government before the amendment can be
approved by the Village Board.
(5) For amendments in areas with no water surface profiles, the Plan
Commission shall consider data submitted by the Department, the
Zoning Administrator's visual on-site inspections and other
available information. (See 90-490.20.)
§ 90-490.130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-490.140
1:819

DIVISION 90-495
Shoreland Protection
§ 90-495.10. Introductory provisions. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-495.20. Applicability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The shoreland protection regulations of this division apply to the following
shoreland areas:
(a) Statutory authorization. The shoreland protection regulations of this
division are established in accordance with the authorization provided
in § 61.353, Wis. Stats.
(b) Findings of fact and purpose. Uncontrolled use of shorelands and
pollution of navigable waters of the Village adversely affect public
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the tax
base. The Legislature of Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to all
municipalities to:
(1) Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare;
(2) Limit certain land use activities detrimental to shorelands; and
(3) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by controlling the location
of structures in shoreland areas and restricting the removal of
natural shoreland vegetation.
(a) A shoreland that was annexed by the Village of Mount Pleasant after
May 7, 1982, and that before such annexation was subject to a county
shoreland zoning ordinance under § 59.692, Wis. Stats.
(b) A shoreland that before incorporation by the Village of Mount Pleasant
was part of a town that was subject to a county shoreland zoning
ordinance under § 59.692, Wis. Stats., if the date of incorporation was
after April 30, 1994.
(c) Shoreland areas subject to regulations under the regulations of this
division include all lands in the Village that are:
(1) Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable
lakes, ponds, or flowages. Lakes, ponds, and flowages are
presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the DNR Surface
Water Data viewer available on the DNR website, or are shown on
United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning
base maps; or
(2) Within 300 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers
or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever
distance is greater. Rivers and streams are presumed to be
navigable if they are designated as continuous waterways or
intermittent waterways on United States Geological Survey
§ 90-495.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-495.20
1:821
§ 90-495.30. Setbacks from navigable waters. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
§ 90-495.40. Boathouses. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
A single boathouse accessory to a permitted or conditional use may be
located within a shore yard only if all the following requirements are met:
quadrangle maps. Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, Flood Insurance
Rate Maps, or other existing floodplain zoning maps approved by
the DNR must be used to delineate floodplain areas.
(d) Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water mark location
shall initially be made by the Community Development Director or
Public Works Director. When questions arise, the Community
Development Director or Public Works Director must contact the
appropriate DNR district office for a final determination of navigability
or ordinary high-water mark.
(e) Pursuant to § 61.353, Wis. Stats., the shoreland protection regulations
of this division do not apply to lands adjacent to an artificially
constructed drainage ditch, pond, or retention basin if the drainage
ditch, pond, or retention basin is not hydrologically connected to a
natural navigable water body.
(a) Principal building setbacks. All principal buildings must be set back at
least 150 feet from the top of bank of either side of Hood's Creek, Lower
Pike River, Lower Sorensen Creek, or Des Plains. All principal buildings
must be set back at least 75 feet from the top of bank for all other areas
subject to shoreland protection under § 90-495.20.
(a) The boathouse may not be closer than 10 feet to the ordinary highwater
mark of a navigable water.
(b) The boathouse may not exceed 15 feet in height above the ordinary
high-water mark elevation.
(c) The boathouse may not exceed 250 square feet in horizontal area
(ground coverage).
(d) The boathouse must comply with applicable zoning district setbacks.
(e) A boathouse may not project beyond the ordinary high-water mark.
(f) A boathouse must be constructed in such a manner as to orient the
main opening of the boathouse toward the body of water.
(g) The use of a boathouse for human habitation is prohibited.
(h) No plumbing facilities may be provided in or for a boathouse.
(i) The roof of a boathouse may be used as a deck if:
(1) It has a flat roof; and
§ 90-495.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-495.40
1:822
§ 90-495.50. Vegetative buffers. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
A person who owns shoreland property that contains vegetation must
maintain that vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone along the entire
shoreline of the property and extending 150 feet inland for Hood's Creek,
Lower Pike River, Lower Sorensen Creek, or Des Plains or 75 feet for all
other areas subject to shoreland protection under § 90-495.20. Required
vegetative buffer zones are measured inland from top of bank and must
remain undisturbed, except as follows.
(2) The roof has no side walls or screens other than a railing that meets
all building code requirements.
(a) Invasive species or dead or diseased vegetation may be removed, but if
all vegetation in the vegetative buffer zone is removed, the owner must
establish a vegetative buffer zone with new vegetation; and
(b) Vegetation may be removed in part of the required vegetative buffer
zone in order to establish a viewing and access corridor that is no
greater than 30 feet wide for every 100 feet of shoreline frontage.
§ 90-495.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-495.50
1:823

ARTICLE 500
Administration And Procedures
DIVISION 90-510
Common Procedures
§ 90-510.10. Applicability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The common provisions of this division apply to all of the procedures in this
zoning chapter unless otherwise expressly stated.
§ 90-510.20. Review and decisionmaking authority. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Table 90-510-1 provides a summary of review and decisionmaking authority
under the procedures of this zoning chapter. If this summary table conflicts
with written procedures contained elsewhere in this chapter, the written
procedures govern.
Table 90-510-1
Review and Decisionmaking
Procedure CD ZBA PC VB
Zoning chapter text
amendments
R — R* DM*
Zoning Map amendments R — R* DM*
Development plans R — R* DM*
Site plan review
Administrative site plan DM — — —
Public hearing site plan R — DM —
Conditional uses R — R* DM*
Variances R DM* — —
Appeals of administrative
decisions
— DM* — —
Zoning permits and COs DM — — —
Notes:
R = Review and recommendation
DM = Final decisionmaker
A = Appeals
CD = Community Development Director
ZBA = Zoning Board of Appeals
P&Z = Plan Commission
§ 90-510.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-510.20
1:825
VB = Village Board
* = Public hearing
§ 90-510.30. Preapplication meetings. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-510.40. Applications and fees. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Purpose. Preapplication meetings provide an early opportunity for staff
and applicants to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations
required for approval under this zoning chapter.
(b) Applicability. Preapplication meetings are required whenever the
provisions of this zoning chapter expressly state that they are required.
They are encouraged in all cases.
(c) Scheduling. Preapplication meetings must be scheduled with
Community Development Department staff.
(d) Guidelines. The Community Development Director is authorized to
establish guidelines for preapplication meetings, including information
to be provided and any available alternatives to face-to-face meetings,
such as telephone conversations and email correspondence.
(a) Applicability. The application and fee provisions of this section apply to
zoning applications filed by eligible applicants.
(b) Eligible applicants. When the procedures of this division allow an
application to be filed by an eligible applicant, such application must be
submitted by, or on behalf of, a person, firm, corporation or
organization that has one or more of the following interests that are
specifically enforceable in the land that is subject to the application:
(1) A freehold interest;
(2) A possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession;
(3) A contractual interest which may become a freehold possessory
interest; or
(4) Any exclusive possessory interest.
(c) Form of application. Applications required under this zoning chapter
must be submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the
official responsible for accepting the application. Applications must
include materials and information to assist authorized review and
decisionmaking bodies in their consideration of the application,
including at least the following:
(1) A list of the names and addresses of all owners of record of the
property that is the subject of the application; and
(2) Maps, plats, surveys, dimensioned site plans, engineering
documents, environmental reports, traffic studies, and other
§ 90-510.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-510.40
1:826
materials and information, as required by this zoning chapter or
application checklists established by the official responsible for
accepting the application. Application forms and submittal
requirements must be made available to the general public.
(d) Fees and notification costs. All applications filed by property owners
must be accompanied by the application fee that has been established
by the Village Board. Application filing fees are intended to cover the
cost of providing public hearing notices and other costs related to
reviewing and processing applications. Such fees are nonrefundable
and may include late fees, penalties, and fees for expedited processing.
(See also Chapter 30 of the Village Code.)
(e) Completeness, accuracy and sufficiency.
(1) An application will be considered complete and ready for
processing only if it is submitted in the required number and form,
includes all required information and is accompanied by the
required application filing and notification fees.
(2) The official responsible for accepting the application is authorized
to refuse acceptance of an incomplete application. If an application
is determined to be incomplete, the official responsible for
accepting the application must provide written notice to the
applicant along with an explanation of the application's
deficiencies.
(3) No further processing of incomplete applications will occur, and
incomplete applications will be pulled from the processing cycle.
When the deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed
in the first available processing cycle. If the deficiencies are not
corrected by the applicant within 90 days, the application will be
deemed to have been withdrawn.
(4) Applications deemed complete will be placed in the first available
application processing cycle and will be reviewed by staff and other
review and decisionmaking bodies in accordance with applicable
review and approval procedures of this zoning chapter.
(5) The official responsible for accepting the application may require
that applications or plans be revised before being placed on an
agenda for possible action if the Community Development Director
determines that:
a. The application or plan contains one or more significant
inaccuracies or omissions that hinder timely or competent
evaluation of the plan's/application's compliance with zoning
chapter requirements or other regulations;
b. The application contains multiple minor inaccuracies or
omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the
§ 90-510.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-510.40
1:827
§ 90-510.50. Application processing cycles. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
The Community Development Director and other officials responsible for
accepting applications, after consulting with review and decisionmaking
bodies, are authorized to promulgate reasonable cycles and timelines for
processing applications, including deadlines for receipt of complete
applications.
§ 90-510.60. Neighbor communications. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
§ 90-510.70. Public hearing notices. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
plan's/application's compliance with zoning chapter
requirements or other regulations; or
c. The decisionmaking body does not have legal authority to
approve the application.
(a) Purpose. Neighbor communications are required by the Zoning Board
of Appeals, Plan Commission and Village Board to help:
(1) Educate applicants and neighbors about one another's interests;
(2) Resolve issues in a manner that respects those interests; and
(3) Identify unresolved issues before the start of formal public
hearings.
(b) When required. Neighbor communication summaries are required for
Zoning Map amendments, conditional uses and variances.
(c) Timing. Neighbor communication summaries must be submitted by
applicants at or before the first required public hearing.
(d) Contents. Required neighbor communication summaries must include a
description of the following:
(1) Efforts taken to notify neighbors about the proposal (how and when
notification occurred, and who was notified);
(2) How information about the proposal was shared with neighbors
(mailings, fliers, meetings, individual door-to-door conversations,
etc.);
(3) Concerns raised by neighbors; and
(4) Specific changes (if any) that were considered or made as a result
of the neighbor communications.
(a) Published notice. Whenever the provisions of this zoning chapter
require that published notice be provided, the notice must be published
§ 90-510.40 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-510.70
1:828
in the Village's official newspaper in accordance with Ch. 985, Wis.
Stats.
(b) Mailed notice.
(1) Whenever the provisions of this zoning chapter require that notices
be mailed to property owners, the notices must be sent via United
States Postal Service First Class (also known as regular) Mail.
(2) Property owner addresses must be obtained from the latest
property ownership information available in Racine County
records.
(c) Posted notice. Whenever the provisions of this zoning chapter require
that notice signs be posted, the following requirements apply:
(1) At least one notice sign must be posted on each public street
frontage abutting the subject property in locations plainly visible to
passersby.
(2) The Community Development Director is authorized to establish
rules governing the size, format, design and content of required
public notice signs.
(3) Property owners are required to post required notice signs and
ensure that the signs remain visible and in sound condition until a
final decision is made on the subject application.
(4) When the Village initiates a Zoning Map amendment, the
Community Development Director is authorized to designate the
number and location of posted notice signs. The locations must be
within the area proposed for rezoning, be plainly visible to
passersby and provide reasonable posted notice.
(d) Courtesy notices. In addition to the forms of notice required to be
provided by this zoning chapter, the Village may elect to provide
additional forms of courtesy notification by, for example, mailing notice
to neighborhood or business organizations, posting notices in Village
Hall or other government buildings or providing notice via the internet.
(e) Content of notices. All required hearing notices must:
(1) Indicate the date, time and place of the hearing or date of action
that is the subject of the notice;
(2) Describe any property involved in the application by address or by
a commonly understood description of the location;
(3) Describe the general nature, scope and purpose of the application
or proposal; and
(4) Indicate where additional information on the matter can be
obtained.
§ 90-510.70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-510.70
1:829
§ 90-510.80. Hearing procedures. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-510.90. Action by review and decisionmaking bodies. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(f) Constructive notice.
(1) When the records of the Village document the publication, mailing
or posting of notice, as required by this division, required notice of
the public hearing will be presumed to have been given. Failure of
mailed notice to reach any intended recipient does not invalidate
any action taken on the subject matter of the notice.
(2) Minor defects in required notices will not be deemed to impair the
notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice. Minor
defects in notice are limited to errors in a legal description or
typographical or grammatical errors that do not impair
communication of the notice to affected parties. If questions arise
at the hearing regarding the adequacy of notice, the body
conducting the hearing must make a formal finding about whether
there was substantial compliance with the notice requirements of
this zoning chapter.
(a) The body conducting the hearing is authorized to establish reasonable
rules and regulations governing the conduct of hearings and the
presentation of information and comments.
(b) Once commenced, a public hearing may be continued by the hearing
body. No renotification is required if the continuance is set for a
specified date and time and that date and time is announced at the time
of the continuance.
(c) If a public hearing is continued or postponed for an indefinite period of
time from the date of the originally scheduled public hearing, new
public hearing notice must be given before the rescheduled public
hearing. If the applicant requests and is granted a continuance or
postponement requiring renotification, the body conducting the hearing
is authorized to require that the applicant pay any costs of
renotification.
(a) In taking action under the procedures of this division, review and
decisionmaking bodies must act by simple majority vote of a quorum,
unless otherwise expressly stated.
(b) Review and decisionmaking bodies may take any action that is
consistent with:
(1) The regulations of this zoning chapter and state law;
(2) Any rules or bylaws that apply to the review or decisionmaking
body; and
§ 90-510.70 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-510.90
1:830
§ 90-510.100. Conditions of approval. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
When the procedures of this division authorize approval with conditions,
review bodies, including staff, are authorized to recommend conditions and
decisionmaking bodies are authorized to approve the subject application
with conditions. Any conditions recommended or approved must relate to
a situation likely to be created or aggravated by the proposed use or
development and must be roughly proportional to the impacts of the use or
development.
§ 90-510.110. Burden of proof or persuasion. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Applications must address relevant review and decisionmaking criteria. In
all cases, the burden is on the applicant to show that an application or
proposal complies with all applicable review or approval criteria.
§ 90-510.120. Required time frames for action. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Any time limit specified in this zoning chapter for any decision or action on
behalf of a review or decisionmaking body may be extended if the applicant
agrees to an extension. Unless otherwise expressly stated, if a review or
decisionmaking body does not render a decision or take action within any
time period required under this zoning chapter and the applicant has not
agreed to an extension of that time limit, the application is deemed denied.
(3) The notice that was given.
(c) Review and decisionmaking bodies are authorized to continue a public
hearing or defer action in order to receive additional information or
conduct further deliberations.
§ 90-510.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-510.120
1:831

DIVISION 90-515
Review and Decisionmaking Bodies
§ 90-515.10. Village Board. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Village Board has the powers and duties expressly identified in this
zoning chapter and state law. See also Chapter 2, Article II, of the Village
Code.
§ 90-515.20. Plan Commission. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Plan Commission has the powers and duties expressly identified in this
zoning chapter and state law. See also Chapter 2, Article IV, Division 2, of
the Village Code.
§ 90-515.30. Zoning Board of Appeals. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Zoning Board of Appeals has the powers and duties expressly identified
in this zoning chapter and state law. See also Chapter 2, Article IV, Division
3, of the Village Code.
§ 90-515.40. Zoning Administrator. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) The Community Development Director is designated as the Zoning
Administrator. The Community Development Director is also authorized
to delegate zoning administration duties to other staff of the
Community Development Department.
(b) The Zoning Administrator is responsible for administering, interpreting
and enforcing the provisions of this zoning chapter, except as otherwise
expressly stated in this zoning chapter.
(c) The Zoning Administrator has all of the powers and authority necessary
to perform required duties,
§ 90-515.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-515.40
1:833

DIVISION 90-520
Text Amendments
§ 90-520.10. Authority to initiate. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Figure 90-520-1
Text Amendments
Amendments to the text of this zoning chapter may be initiated by the
Village Board, any Village Trustee, the Plan Commission or the Community
Development Director.
§ 90-520.20. Staff recommendation. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Community Development Director must review the proposed zoning
chapter text amendment and prepare a recommendation for consideration
by the Plan Commission and Village Board.
§ 90-520.30. Plan Commission recommendation. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Proposed zoning chapter text amendments must be referred to the Plan
Commission. Following its review of the proposed text amendment, the Plan
Commission must act to recommend that the proposed text amendment be
approved, approved with modifications, or denied. The Plan Commission's
recommendation must be transmitted to the Village Board.
§ 90-520.40. Public hearing notice. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Notice of the Village Board's public hearing on a zoning chapter text
amendment must be published in accordance with the Class 2 notice
requirements of Ch. 985, Wis. Stats.
§ 90-520.50. Village Board hearing and decision. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
§ 90-520.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-520.50
1:835
§ 90-520.60. Review criteria and standards. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Zoning chapter text amendments are legislative decisions of the Village
Board based on consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and promotion of
the public health, safety, and general welfare. In acting on zoning chapter
text amendments, the Village Board must give due consideration to existing
conditions, conservation of property values, building development providing
best advantage to the Village and the current use of property.
(a) Upon receipt of the Plan Commission's recommendation, the Village
Board must hold a public hearing on the proposed text amendment.
Following the close of the public hearing, the Village Board must act to
approve, approve with modifications or deny the proposed text
amendment. If the Plan Commission's recommendation has not been
forwarded to the Village Board within 60 days of referral of the
proposed text amendment to the Plan Commission, the Village Board
may hold the required hearing and take action without receipt of the
recommendation.
(b) If the Village Board does not take final action on a proposed zoning text
amendment application within 90 days of the Village Board's public
hearing, the amendment application is deemed to have been denied.
This deemed-denied provision does not apply when the application is
referred back to staff or the Plan Commission after the public hearing is
held.
§ 90-520.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-520.60
1:836
DIVISION 90-530
Zoning Map Amendments
§ 90-530.10. Authority to initiate. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Figure 90-530-1
Map Amendments
Amendments to the official Zoning Map may be initiated by the Village
Board or filed by an eligible applicant or an eligible applicant's authorized
agent. (See § 90-510.40.)
§ 90-530.20. Preapplication meeting. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Before filing a Zoning Map amendment application, the applicant or the
applicant's authorized agent must meet with the Community Development
Director to discuss the proposed amendment and the applicable
procedures.
§ 90-530.30. Application filing. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Zoning Map amendment applications must be filed with the Community
Development Director.
§ 90-530.40. Staff recommendation. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Community Development Director must review the proposed Zoning
Map amendment and prepare a recommendation for consideration by the
Plan Commission and Village Board.
§ 90-530.50. Public hearing notice. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-530.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-530.50
1:837
§ 90-530.60. Plan Commission recommendation. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Proposed Zoning Map amendments must be referred to the Plan
Commission for consideration in a public meeting. Following review of
the proposed Zoning Map amendment, the Plan Commission must act to
recommend that the proposed Zoning Map amendment be approved,
approved with modifications, or denied. The Plan Commission's
recommendation must be transmitted to the Village Board.
§ 90-530.70. Village Board hearing and decision. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Upon receipt of the Plan Commission's recommendation, the Village Board
must hold a public hearing on the proposed Zoning Map amendment.
Following the close of the public hearing, the Village Board must act to
approve, approve with modifications (e.g., reducing the land area involved
in the rezoning or recommending another less intensive zoning
classification) or deny the proposed Zoning Map amendment. If the Plan
Commission's recommendation has not been forwarded to the Village Board
within 60 days of referral of the proposed Zoning Map amendment to the
Plan Commission, the Village Board may hold the required hearing and take
action without receipt of the recommendation.
§ 90-530.80. Review criteria and standards. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Zoning Map amendments are legislative decisions of the Village Board
based on consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and promotion of the
public health, safety, and general welfare. In acting on a Zoning Map
amendment, the Village Board must give due consideration to existing
conditions, conservation of property values, building development providing
best advantage to the Village, the current use of property the cost of
providing municipal services to the property and uses served by the Zoning
Map amendment.
(a) Published. Notice of the Village Board's public hearing on a Zoning Map
amendment must be published in accordance with the Class 2 notice
requirements of Ch. 985, Wis. Stats.
(b) Mailed. Public hearing notices must be mailed to all of the following at
least 10 days before the Village Board's public hearing:
(1) The subject property owner; and
(2) All owners of property within 300 feet of the subject property.
(c) Posted. Public hearing notice signs must be posted in accordance with
the posted notice sign provisions of § 90-510.70.
§ 90-530.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-530.90
1:838
§ 90-530.90. Successive applications. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
If the Village Board denies a proposed Zoning Map amendment, no Zoning
Map amendment application requesting the same or more intensive zoning
for the subject property may be filed for or accepted for processing by the
Village for one year from the date of final action by the Village Board unless
the Village Board expressly acts to deny the previous application without
prejudice or the new application is substantially different than the one that
was denied.
§ 90-530.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-530.90
1:839

DIVISION 90-535
Development Plans
§ 90-535.10. Purpose. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Figure 90-535-1
Development Plan
Development plans are required with some property-owner-initiated Zoning
Map amendment applications (rezonings) and are optional with other
property-owner-initiated rezonings. Their purpose is to depict a property
owner's generalized plan for the type, amount and character of
development proposed on the subject property. By providing greater
certainty about development proposals, development plans provide review
and decisionmaking bodies with additional information upon which to base
Zoning Map amendment (rezoning) recommendations and decisions.
§ 90-535.20. Applicability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Mandatory. Development plans are required (mandatory) for M-3
District Zoning Map amendments and Master Plan Development (MPD)
Zoning Map amendments. They are also required for major
amendments to existing planned developments (PDs). In acting on
mandatory development plans, the Plan Commission is authorized to
recommend and the Village Board is authorized to approve use and
development limitations that comply with, are more restrictive than or,
as may be permitted by the respective base district provisions of this
zoning chapter, are less restrictive than the base zoning district
regulations and otherwise applicable regulations of this zoning chapter.
§ 90-535.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-535.20
1:841
§ 90-535.30. Application filing. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Complete applications for development plan approval must be filed with
the Community Development Director at the same time as the Zoning Map
amendment for the subject property. (Also see the Zoning Map amendment
procedures of Division 90-530.)
§ 90-535.40. Procedures. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Except as otherwise expressly stated in this division, all development plans
must be processed concurrently with and following the Zoning Map
amendment procedures of Division 90-530.
§ 90-535.50. Site plan review. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(b) Optional. Property owners may elect to submit a development plan with
any Zoning Map amendment application. The optional development
plan process is also used to process proposals to provide access to lots
via a private street. In acting on optional development plans, the Plan
Commission is authorized to recommend and the Village Board is
authorized to approve use and development limitations that are at least
as restrictive or are more restrictive than the base district zoning
regulations. Optional development plans may not be used to obtain
relief from otherwise applicable zoning chapter regulations.
(a) Required. Site plan approval is required before the issuance of any
permits for development or construction on any property included
within the boundaries of any approved development plan.
(b) Mandatory development plans. Unless a longer time period or a phasing
plan is approved at the time of approval of a mandatory development
plan, a complete application for site plan approval must be filed within
five years of the date of mandatory development plan approval. If an
application for site plan approval is not filed within the time required,
no further site plans may be approved for the project until the owner of
the subject property has filed the original or amended development
plan for re-review and reconsideration by the Plan Commission and
Village Board. Such re-review and reconsideration must follow the
development plan review procedures of this division. Following rereview
and reconsideration, the Plan Commission is authorized to
recommend and the Village Board is authorized to approve any of the
following actions based on surrounding land use patterns and other
relevant information presented at the time of reconsideration by the
Plan Commission and Village Board:
(1) An extension of time for filing a site plan;
(2) An amendment to the approved mandatory development plan; or
(3) Rezoning to another zoning district in accordance with the Zoning
Map amendment procedures of Division 90-530.
§ 90-535.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-535.50
1:842
§ 90-535.60. Amendments to approved development plans. [Ord.
No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(c) Optional development plans. The site plan filing deadline established in
Subsection (b), does not apply to optional development plans.
(a) Minor amendments.
(1) The Plan Commission is authorized to approve amendments to
approved development plans as minor amendments if the Plan
Commission determines that substantial compliance is maintained
with the approved development plan. The following is a
nonexhaustive list of changes that may be approved as minor
amendments:
a. Any deviation expressly authorized at the time of development
plan approval;
b. The relocation or addition of customary accessory uses and
structures;
c. Adjustment of internal development area boundaries, provided
that the allocation of land to particular uses and the
relationship of uses within the project are not substantially
altered;
d. Limitation or elimination of previously approved uses, provided
that the character of the development is not substantially
altered;
e. Modification of the internal circulation system that would not
increase points of access from adjacent streets, change access
to another street or increase projected traffic volumes;
f. Modifications to approved signage, provided that the size,
location, number and type of signs is not substantially altered;
g. Modification to approved landscape and screening plans,
provided that the modification is not a substantial deviation
from the original approved plan;
h. Changes reducing the number of permitted dwelling units, the
amount of nonresidential floor area or the area covered by
buildings or paved areas; and
i. Reductions in off-street parking or loading by more than 5% or
one space, whichever results in a greater reduction.
(2) In those cases when the Village Board has expressly imposed a
condition more restrictive than recommended by the Plan
Commission, any amendment of that Village Board imposed
condition must be reviewed and approved by the Village Board.
§ 90-535.50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-535.60
1:843
(3) Notice of the Plan Commission's public hearing on a development
plan minor amendment request must be provided at least 10 days
in advance of the hearing by mailing written notice to all owners of
property within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the
subject property. Notice (signs) must also be posted on the subject
property at least 10 days before the scheduled public hearing.
(4) If the Plan Commission determines that the proposed development
plan amendment, if approved, will result in a significant departure
from the approved development plan or otherwise significantly
change the character of the subject area or that the cumulative
effect of a number of minor amendments substantially alters the
approved development plan, then the amendment must be deemed
a major amendment to the development plan and processed as a
new development plan following the development plan approval
procedures of this division, including all requirements for fees,
notices and hearings.
(b) Appeal of development plan minor amendment decisions. An appeal
from any development plan minor amendment decision by the Plan
Commission may be taken by any person aggrieved by such decision.
Appeals are made to the Village Board by filing notice of appeal with the
Village Clerk-Treasurer and with the Community Development Director
within 10 days of the date of the decision being appealed. The appeal
must specify the grounds of the appeal. Upon filing of the notice of
appeal, the Plan Commission must transmit to the Village Board all
papers constituting the record in the case, together with the decision of
the Plan Commission. The Village Board must notify the applicant and
all interested parties of the appeal hearing location, date and time.
(c) Major amendments. Any amendment to an approved development plan
that is not authorized as a minor amendment must be processed as a
new development plan following the development plan approval
procedure of this division, including all requirements for fees, notices
and hearings.
§ 90-535.60 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-535.60
1:844
DIVISION 90-540
Site Plan Review
§ 90-540.10. Purpose. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
This division establishes a procedure to ensure timely, competent review of
site plans as a means of determining whether such plans comply with the
applicable regulations of this zoning chapter, and to enable the Village to
plan for and review certain proposed improvements of property in order to:
§ 90-540.20. Applicability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Site plan review is required for all multifamily, mixed-use and nonresidential
development.
§ 90-540.30. Application filing. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Applications must be submitted to the Community Development Director.
All applications must include plans and other information necessary to allow
for thorough review of the proposed plans, as indicated on the site plan
submittal checklists developed by the Community Development Director.
§ 90-540.40. Review and decisionmaking authority. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Implement community policies on physical development;
(b) Provide for efficient, rational allocation of scarce facilities and
resources;
(c) Promote economy and efficiency in the provision and improvement of
municipal services through the regulation of development; and
(d) Ensure the orderliness, quality and character of the development of
property in the Village, prevent foreclosure of future development
opportunities, and facilitate coordination of land usage with planned
and available facilities and resources.
(a) Administrative site plans. Site plan applications that meet the following
criteria are referred to as "administrative site plans" and follow a onestep
approval process: review and final action by the Community
Development Director:
(1) Facade changes that change the color or material of a building if
the proposed change is to another approved color and approved
material.
(2) Landscape plan alterations that result in an increased amount of
open space and vegetation.
(3) Stormwater management system alterations.
§ 90-540.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-540.40
1:845
§ 90-540.50. Review process. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(4) Parking lot alterations and pavement alterations that result in an
increased amount of open space and landscaping.
(5) Building, parking or site changes that meet all of the following:
a. Do not increase building floor area by more than 5,000 square
feet;
b. Do not increase parking area by more than 5,000 square feet;
c. Do not increase impervious surface area by more than 5,000
square feet; and
d. Do not increase the number of floors in a building.
(b) Plan Commission site plans. All site plan applications that are not
classified as administrative site plans are referred to as "Plan
Commission site plans" and must follow a two-step approval process: 1)
review and recommendation by staff and 2) review and final action by
the Plan Commission. Plan Commission site plan review is also required
for projects and activities for which Plan Commission review is
expressly required under the provisions of this zoning chapter.
(a) Preapplication meeting. Before filing a site plan application, the
applicant or the applicant's authorized agent must meet with the
Community Development Director to discuss the proposed site plan and
the applicable procedures.
(b) Department and agency comments. Following receipt of a complete site
plan application, the Community Development Director is authorized to
request comments from any Village departments and external agencies
who have regulatory responsibility or related interests in the review of
the proposed site plan.
(c) Administrative site plans.
§ 90-540.40 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-540.50
1:846
Figure 90-540-1
Administrative Site Plan
(1) After review of a complete site plan application, the Community
Development Director must make a final decision or provide
comments to the applicant. The Community Development Director
is authorized to:
a. Approve the site plan;
b. Approve the site plan with conditions:
c. Deny approval of the site plan;
d. Provide comments to the applicant identifying modifications
that will allow for approval of the site plan; or
e. Forward the site plan to the Plan Commission for review and a
decision in accordance with the Plan Commission site plan
review procedures of this division.
(2) If an application for an administrative site plan is denied, the
reasons for denial must be provided to the applicant in writing.
(3) If a site plan is denied, a new application may be submitted for
consideration.
(4) If an administrative site plan requires revisions for approval, the
applicant must revise the site plan in accordance with
administrative comments. To be considered for further review, the
applicant must resubmit the revised site plan along with an
explanation of how each administrative comment was addressed.
Upon receipt of a complete resubmittal package, the Community
Development Director must provide any written administrative
§ 90-540.50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-540.50
1:847
comments that require further revision or provide acknowledgment
that all administrative comments have been satisfied.
(5) Once an administrative site plan has satisfied all administrative
comments, the Community Development Director will issue an
approval memo.
(6) The Community Development Director will retain a copy of the
approved site plan in the Department's permanent files.
(d) Plan Commission site plans.
Figure 90-540-2
Plan Commission Site Plan
(1) Upon receipt of a complete application for approval of a Plan
Commission site plan, the Community Development Director must
review the proposed site plan, obtain any department or agency
comments and share all administrative review comments with the
applicant.
(2) To be considered for further review, the applicant must resubmit
any revised site plan along with an explanation of how each
administrative comment was addressed. Upon receipt of a
complete resubmittal package, the Community Development
Director must provide any written administrative comments that
require further revision or establish a date for a review by the Plan
Commission.
(3) The Plan Commission must take action to approve the proposed site
plan, approve the proposed site plan subject to conditions or deny
approval of the proposed site plan within 60 days of the date of
latest site plan submittal unless the required time frame for action
is waived by the applicant.
§ 90-540.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-540.50
1:848
§ 90-540.60. Effective date of site plan approval. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
An approved site plan becomes effective upon certification by the
Community Development Director. If an appeal is filed, a site plan does not
become effective until all appeals have been decided.
§ 90-540.70. Lapse of site plan approval. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
An approved site plan will lapse and have no further effect one year after it
is approved, unless:
§ 90-540.80. Permits and continuing compliance. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(4) If an application for Plan Commission site plan approval is denied,
the reasons for denial must be stated in writing, specifying the
aspects of the plan that are not in compliance with applicable
regulations. If a site plan application is denied, a new application
may be submitted for further consideration.
(5) If a Plan Commission site plan is approved subject to specific
conditions and all administrative review comments, the applicant
must revise the site plan in accordance with those conditions and
comments and resubmit the plan for review. The Community
Development Director must act on all resubmitted Plan
Commission site plans within 20 business days of their receipt.
(6) If a Plan Commission site plan is approved, the applicant must
submit signed and dated digital and reproducible copies of the site
plan to the Community Development Director, and the Community
Development Director will issue a written approval.
(7) The Community Development Director will retain a copy of the
approved site plan in the Department's permanent files..
(a) A building permit has been issued (if required);
(b) The use or structure has been lawfully established; or
(c) A different lapse of approval period or point of expiration has been
expressly established by the decisionmaking body.
(a) No permit may be issued for any development requiring site plan
approval until a site plan has been submitted and approved for such
development in accordance with this division.
(b) No permanent certificate of occupancy may be issued for such
development until all terms and conditions of the approved site plan
have been satisfactorily completed or provided for.
§ 90-540.50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-540.80
1:849
§ 90-540.90. Resubmissions and amendments. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
§ 90-540.100. Appeals. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(c) Construction, grading, or other development activities may be carried
out only in compliance with the approved site plan.
(d) When a site plan has been approved for property pursuant to this
section, the property must be used and maintained in compliance with
the approved site plan. No person may use property in a manner or
physical condition that does not conform to the approved site plan for
such property.
(a) An approved site plan may be amended in accordance with the site plan
review procedures of this section. However, the Community
Development Director is authorized to waive applicable review and
approval procedures and fees if the Community Development Director
determines that a proposed amendment involves only a minor change in
the approved site plan. Any waiver by the Community Development
Director must be in writing. The following constitutes a nonexhaustive
list of changes that may qualify as minor changes:
(1) Any deviation expressly authorized at the time of site plan
approval;
(2) The relocation or addition of customary accessory uses and
structures;
(3) Adjustment of internal development area boundaries, provided that
the allocation of land to particular uses and the relationship of uses
within the project are not substantially altered;
(4) Limitation or elimination of previously approved uses, provided
that the character of the development is not substantially altered;
(5) Modification of the internal circulation system that would not
increase points of access from adjacent streets, change access to
another street or increase projected traffic volumes;
(6) Modifications to approved signage, provided that the size, location,
number and type of signs is not substantially altered;
(7) Modification to approved landscape and screening plans, provided
that the modification is not a substantial deviation from the original
approved plan;
(8) Changes reducing the number of permitted dwelling units, the
amount of nonresidential floor area or the area covered by
buildings or paved areas; and
(9) Reductions in off-street parking or loading by more than 5% or one
space, whichever results in a greater reduction.
§ 90-540.80 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-540.100
1:850
(a) Administrative site plans.
(1) The applicant may appeal a final site plan decision of the
Community Development Director by filing a written notice of and
reasons for the appeal with the Community Development Director
no later than 30 days after the date of the action from which the
appeal is sought.
(2) The Plan Commission must consider and act on appeals of
interpretations of final decisions of the Community Development
Director in a public meeting.
(b) Plan Commission site plans. Any person aggrieved by a final site plan
decision of the Plan Commission may appeal the decision in accordance
with state law.
§ 90-540.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-540.100
1:851

DIVISION 90-550
Conditional Uses
§ 90-550.10. Purpose. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
This chapter identifies certain uses that, because of their unique or widely
varying characteristics or their potential adverse impacts on adjacent land
uses, are not permitted as a matter of right but that may be approved
through case by-by-case review as a conditional use. They are subject to the
conditional use regulations because they may, but do not necessarily, have
significant adverse effects on the environment, overburden public services,
change the desired character of an area, or create major nuisances. A
review of these uses is necessary due to the potential individual or
cumulative impacts they may have on the surrounding area or
neighborhood. The conditional use review provides an opportunity to allow
the use when there are minimal impacts, to allow the use but impose
mitigation measures to address specific reasonable concerns, or to deny the
use if the concerns cannot be resolved.
§ 90-550.20. Authority to initiate. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Applications for approval of a conditional use may be initiated by the Village
Board or filed by an eligible applicant or an eligible applicant's authorized
agent. (See § 90-510.40.)
§ 90-550.30. Preapplication meeting. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Figure 90-550-1
Conditional Uses
Before filing a conditional use application, the applicant or the applicant's
authorized agent must meet with the Community Development Director to
discuss the proposed amendment and the applicable procedures.
§ 90-550.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-550.40
1:853
§ 90-550.40. Application filing. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Conditional use applications must be filed with the Community
Development Director.
§ 90-550.50. Staff recommendation. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Community Development Director must review the proposed
conditional use and prepare a recommendation for consideration by the
Plan Commission and Village Board.
§ 90-550.60. Public hearing notice. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-550.70. Plan Commission recommendation. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Applications for approval of a conditional use must be referred to the Plan
Commission for consideration in a public meeting. Following review of
the proposed Zoning Map amendment, the Plan Commission must act to
recommend that the conditional use application be approved, approved with
modifications, or denied. The Plan Commission's recommendation must be
transmitted to the Village Board.
§ 90-550.80. Village Board hearing and decision. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Upon receipt of the Plan Commission's recommendation, the Village Board
must hold a public hearing on the proposed conditional use. Following the
close of the public hearing, the Village Board must act to approve, approve
with modifications or deny the proposed Zoning Map amendment. If the
Plan Commission's recommendation has not been forwarded to the Village
Board within 60 days of referral of the proposed conditional use to the
Plan Commission, the Village Board may hold the required hearing and take
action without receipt of the recommendation.
§ 90-550.90. Review and decisionmaking criteria. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Published. Notice of the Village Board's public hearing on a conditional
use application must be published in accordance with the Class 2 notice
requirements of Ch. 985, Wis. Stats.
(b) Mailed. Public hearing notices must be mailed to all of the following at
least 10 days before the Village Board's public hearing:
(1) The subject property owner; and
(2) All owners of property within 300 feet of the subject property.
(c) Posted. Public hearing notice signs must be posted in accordance with
the posted notice sign provisions of § 90-510.70.
§ 90-550.40 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-550.90
1:854
(a) In reviewing and taking final action a proposed conditional use the Plan
Commission and Village Board must review each application to
determine whether the proposed use complies with regulations
applicable to that specific use and with all other relevant provisions of
this chapter.
(b) The Village Board's decision to approve or deny a conditional use must
be supported by substantial evidence.
(c) To aid in review of and decisionmaking on proposed conditional uses,
the Plan Commission and Village Board must evaluate at least the
following criteria, which are deemed reasonable and, to the extent
practicable, measurable:
(1) Whether the establishment, maintenance or operation of the
conditional use will be detrimental to or endanger the public
health, safety, or general welfare.
(2) Whether the Village is able to provide municipal services to the
property where the conditional use is proposed, given due
consideration of the cost of providing those services.
(3) Whether the uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the
neighborhood for purposes already established will be substantially
impaired or diminished in any foreseeable manner.
(4) Whether the establishment of the conditional use will impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of the
surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
(5) Whether adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, parking supply,
internal circulation improvements, including but not limited to
vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle, public transit and other necessary
site improvements have been or are being provided.
(6) Whether measures have been or will be taken to provide adequate
ingress and egress, including all off-site improvements, so designed
as to minimize traffic congestion and to ensure public safety and
adequate traffic flow, both on site and on the public streets.
(7) Whether the conditional use conforms to all applicable regulations
of the district in which it is located.
(d) An applicant's failure to demonstrate, by substantial evidence, that the
application and all applicable requirements in this chapter and
conditions established by the Village relating to the conditional use are
or will be satisfied constitute grounds to deny the conditional use. At all
times the burden of proof to demonstrate satisfaction of these criteria
remains with the applicant.
§ 90-550.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-550.100
1:855
§ 90-550.100. Conditions and requirements. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
In approving a conditional use application, the Village Board may impose
conditions and requirements that it determines are necessary to prevent or
minimize adverse effects from the proposed use on other properties in the
area and on the general health, safety, and welfare of the Village.
§ 90-550.110. Successive applications. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
If the Village Board denies approval of the conditional use, no application
requesting approval of the same conditional use on the subject property
may be filed for or accepted for processing by the Village for one year
from the date of final action by the Village Board unless the Village Board
expressly acts to deny the previous application without prejudice or the new
application is substantially different than the one that was denied.
(a) Any conditions or requirements imposed must be:
(1) Reasonable.
(2) Measurable, to the extent practical;
(3) Consistent with the general purpose of this chapter; and
(4) Based on substantial evidence.
(b) The applicant must demonstrate, by substantial evidence, that all
conditions or requirements imposed will be met.
§ 90-550.100 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-550.110
1:856
DIVISION 90-560
Zoning Variances
§ 90-560.10. Intent. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Zoning variances are intended as a way to provide relief from unnecessary
hardships resulting from strict application of zoning chapter requirements.
§ 90-560.20. Applicability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to grant zoning variances in
accordance with the procedures of this division, except that variances from
the flood protection regulations of Division 90-490 are governed by the
procedures established in § 90-490.110.
§ 90-560.30. Authorized variances. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The zoning variance procedures of this division may not be used to:
§ 90-560.40. Authority to file. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Zoning variance applications may be filed by eligible applicants or an
eligible applicant's authorized agent. (See § 90-510.40.)
(a) Permit a principal use in a zoning district that is not otherwise allowed
in that zoning district (i.e., use variances are prohibited);
(b) Waive, modify or amend any definition or interpretation of a use
classification;
(c) Waive, modify or otherwise vary any of the review and approval
procedures;
(d) Waive, vary, modify or otherwise override a condition of approval or
requirement imposed by an authorized decisionmaking body or the
state or federal government;
(e) Waive, vary or modify applicable minimum lot area per unit (density)
standards (Note: This provision is not intended to prohibit variances of
minimum lot area requirements for individual lots.);
(f) Waive, vary or modify provisions over which jurisdiction for exceptions
or other modifications is assigned to another decisionmaking body; or
(g) Waive, vary or modify provisions for which variances are expressly
prohibited.
§ 90-560.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-560.50
1:857
§ 90-560.50. Application filing. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Figure 90-560-1
Zoning Variance
Zoning variance applications must be filed with the Community
Development Director.
§ 90-560.60. Public notices. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-560.70. Hearing and final decision. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
§ 90-560.80. Review criteria and standards. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(a) Published. Public notice of hearings on a zoning variance must be
published as required by state law.
(b) Mailed. Notice must be mailed to all of the following at least 10 days
before the Zoning Board of Appeals' public hearing on the matter:
(1) The subject property owner; and
(2) All owners of abutting property and of property separated from the
subject property solely by public right-of-way.
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals must hold a hearing to consider the zoning
variance request.
(b) Following the close of the hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals must
make findings of fact and act to approve the requested zoning variance,
approve the variance with modifications and/or conditions, refer the
zoning variance request back to staff or deny the zoning variance
request based on the review criteria and standards of § 90-560.80.
§ 90-560.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-560.80
1:858
§ 90-560.90. Transferability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Approved variances run with the land and are not affected by changes of
tenancy, ownership, or management.
§ 90-560.100. Lapse of approval. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
An approved zoning variance will lapse and have no further effect one year
after it is approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals, unless:
§ 90-560.110. Successive applications. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Once a zoning variance request has been denied by the Zoning Board
of Appeals, no application for the same or substantially similar variance
application may be accepted for one year of the date of denial.
(a) Pursuant to § 62.23(7)(e)7, Wis. Stats., a zoning variance may not be
approved unless the Zoning Board of Appeals finds, based on evidence
presented by the subject property owner, that:
(1) There are conditions unique to the subject property that do not
apply generally to other properties in the district;
(2) The variance is not contrary to the spirit, purpose, and intent of the
regulations of this zoning chapter and is not contrary to the public
interest;
(3) Strict compliance with applicable zoning regulations would
unreasonably prevent use of the property for a permitted purpose
or would render compliance with the chapter unnecessarily
burdensome;
(4) The alleged hardship is created by the terms of the chapter rather
than by a person who has a present interest in the property;
(5) The proposed variance will not create substantial detriment to
adjacent property; and
(6) The proposed variance will not result in building or development
that is incompatible with the character of the immediate
neighborhood.
(a) A building permit has been issued (if required);
(b) The use or structure has been lawfully established; or
(c) A different lapse of approval period or point of expiration has been
expressly established by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 90-560.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-560.120
1:859
§ 90-560.120. Review by court of record. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Any person aggrieved by a zoning variance decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals may appeal the decision in accordance with state law.
§ 90-560.120 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-560.120
1:860
DIVISION 90-565
Administrative Adjustments
§ 90-565.10. Intent. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Administrative adjustments are intended to provide a streamlined approval
procedure for very minor modifications of selected zoning chapter
regulations. Administrative adjustments are further intended to:
§ 90-565.20. Authorized administrative adjustments. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Allow development and construction that is in keeping with the general
purpose and intent of zoning chapter regulations and the established
character of the area in which the development or construction is
located;
(b) Provide flexibility that will help promote rehabilitation and reuse of
existing buildings when such flexibility will not adversely affect nearby
properties or neighborhood character; and
(c) Provide flexibility for new construction when such flexibility is in
keeping with the general purpose and intent of zoning chapter
regulations and will not adversely affect nearby properties or
surrounding neighborhood character.
(a) The Community Development Director is authorized to grant approval
of an administrative adjustment, in accordance with the procedures of
this division, only for the following:
(1) A reduction of minimum required street setbacks by up to five feet;
(2) A reduction of minimum required side and rear setbacks in any R
District by up to 15%;
(3) A modification of applicable build-to zone regulations by up to 15%;
(4) An increase in building height by up to 10% if it does not increase
the number of allowed building stories;
(5) A reduction of minimum transparency requirements by up to 10
square feet or 20%, whichever is greater;
(6) A reduction of minimum lot width and lot frontage requirements by
up to 15%;
(7) A modification of minimum and maximum motor vehicle parking
requirements by up to 10% or one space whichever is greater; and
(8) A reduction of minimum bicycle parking requirements by up to 25%
or two spaces, whichever is greater.
§ 90-565.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-565.20
1:861
§ 90-565.30. Authority to file. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Administrative adjustment applications may be filed by eligible applicants
or an eligible applicant's authorized agent. (See 90-510.40.)
§ 90-565.40. Application filing. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Administrative adjustment applications must be filed with the Community
Development Director.
§ 90-565.50. Notice of filing/intent to approve. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
§ 90-565.60. Action by Community Development Director. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(b) The administrative adjustment procedures may not be used to vary,
modify or otherwise override a condition of approval or requirement
imposed by an authorized decisionmaking body.
(a) The applicant is responsible for delivering written notice of application
filing to all owners of property abutting the subject lot and owners of
property separated from the subject property solely by public right-ofway.
(b) The written notice must describe the nature of the requested
administrative adjustment. It must also indicate the date on which the
Community Development Director will take action on the application
and that the application will be available for review and comment until
that date. Any interested party may submit written comments
concerning the application to the Community Development Director.
(a) The Community Development Director must review each application for
an administrative adjustment and act to approve the application,
approve the application with conditions or deny the application.
Alternatively, the Community Development Director is authorized to
refer the application to the Zoning Board of Appeals for consideration
as a zoning variance request.
(b) The Community Development Director may not take final action to
approve or deny an administrative adjustment application until at least
seven days after the date that required notices are provided to
surrounding property owners.
(c) If a property owner who has received notice of the administrative
adjustment application provides a written objection to the
administrative adjustment before the date of intended action indicated
on the notice, the Community Development Director must refer the
application to the Zoning Board of Appeals for consideration as a zoning
variance. No additional fees are required other than fees to cover the
cost of required notice of the Zoning Board of Appeals public hearing.
§ 90-565.20 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-565.60
1:862
§ 90-565.70. Review criteria and standards. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Administrative adjustments may be approved only when the Community
Development Director determines that the following general approval
criteria and any specific criteria associated with the authorized
administrative adjustment have been met:
§ 90-565.80. Conditions of approval. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
In granting an administrative adjustment, the Community Development
Director is authorized to impose conditions upon the subject property that
are necessary to reduce or minimize any potentially adverse impacts on
other property in the surrounding area, and to carry out the stated purpose
and intent of this zoning chapter.
§ 90-565.90. Appeals of decisions. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The applicant may appeal a decision to deny an administrative adjustment
to the Zoning Board of Appeals. In the case of an appeal, the Zoning Board
of Appeals must consider the request as a zoning variance. No additional
fees are required other than fees to cover the cost of required notice of the
Zoning Board of Appeals public hearing.
§ 90-565.100. Reporting. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
At least once per calendar year, the Community Development Director must
provide to the Zoning Board of Appeals a summary of all administrative
adjustment decisions.
§ 90-565.110. Transferability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Approved administrative adjustments run with the land and are not affected
by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management.
(d) The Community Development Director's decision to approve or deny an
administrative adjustment must be based on the review criteria and
standards of § 90-565.70.
(a) There are conditions unique to the subject property that do not apply
generally to other properties in the district;
(b) The requested administrative adjustment is not contrary to the spirit,
purpose, and intent of the regulations of this zoning chapter and is not
contrary to the public interest;
(c) The requested administrative adjustment will not create substantial
detriment to adjacent property; and
(d) The requested administrative adjustment will not result in building or
development that is incompatible with the character of the immediate
neighborhood.
§ 90-565.60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-565.120
1:863
§ 90-565.120. Lapse of approval. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
An approved administrative adjustment will lapse and have no further effect
one year after it is approved by the Community Development Director,
unless:
(a) A building permit has been issued (if required);
(b) The use or structure has been lawfully established.
§ 90-565.120 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-565.120
1:864
DIVISION 90-570
Appeals of Administrative Decisions
§ 90-570.10. Applicability. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to hear and decide appeals when
it is alleged there has been an error in any order, requirement, decision
or determination made by the Community Development Director, Zoning
Administrator or any other administrative official in the administration and
interpretation of this zoning chapter.
§ 90-570.20. Right to appeal. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Except as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning chapter, appeals of
administrative decisions may be filed by any person aggrieved by the
administrative official's decision or action, including officials, departments,
boards or agencies affected by decisions.
§ 90-570.30. Filing of appeal. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Figure 90-570-1
Appeals
Appeals of administrative decisions must be filed with the Community
Development Director within 30 days of the date of the written decision or
order.
§ 90-570.40. Effect of filing. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The filing of a complete notice of appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed, unless the Community Development Director
certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals, after the appeal is filed, that,
because of facts stated in the certification, a stay would cause immediate
peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings will not be stayed
unless by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals or by a court of record based on due cause shown.
§ 90-570.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-570.50
1:865
§ 90-570.50. Transmittal to Zoning Board of Appeals. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Upon receipt of a complete notice of appeal, the administrative official
whose decision is being appealed must transmit to the Zoning Board of
Appeals all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
is taken.
§ 90-570.60. Notice of hearing. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-570.70. Hearing and final decision. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
§ 90-570.80. General review criterion. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
An administrative decision may be reversed only if the Zoning Board of
Appeals finds that the Community Development Director or other
administrative official erred.
§ 90-570.90. Successive appeals. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Once an appeal has been denied by the Zoning Board of Appeals, no
rehearing on the same or substantially similar appeal may held except upon
a simple majority vote of Board members present and voting and a finding
that substantial new evidence is submitted that could not reasonably have
been presented at the previous hearing on the appeal.
(a) Public notice of hearings on an appeal of an administrative decision
must be published as required by state law.
(b) Notice must be mailed to the subject property owner at least 10 days
before the Zoning Board of Appeals' required hearing.
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals must hold a hearing to consider the
appeal.
(b) Following the close of the hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals must
take action on the appeal. The Board's decision must be supported by
written findings of fact.
(c) In exercising the appeal power, the Zoning Board of Appeals has all the
powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may affirm or may, upon the concurring
vote of a simple majority of Board members present and voting,
reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the decision being appealed.
(d) In acting on the appeal, the Zoning Board of Appeals must grant to the
administrative official's decision a presumption of correctness, placing
the burden of persuasion of error on the appellant.
§ 90-570.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-570.100
1:866
§ 90-570.100. Review by court of record. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Any person aggrieved by a zoning variance decision of the Board of Appeals
may appeal the decision in accordance with state law.
§ 90-570.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-570.100
1:867

DIVISION 90-580
Zoning Permits and Certificates
§ 90-580.10. Zoning compliance permits. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(a) Purpose. Zoning compliance permits are required for the purpose of
determining compliance with all applicable provisions of this zoning
chapter. Zoning compliance permits are generally required for
development and building activities that do not require a building
permit, while zoning compliance review (See § 90-580.20.) is required
for development and building activities that do require building
permits.
(b) Applicability.
(1) A zoning compliance permit is required before any structure, or
part of a structure, is created, erected, changed or converted,
wholly or in part, in its use, occupancy, or construction.
(2) A zoning compliance permit is also required before any new use is
established or any existing use is changed wholly or in part.
(c) Application filing.
(1) Complete applications for approval of a zoning compliance permit
must be filed with the Community Development Director.
(2) Each application for a zoning compliance permit must be
accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale, and in such form as may
be prescribed by the Community Development Director, showing
the actual size and dimensions of the parcel to be built upon, the
size of the building to be erected, and such other information as the
Community Development Director determines necessary to allow a
competent determination of the whether the requirements of this
zoning chapter have been met.
(d) Review and decision by Community Development Director. The
Community Development Director must review each application for a
zoning compliance permit and act to issue or deny a zoning compliance
permit based solely on whether the proposed use, structure or
development complies with all applicable provisions of this zoning
chapter.
(e) Lapse of approval. A zoning compliance permit will lapse and have no
further effect two years after it is issued by the Community
Development Director, unless a building permit has been issued (if
required).
(f) Appeals. Decisions of the Community Development Director to deny the
issuance of a zoning compliance permit for noncompliance with one or
§ 90-580.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-580.10
1:869
§ 90-580.20. Zoning compliance review. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
§ 90-580.30. Certificates of occupancy. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
more regulations of this zoning chapter may be appealed to the Zoning
Board of Appeals in accordance with Division 90-570.
(a) Purpose. Zoning compliance review is required before the issuance of
building permits for the purpose of determining whether proposed
structures and uses comply with all applicable provisions of this zoning
chapter. Development that does not require building permits may be
subject to the zoning compliance permit procedures of § 90-580.10.
(b) Applicability. Zoning compliance review is required before any
structure, or part of a structure, may be created, erected, changed or
converted, wholly or in part, in its use, occupancy, or construction.
(c) Timing. Zoning compliance review must be conducted before the
Building Official issues a building permit.
(d) Applications. Zoning compliance review for development as submitted
to the Building Official requires a site plan drawn to scale, and in such
form as may be prescribed by the Community Development Director,
showing the actual size and dimensions of the parcel to be built upon,
the size of the building to be erected, and such other information as the
Community Development Director determines necessary to allow a
competent determination of whether the requirements of this zoning
chapter have been met.
(e) Community Development Director's decision. The Community
Development Director must review each building permit application
and act to approve or deny the zoning compliance review based solely
on whether the proposed use, structure or development complies with
all applicable provisions of this zoning chapter.
(f) Appeal. Community Development Director decisions of noncompliance
with one or more regulations of this zoning chapter may be appealed to
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Division 90-570.
(a) Applicability. No building or premises other than a detached house or
two-unit house may be used or occupied until the Community
Development Director has issued a certificate of occupancy, which
states that the use and arrangement of structures and site features
comply with all applicable regulations of this zoning chapter.
(b) Issuance. A certificate of occupancy may be issued only after:
(1) The Chief Building Inspector, Public Works Director, Fire Chief, or
any other affected regulatory agency confirms that the site has
been developed in accordance with applicable regulations and
standards; and
§ 90-580.10 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-580.30
1:870
(2) The Community Development Director has determined that the site
has been developed in compliance with the site plan that
accompanied the zoning compliance permit for the subject
property.
(c) Work description and valuation. If the improvements are subject to the
commercial building code, the applicant must submit a description of
work and scheduled valuation before the certificate of occupancy may
be issued. The work description and valuation must be provided on a
form provided by the Village.
(d) Temporary certificates of occupancy. The Community Development
Director is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for
a period of up to six months during the completion of any final
improvements or alterations or during partial occupancy of such
building or site.
(1) Such temporary certificate of occupancy may be extended, but may
not in any way affect the rights, duties and obligations of the owner
or the Village, relative to the use or occupancy of the premises
converted, or any other matter covered by this zoning chapter.
(2) The Community Development Director is authorized to require a
financial guarantee, in a form approved by the Village Attorney,
before issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy.
a. Required financial guarantees must be held by the Community
Development Director for the duration of the temporary
certificate of occupancy.
b. The amount of any required financial guarantee must be equal
to at least 110% of the amount deemed necessary to complete
the development in accordance with all applicable
requirements of this chapter.
c. The financial guarantee may only be returned to the property
owner upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
d. If the temporary certificate of occupancy expires and the
development is not completed in accordance with all applicable
requirements of this chapter, the Village is authorized to
exercise the financial guarantee and use the funds to cause the
completion of the development.
§ 90-580.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-580.30
1:871

DIVISION 90-595
Enforcement
§ 90-595.10. Responsibility for enforcement. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
The Community Development Director is responsible for the interpretation,
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this zoning chapter
unless otherwise expressly stated.
§ 90-595.20. Violations. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) It is unlawful and a violation of this zoning chapter for any person, firm
or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any
building or structure or use any land in the Village, or cause any of
these actions, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this
zoning chapter. Any violation of a provision of this zoning chapter,
including but not limited to all of the following, may be subject to the
remedies and penalties provided for in this zoning chapter.
(1) To use land or buildings in any way not consistent with the
requirements of this zoning chapter;
(2) To erect a building or other structure in any way not consistent
with the regulations of this zoning chapter;
(3) To engage in the use of a building or land or any other activity
requiring one or more permits or approvals under this zoning
chapter without obtaining such required permits or approvals;
(4) To engage in the use of a building or land or any other activity
requiring one or more permits or approvals under this zoning
chapter in any way inconsistent with any such permit or approval
or any conditions imposed on the permit or approval;
(5) To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this
zoning chapter or any condition imposed on the permit or approval;
(6) To obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted or
otherwise given under this zoning chapter;
(7) To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under this
zoning chapter; or
(8) To continue any violation after receipt of notice of a violation.
(b) Each day that a violation remains uncorrected after receiving notice of
the violation from the Village constitutes a separate violation of this
zoning chapter.
§ 90-595.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-595.30
1:873
§ 90-595.30. Remedies and enforcement powers. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
The Village has all remedies and enforcement powers allowed by law,
including the following:
§ 90-595.40. Previous enforcement actions. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Nothing in this zoning chapter prohibits the continuation of previous
enforcement actions undertaken by the Village pursuant to previous valid
ordinances and laws.
§ 90-595.50. Remedies cumulative. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The remedies and enforcement powers established in this zoning chapter
are cumulative, and the Village may exercise them in any combination or
order. Each day that a violation continues is considered a separate offense.
§ 90-595.60. Persons subject to penalties. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
The occupant or owner of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof,
and any architect, builder, contractor, or agent, or other person who
commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violations may each
be found guilty of a separate offense and be subject to penalties, remedies
and enforcement actions.
(a) Withhold or revoke permits. Any permit, certificate or other form of
authorization required under this zoning chapter may be withheld or
revoked by the Community Development Director when the Community
Development Director determines that there is departure from the
plans, specifications, or conditions as required under terms of the
permit.
(b) Permits approved with conditions. Instead of withholding or denying a
permit or other authorization, the Community Development Director
may grant such authorization subject to the condition that the violation
be corrected.
(c) Municipal citations. The Village may issue municipal citations for
violations of this zoning chapter, as set forth in § 1-16 of the Village
Code.
(d) Other legal remedies. In addition to all other remedies and enforcement
powers, the Village is authorized to use all remedies available under
state law, including seeking injunctive relief and payment of damages.
§ 90-595.30 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-595.60
1:874
ARTICLE 600
Measurements And Terminology
DIVISION 90-610
Measurements
§ 90-610.10. Purpose. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
This division establishes rules for measuring compliance with zoning
chapter regulations and describes exceptions to some of the regulations.
§ 90-610.20. Fractions and rounding. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
When calculations required under this zoning chapter result in fractions,
the results must be rounded as follows:
§ 90-610.30. Lot area. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Lot area is measured as the total ground-level surface area contained within
the lot lines of a lot but not including any area occupied by the waters of a
duly recorded lake or river and/or public right-of-way.
§ 90-610.40. Lot width. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Lot width is the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot,
measured along the minimum front setback line. If no minimum front
setback is required, lot width is measured long the front lot line.
(a) Minimum requirements.
(1) When calculating minimum off-street parking requirements, any
fractional result of less than one-half is rounded down to the whole
number and any fractional result of one-half or more is rounded up
to the next consecutive whole number.
(2) When a requirement other than off-street parking is expressed as a
minimum requirement, any fractional result must be rounded up to
the next consecutive whole number.
(b) Maximum limits. When a regulation is expressed as a maximum limit,
any fractional result must be rounded down to the preceding whole
number. For example, if a maximum limit of 3.33 parking spaces per
1,000 square feet of floor area is applied to an 8,000 square foot
building, the resulting fraction of 26.64 is rounded down to 26 allowed
parking spaces. This provision is not to be interpreted as allowing
fractional results to be rounded down when determining compliance
with percentage-based limits. For example, if maximum allowed lot
coverage is 45%, a lot with 45.33% coverage is not considered to be in
compliance.
§ 90-610.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-610.50
1:875
§ 90-610.50. Lot frontage or street frontage. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
Lot frontage is measured between side lot lines of a lot along the front lot
line.
§ 90-610.60. Building coverage. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Building coverage is the total area of a lot covered by principal and
accessory buildings.
§ 90-610.70. Impervious coverage. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Imperious coverage is the total area of a lot covered by impervious surfaces,
including principal and accessory buildings and structures, driveways,
sidewalks, patios, parking lots and swimming pools.
§ 90-610.80. Floor area. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
The sum of the gross, horizontal areas of the several floors of the building
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center
line of walls separating two buildings. The floor area of a building includes
basement floor area, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, floor
space used for mechanical equipment (except equipment, open or enclosed,
located on the roof), penthouses, attic space having headroom of seven feet
10 inches or more, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches,
and floor area devoted to accessory uses. However, any space devoted to
off-street parking or loading is not counted as floor area.
§ 90-610.90. Building setbacks. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(a) Measurements.
(1) Required building setbacks are measured from the applicable lot
line, right-of-way, or specific location referred to in the applicable
regulation. Building setbacks are measured to the nearest exterior
building wall. Minimum setbacks that apply to other features
(parking areas, fences, storage areas) are measured from the
nearest point of the area or feature for which a setback is required.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, no part of any structure may be
located within the street right-of-way.
(2) Street (front and street-side) setbacks are measured from the rightof-
way line of the street. For lots without frontage on a public
street, street setbacks are measured starting at a point one foot
back of the outer edge of the improved surface of the private street,
multi-use pathway, or sidewalk that lies nearest to the principal
building.
(3) Interior side setbacks are measured from the nearest side lot line
that does not abut a street.
§ 90-610.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-610.90
1:876
(4) Rear setbacks are measured from the rear lot line.
(5) On double-frontage lots, the required front setback must be
provided from both streets.
(6) Structures not classified as buildings and six inches or more in
height from the surface of the ground are subject to the setback,
regulations of this zoning chapter, unless otherwise expressly
stated.
(7) When local, state or federal regulations (e.g, setbacks from state or
federal roads or building and electric code requirements) impose a
greater required setback than established in this chapter, the
greater setback regulation applies.
(b) Exceptions.
(1) Structures not classified as buildings and less than six inches in
height from the surface of the ground are not subject to the setback
regulations of this zoning chapter, unless otherwise expressly
stated.
(2) Eaves or roof overhangs may encroach into any required setback,
provided that such features are set back at least three feet from lot
lines.
(3) The following structures are permitted within required zoning
district setbacks: highway and traffic signs, public utility lines and
poles, walls and fences, mailboxes, signs.
(4) Walks, drives, paved terraces and decorative yard accessories,
such as fountains, pools, statuary, flagpoles, clothesline poles,
children's play apparatuses, etc., are permitted within required
zoning district setbacks but must be set back at least two feet from
an abutting property line. Walks, drives and paved terraces may
abut property lines abutting a street or alley.
(5) Fences, walls, and architectural screening devices, when anchored
to ground-mounted supports, are considered permanent
structures.
(6) Retaining walls are permitted in any location on a lot, provided that
retaining walls must be set back at least three feet from lot lines.
(c) Setbacks on irregular lots. Setbacks are measured from lot lines
towards the center of the lot, except as follows:
(1) When lot lines are curvilinear, setbacks are measured parallel to
the curvilinear lot line.
(2) When there are multiple rear lot lines, the rear setback is measured
from each of the rear lot lines.
§ 90-610.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-610.90
1:877
(3) When there is no rear lot line, the rear setback must be measured
as a radial distance from the intersection of side lot lines at the rear
of the lot.
Figure 90-610-1
Setbacks on Irregular Lots
(d) Contextual building setbacks. When existing buildings on one or more
abutting lots are closer to the street (front or street side) property line
than the otherwise required minimum setback, additions to existing
buildings or construction of new buildings on the subject lot may
comply with the average street yard depth that exists on the nearest
two lots on either side of the subject lot instead of complying with the
zoning district's minimum street setback requirement.
(1) Existing average street yard depths must be based on the front
corners of the buildings on the lots used in the contextual setback
determination that are nearest to the subject lot.
§ 90-610.90 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-610.90
1:878
§ 90-610.100. Parking setbacks. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-610.110. Build-to zone and required building frontage. [Ord.
No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(2) If one or more of the lots required to be included in the average
setback calculation is vacant, the vacant lot is deemed to have a
street yard depth equal to the minimum front street setback of the
subject zoning district.
(3) Lots with frontage on a different street than the subject lot or that
are separated from the subject lot by a street or alley are not used
in computing the average setback.
(4) The contextual setback provisions of this subsection may not be
used to reduce the front setback for a street-facing garage door to
less than 20 feet from the back of the sidewalk or less than 20 feet
from the street right-of-way.
Figure 90-610-2
Contextual Setbacks
(a) All on-site (off-street) parking spaces must be located behind any
applicable parking setback line. This requirement applies whether such
spaces are located in a surface (open-air) parking lot or in a parking
structure. Parking setbacks do not apply to on-street parking spaces,
parking spaces located in an underground structure or parking spaces
located above the ground floor.
(b) Required parking setbacks are measured in accordance with
§ 90-610.90(a).
(a) The build-to zone is the area on the lot where all or a portion of the
street-facing building facade must be located, established as a
minimum and maximum setback range.
(b) The street-facing building facade must be located in and extend along
the length of the build-to zone for a minimum distance equal to a
percentage of the width of the lot, as required by specific provisions of
this zoning chapter. The required minimum percentage is calculated by
dividing the width of the building facade located within the build-to
§ 90-610.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-610.110
1:879
§ 90-610.120. Transparency. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-610.130. Street-facing building entrances. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
zone by the width of the lot. For purposes of this calculation, the width
of the lot is the narrowest width of the lot within the build-to zone.
(c) Awnings, steps, porches, balconies, and building mounted signs may
extend beyond the build-to zone.
(d) On corner lots, the Community Development Director is authorized to
designate which street is the primary street and which street is the
secondary or side street. The primary street designation must be based
on consideration of the following criteria:
(1) The street with the highest functional street classification;
(2) The street that the lot takes its address from; and
(3) The street parallel to an alley within the block.
(e) On corner lots, the building must be within the required build-to zone
for the first 25 feet extending from the intersection of the two street
rights-of-way.
(a) Transparency regulations govern the percentage of a street-facing
building facade that must be covered by glazed elements (e.g.,
transparent windows and doors).
(b) Unless otherwise expressly stated, the transparency of a ground-floor
facade is measured between 2.5 feet and eight feet above the adjacent
curb.
(c) The transparency of an upper-story facade is measured from top of the
finished floor to the top of the finished floor above. When there is no
floor above, upper-story transparency is measured from the top of the
finished floor to the top of the wall plate.
(d) Glazed elements used to satisfy minimum transparency requirements
must be clear and nonreflective and not be painted or tinted
(transparent, low-emissivity glass is permitted).
(a) Required street-facing building entrances must provide ingress and
egress for residents and customers. Additional entrances off another
street, pedestrian area or internal parking area are also permitted.
(b) An angled entrance may be provided at any corner of a building along
the street to meet street-facing entrance requirements.
§ 90-610.110 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-610.140
1:880
§ 90-610.140. Floor-to-ceiling height. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Floor-to-ceiling height is measured from the finished floor to the ceiling
immediately above. At least 50% of the enclosed ground floor area must
comply with established floor-to-ceiling height requirements and all of the
first 20 feet of building depth, measured from the principal street-facing
facade, must comply with established floor-to-ceiling height requirements.
Buildings in existence or that were the subject of an approved building
permit before the effective date specified in § 90-10.30 are exempt from
floor-to-ceiling height requirements.
§ 90-610.150. Building height. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
§ 90-610.160. Other height measurements. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(a) Measurement. Building height is measured as the vertical distance
from the average ground elevation along the front, exterior building
wall to the highest point of the subject building. For purposes of
measuring height:
(1) The average ground elevation is the midpoint between the highest
and lowest ground elevations along the exterior building wall; and
(2) The highest point of the building is the coping of a flat roof, the
deckline of a mansard roof or shed roof, or the peak of the highest
gable of a gambrel, hip or pitch roof. For buildings without a roof,
height is measured to the highest point of the structure.
(b) Exceptions.
(1) Farm buildings and farm-related structures are not subject to
building height limits.
(2) Chimneys, elevators, equipment penthouses, monitors, cooling
towers and ventilators may exceed maximum building height limits,
provided that they are not intended for human occupancy and they
do not extend more than 25 feet above the top of the principal
structure to which they are attached.
(3) Belfries, clock towers, cupolas, domes, flagpoles and spires may
exceed maximum building height limits, provided that they are not
intended for human occupancy and they are not more than 50%
taller than the applicable height limit.
(a) Signs. See § 90-440.140.
(b) Fences and walls. The height of fences and walls is measured as the
vertical distance from the average finished grade on the inside of the
fence to the top of the fence or wall. Fences atop walls or landscape
features (e.g., raised beds) are measured to average finished grade at
§ 90-610.140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-610.160
1:881
§ 90-610.170. Noise and sound. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
For the purpose of determining compliance with any noise limits expressed
in db(A) (A-weighted decibels), the noise must be measured on the Aweighting
scale on a sound level meter of standard design and quality
having characteristics established by the American National Standards
Institute.
§ 90-610.180. Occupancy. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
For the purpose of determining compliance with standards or requirements
based on building occupancy or capacity, calculations must be based on the
building code.
the base of the wall or landscape feature. The following may extend a
up to 12 inches above the maximum fence height limits:
(1) Fence posts.
(2) Fence column and other supporting structures.
(3) Lights or ornamentation mounted on any column, post, or
supporting structure of a fence or wall.
(c) Other structures. The height of structures other than buildings, fences
or walls is measured as vertical distance from the average finished
grade at the base of the structure to the highest point of the structure.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the height of a structure may not
exceed the maximum building height allowed in the subject zoning
district.
§ 90-610.160 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-610.180
1:882
DIVISION 90-620
Terminology
§ 90-620.10. Language and ordinance construction. [Ord. No.
19-2020, 6-8-2020]
See § 90-10.90.
§ 90-620.20. Use definitions. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
See Division 90-320 for an explanation of the use categorization system
used in this zoning chapter and for use type definitions.
§ 90-620.30. Measurement-related terms. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
See Division 90-610.
§ 90-620.40. Abbreviations. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
Table 90-620-1
Abbreviations
BFE Base flood elevation
BTZ Build-to zone
DNR Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency
FIS Flood insurance study
ft. Feet
LID Low-impact development
max. Maximum
min. Minimum
RFE Regional flood elevation
sq. ft. Square feet
ZBA Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 90-620.50. Terms beginning with A. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A ZONES — Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map that
would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered
or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be reflective of flood
profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area.
ABUT or ABUTTING — To touch or share a contiguous boundary or border.
§ 90-620.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-620.50
1:883
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A use or structure that meets the
criteria established in § 90-330.10(b).
ADJACENT — Lying near or in the immediate vicinity.
AGENT — A person duly authorized to act on behalf of the owner of the
subject property.
AH ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
ALLEY — A special public right-of-way affording only secondary access to
abutting properties, typically at the rear or sides.
ALTERATION — An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or
modification other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other systems within a
structure.
AO ZONE — See "area of shallow flooding."
APPLICANT — The owner of the subject property or an agent authorized by
the subject property owner to submit an application on the owner's behalf.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH or
VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable, and where the velocity flood may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AWNING — A roof-like structure typically made of cloth, metal or other
material, attached to a frame that extends from and is supported by a
building. Awnings are typically erected over a window, doorway or building
front, and they may be raised or retracted to a position adjacent to the
building.
§ 90-620.60. Terms beginning with B. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASE (ZONING) DISTRICT — Any zoning district that is not an overlay
district.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a
FIRM.
BASEMENT — Any enclosed area of a building having its floor subgrade,
i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
BERM — A vegetated, elongated earthen mound.
BIORETENTION — The use of soil and plants to remove pollutants from
stormwater runoff.
BLOCK FACE — All lots abutting one side of a street between the two
nearest intersecting streets.
§ 90-620.50 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-620.60
1:884
BUILD-TO ZONE (or BUILD-TO LINE) — See § 90-610.110.
BUILDING — A structure that is permanently affixed to the land, with or
without a roof, or walls on all sides, and used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING COVERAGE — See § 90-610.60.
BUILDING FACADE — That portion of a building that is parallel or nearly
parallel to the abutting street.
BUILDING HEIGHT — See § 90-610.150.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A principal building surrounded by open space
on the same lot.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building or combination of buildings of chief
importance or function on a lot. In general, the principal use of the property
is carried out in the principal building.
BULKHEAD LINE — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the
Department pursuant to § 30.11, Wis. Stats., and that allows limited filling
between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water mark,
except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this
division.
§ 90-620.70. Terms beginning with C. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CALIPER — The diameter of the tree trunk measured at a point six inches
above the root ball or soil level.
CAMPGROUND — Any parcel of land that is designed, maintained, intended
or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use
by four or more camping units, or that is advertised or represented as a
camping area.
CAMPING TRAILER — Any shelter designed to provide sleeping, eating and
living quarters, and designed to be transported on wheels from place to
place, but shall be less than 20 feet in length. Any such shelter that exceeds
20 feet shall be considered a house trailer, and if the wheels have been
removed, it shall be construed as a permanent dwelling structure.
CAMPING UNIT — Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in
area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping
trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, tent or other mobile
recreational vehicle.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification that the construction and
the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of
a structure is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this zoning
chapter.
§ 90-620.60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-620.70
1:885
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks
to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
CHARACTER — Any letter of the alphabet or any numeral.
COLD FRAME — An unheated structure no more than four feet in height
used for protecting seedlings and plants from the cold.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use requiring conditional use approval in
accordance with Division 90-550.
CONSERVATION STANDARDS — The guidelines and specifications for soil
and water conservation practices and management enumerated in the
technical guide prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service for Racine
County, adopted by the County Soil and Water Conservation District
Supervisors, and containing suitable alternatives for the use and treatment
of land, based upon its capabilities, from which the landowner selects the
alternative that best meets his needs in developing his soil and water
conservation plan.
CRAWLWAYS or CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area below the first usable
floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to
plumbing and electrical utilities.
CURB LEVEL — The average (mean) level of the established curb along the
street frontage of the subject lot. Where no curb has been established, the
Village Engineer is authorized to establish such curb level or its equivalent.
§ 90-620.80. Terms beginning with D. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DECK — An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has
a permeable floor that allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of
any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure,
regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of
buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the
storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the
installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems
or water supply facilities.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of a tree trunk
measured at a point 4.5 feet above ground level at the base of the tree.
DRY LAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route that is above the regional
flood elevation and that connects land located in the floodplain to land
outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood
elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
§ 90-620.70 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-620.80
1:886
DUMPSTER — A container with a capacity of more than 1.5 cubic yards or a
height of more than 4.5 feet that is designed for receiving, transporting, and
depositing waste materials produced by uses that are on the subject site.
Dumpsters are typically designed to be hoisted and emptied into a garbage
truck.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms that is arranged, intended or
designed to be occupied as sleeping, eating and living quarters for a single
individual or household.
§ 90-620.90. Terms beginning with E. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTRIC VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is licensed and registered for
operation on public and private highways, roads, and streets, either
partially or exclusively on electrical energy from the grid or an off-board
source that is stored on-board via a battery. "Electric vehicle" includes: 1)
battery electric vehicles; and 2) plug-in hybrid electric vehicles.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) CHARGING STATION — A public or private
parking space that is served by battery charging station equipment.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION, PRIVATE (RESTRICTEDACCESS)
— An EV charging station that is not available for use by the
general public. Examples include electric vehicle charging stations that
serve residential homeowners or renters, executive parking areas,
designated employee parking areas and fleet parking areas.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION, PUBLIC — An EV charging
station that is accessible to and available for use by the general public.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE PARKING SPACE — Any parking space that is clearly
identified to be used exclusively for the parking of an electric vehicle.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or
development in the floodway.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Services provided by public and private utilities
that are necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the
principal structure. Such services include underground, surface or
overhead gas, electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, stormwater
drainage and communication systems, and accessories thereto, such as
poles, towers, wires, mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes,
catch basins, underground water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm
boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations and hydrants,
but not including buildings.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel
of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale,
on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed
before the effective date of this division. At a minimum, this includes the
§ 90-620.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-620.90
1:887
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
EXPANSION TO EXISTING MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes
installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading,
or the pouring if concrete pads.
EXTRACTIVE OPERATIONS — The removal of rock, slate, gravel, sand,
topsoil or other natural material from the earth by excavating, stripping,
leveling or any other process.
§ 90-620.100. Terms beginning with F. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FENCE — A human-made barrier constructed of wood, iron, stone, or other
material erected for the purpose of protection, confinement, enclosure, or
privacy.
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The probability of a flood occurrence that is
determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood
event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified
number of years or as a percentage chance of occurring in any given year.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map designating approximate flood
hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A Zones
and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map
forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a flood
insurance study and a flood insurance rate map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of a community on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special
flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community. This map can only be amended by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A technical engineering examination,
evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides
maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides
both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide
floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and
unnumbered A Zones. Flood insurance rate maps that accompany the flood
insurance study form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance
aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
§ 90-620.90 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-620.100
1:888
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the
following conditions:
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of
land surface elevations along a stream or river.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation of two feet of freeboard
above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood.
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters
has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood
discharge.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway
that is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and associated with
standing water rather than flowing water.
FLOODPLAIN — Land that has been or may be covered by floodwater
during the regional flood. It includes the floodway and the flood fringe, and
may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
FLOODPLAIN ISLAND — A natural geologic land formation within the
floodplain that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the
regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — Policy and procedures to ensure wise use
of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education,
and administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and
contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or
eliminating flood damage.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FLOOR AREA — See § 90-610.80.
FLOOR-TO-CEILING HEIGHT — See § 90-610.140.
(a) The overflow or rise of inland waters;
(b) The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake
Superior; or
(c)
The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
(d)
§ 90-620.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-620.100
1:889
FOOTCANDLE — A measure of illumination; the amount of light falling onto
a surface. One lumen of light, shining evenly across one square foot of
surface, illuminates that surface to one footcandle.
FREEBOARD — A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number
of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any
factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice
jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and
floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas
due to development and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
FRONTAGE, STREET — The dimension of a lot abutting a public street,
measured along the setback line.
§ 90-620.110. Terms beginning with G. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE — A structure primarily intended and used for the enclosed
storage or shelter of the motor vehicles of the individuals who reside on the
premises. Carports are considered garages within this definition.
GARAGE, ATTACHED — A garage, the roof of which is attached to the
principal building.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED — The elevation of the finished street at the center
line or curb as fixed by the engineer or by such authority as shall be
designated by law to determine such elevation.
GRADE, FINISHED — The vertical location of the ground or pavement
surface after site grading work is completed in accordance with an
approved plan.
GREEN ROOF — An extension of an above-grade building roof that includes
at least a waterproof membrane, a root repellent system, a drainage system,
a filtering layer, soil with a minimum depth of three inches and native or
naturalized plants. Also commonly referred to as a "vegetated roof."
GROUND-FLOOR LEVEL — The lowest level of a building that is at or above
grade for at least 50% of its interior floor-to-ceiling height.
§ 90-620.120. Terms beginning with H. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HABITABLE STRUCTURE — Any structure, or portion of which. that is used
or designed for human habitation.
HEDGE — A dense row of shrubs forming a boundary fence or barrier.
HEIGHT, BUILDING — See § 90-610.150.
§ 90-620.100 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-620.120
1:890
HEIGHT, STRUCTURES OTHER THAN BUILDINGS — See § 90-610.160.
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Damage that could result from
flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant
economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is either:
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a dwelling unit for business or
commercial purposes. Home occupations are subject to the regulations of
§ 90-330.60.
HOME OR HOUSEHOLD OCCUPATION — A gainful occupation conducted
only by members of the family entirely within buildings at the place of
residence, but not exceeding 25% of the floor area, where the space used is
incidental to the residential use and does not adversely affect the exterior
residential character of the premises, and the principal service or article
offered for sale is produced on the premises. No such use shall normally
require the coming of the customer or client to the premises, or his
presence upon the premises while the service is being performed. Any
machinery or equipment used shall not create noise or other nuisance
factors beyond what is typical to a residential area, and a nonilluminated
nameplate sign shall be allowed but shall be limited to one square foot.
Unless prohibited by district regulations, such uses shall be accessory uses
by right.
HOOP HOUSE — A temporary or permanent structure typically made of
flexible pipe or other material covered with translucent plastic, constructed
in a half-round or hoop shape, for the purposes of protecting and cultivating
plants. A hoop house is considered more temporary than a greenhouse.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(a)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
(b)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs that have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
(c)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by
an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior, or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(d)
§ 90-620.120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-620.120
1:891
HOUSE TRAILER — A structure designed to be a dwelling unit that can be
moved from place to place on wheels. As defined in § 66.0435, Wis. Stats.,
the term "dependent unit" means a structure not having its own plumbing
facilities, whereas an independent unit has plumbing as well as heating
and cooking facilities ready for hookup to utility connections. (See also the
definitions of the terms "mobile home" and "camping trailer.")
HOUSEHOLD — One or more persons related by blood, adoption or
marriage, or not to exceed three persons not so related, occupying a
premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a
group of individuals occupying a group living use.
§ 90-620.130. Terms beginning with I. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — See § 90-610.70.
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward rise in
the regional flood elevation, greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison
of existing conditions and proposed conditions that is directly attributable
to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of
mathematical variables, such as roughness factors, expansion and
contraction coefficients and discharge.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of
seven days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or in
which the engine, wheels, or other parts have been altered, damaged, or
otherwise modified so that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under
its own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" does not include a motor
vehicle that has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under
its own motor power solely to perform ordinary service or repair operations.
§ 90-620.140. Terms beginning with J. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(Reserved)
§ 90-620.150. Terms beginning with K. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(Reserved)
§ 90-620.160. Terms beginning with L. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LAND USE — Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real
estate. (See also "development.")
LAWFULLY ESTABLISHED — A use, structure, lot or sign (as the context
indicates) that was established in conformance with all applicable zoning
code regulations in effect at the time of its establishment.
§ 90-620.120 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-620.160
1:892
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light that is emitted into an unintended area.
LINER BUILDING — A building or portion of a building that is specifically
designed to mask a parking garage or structure from frontage on a public
street and that consists of habitable floor space.
LOADING AREA, OFF-STREET — The area on a lot or within a building
designed to accommodate a parked truck in a space or berth for the loading
or unloading of freight carriers having adequate ingress and egress to a
public street or alley.
LOT — A single parcel of contiguous land occupied or intended to be
occupied by such structures and uses as permitted under this zoning
chapter, together with the open spaces required by this zoning chapter, and
abutting on a public street or officially approved way.
LOT AREA — See § 90-610.30.
LOT FRONTAGE — See § 90-610.50.
LOT LINE — The lines forming the boundaries of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The boundary of a lot that abuts the street. Unless
otherwise expressly stated, the Community Development Director is
authorized to determine which lot line is the front lot line on corner lots.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any boundary of a lot that is not a street lot line or a
rear lot line.
LOT LINE, STREET — The boundary of a lot that abuts a street. A lot may
have more than one street lot line, and a street lot line may also be a front
lot line.
LOT WIDTH — See § 90-610.40.
LOT, CORNER — A lot having frontage on at least two public streets at the
intersection of such streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot having frontage on two streets, other
than at the street intersection, and the streets typically being along the
front and rear lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — An approach to land development
(or redevelopment) that works with nature to manage stormwater as close
to its source as possible. LID employs principles such as preserving and
recreating natural landscape features, minimizing impervious area to create
functional and appealing site drainage features that treat stormwater as
a resource rather than a waste product. Common LID practices include
bioretention facilities, rain gardens, green roofs, rain barrels or cisterns,
and permeable paving.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE — The elevation of the lowest ground surface
that touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
§ 90-620.160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-620.170
1:893
§ 90-620.170. Terms beginning with M. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MAINTENANCE — The act or process of restoring to original soundness,
including redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the
replacement of existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent
fixtures, systems or structures.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile home but does
not include a "mobile recreational vehicle."
MOBILE HOME — A structure designed to be a dwelling unit, that is
manufactured and totally assembled in a factory and then transported to
a lot or site for placement on a foundation and hookup to essential utility
services for permanent habitation. Any such structure from which its wheels
have been removed shall be construed to be a permanent structure for
purposes of this chapter.
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle that is built on a single
chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by
a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is
required and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use. Manufactured homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land,
but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model
homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational vehicles."
MOBILE STORAGE UNIT, TEMPORARY — A mobile, fully enclosed
container that is specifically designed and used for the temporary storage
of household goods, wares, and materials for the purpose of moving,
relocation, or temporary storage during construction. This definition does
not include a shipping or cargo container, modified or otherwise.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING —
A parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
is completed before the effective date of this chapter. At a minimum, this
would include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO EXISTING —
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This
§ 90-620.170 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-620.170
1:894
includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site
grading, or pouring of concrete pads.
MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE — A hydraulic engineering model that
corrects any errors that occur in the duplicate effective model, adds any
additional cross sections to the duplicate effective model, or incorporates
more detailed topographic information than that used in the current
effective model.
MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE — A copy of the hydraulic analysis used
in the effective FIS and referred to as the "effective model."
MODEL, EFFECTIVE — The hydraulic engineering model that was used to
produce the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT) — A modification of the duplicate
effective model or corrected effective model to reflect any man-made
modifications that have occurred within the floodplain since the date of
the effective model but prior to the construction of the project for which
the revision is requested. If no modification has occurred since the date
of the effective model, then this model would be identical to the corrected
effective model or duplicate effective model.
MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) — A modification of the existing or preproject
conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected effective
model to reflect revised or post-project conditions.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any licensed passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer,
trailer, or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
MULTITENANT DEVELOPMENT — A development typically under unified
ownership and control consisting of two or more business establishments,
which may be on the same lot or on separate lots. The tenants of multitenant
development typically share vehicle access and parking facilities.
§ 90-620.180. Terms beginning with N. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NAVD or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations referenced
to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, "new
construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations
adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it
includes any structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31,
1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
§ 90-620.170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-620.180
1:895
NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations
referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT FEATURE — See § 90-460.60.
NONCONFORMING LOT — See § 90-460.20.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — See § 90-460.50.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — See § 90-460.30.
NONCONFORMING USE — See § 90-460.40.
NONCONFORMITY — A nonconforming lot, nonconforming use,
nonconforming structure, nonconforming development features or
nonconforming sign.
NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Any principal building other than a
residential building.
§ 90-620.190. Terms beginning with O. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development that blocks the conveyance
of floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future
development will cause an increase in regional flood height.
OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP — The map described in
§ 90-490.20 that has been approved by the Department and FEMA.
OPEN SPACE — An occupied space, open to the sky, on the same lot with
the building, and not used for parking or driveway purposes. Roof terraces
shall not be counted as open space unless the access thereto, design of the
terrace and similar factors deemed pertinent by the Plan Commission have
been approved by the Plan Commission in each instance.
OPEN SPACE USE — Those uses having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
OPEN-AIR USES — Uses of land that do not involve buildings or that
involve buildings that are incidental and accessory to the open-air use of
the lot. Typical examples include storage yards, vehicle impound yards, auto
wrecking and junkyard uses.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristic.
OUTDOOR CUSTOMER SEATING/DINING AREA — The area of all
unenclosed areas used or intended to be used for seating and dining by
customers and guests, including standing table areas.
§ 90-620.180 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-620.190
1:896
OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Land and structures, along with
accessory equipment, designed and utilized for leisure time activities of a
predominately outdoor nature and/or a more specific purpose than passive
parklike open areas, and further classified as follows:
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A zoning district that overlays one or more base
zoning districts and imposes requirements in addition to those of the base
district or modifies the regulations otherwise applicable in the base zoning
district.
§ 90-620.200. Terms beginning with P. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKING LOT (OR AREA) — An off-street area containing accessory or
nonaccessory motor vehicle parking spaces and associated motor vehicle
maneuvering and circulation areas.
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET — The area on a lot designed to
accommodate a parked motor vehicle.
PERSON — An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality or state agency.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building or combination of buildings of chief
importance or function on a lot. In general, the principal use is carried out
in the principal building.
PRINCIPAL USE — A use or activity or combination of which are of chief
importance on the lot; one of the main purposes for which the land,
buildings or structures are intended, designed or ordinarily used.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located
on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage
system approved by the Department of Commerce, including a substitute
for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving
more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the
structure.
PRIVATE COMMERCIAL — Facilities owned and operated by an
individual or group for profit as a business, whether or not such
facilities are open to general public use.
(a)
PRIVATE NONCOMMERCIAL — Facilities owned and operated by a
group for the exclusive use of the members of such group and their
guests, and not for profit as a business.
(b)
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — Facilities owned by an individual, located on
the same or adjoining lot as the principal residence and intended solely
for the use of the household (and guests) that occupies the lot.
(c)
PUBLIC — Facilities owned and operated by a governmental agency for
limited or general public use.
(d)
§ 90-620.190 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-620.200
1:897
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines, such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and
distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm
sewer.
§ 90-620.210. Terms beginning with Q. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
(Reserved)
§ 90-620.220. Terms beginning with R. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RAINWATER HARVESTING EQUIPMENT — A rain barrel, cistern or similar
container that collects and stores rainwater or other water that would
otherwise be lost as runoff.
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Base floodwaters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special
flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood
will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) — A trailer, boat trailer, travel trailer,
camping trailer, truck camper, camper shell, motor home, tent trailer, boat,
houseboat, or similar vehicle or unit. Camper shells that are attached to a
pickup truck are not considered a recreational vehicle.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL BINS — A container or drop box with a capacity
of more than 1.5 cubic yards or a height of more than 4.5 feet that is
provided for receiving and temporary storing of recyclable paper, cans,
glass and plastics as well as clothing, shoes, books, and toys. Recyclable
material bins include both containers used by uses located on the subject
site and those used by consumers who bring their recyclables from other
(off-site) locations.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with
a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted
on the firm, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
ROAD — See "street."
§ 90-620.230. Terms beginning with S. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SETBACK — An open, unobstructed area that is required to be provided by
this zoning chapter between a structure and a lot line.
§ 90-620.200 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-620.230
1:898
SIGN — Any object, device, display, structure, or part thereof, situated or
visible from outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct
or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, designs, logos, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected
images. The following are not regulated as signs under this zoning chapter:
SIGN FACE — The entire display surface area of a sign upon, against or
through which copy is placed.
SIGN, HIGHWAY — A freestanding sign, integral sign or flat mounted sign
that is erected and maintained within the view of motorists who are driving
on a highway. In the Village of Mount Pleasant, these signs are limited to
parcels located within 1,000 feet of an interstate.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE-COPY — A sign or portion thereof that
displays electronic text information in which each alphanumeric character,
graphic, or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix elements using
different combinations of light-emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light
bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area. Electronic
changeable-copy signs include computer-programmable, microprocessorcontrolled
electronic displays.
Traffic control and other government messages located within a rightof-
way.
(a)
Decorations that are incidentally and customarily associated with any
national holiday or religious holiday or with any community festival or
similar event.
(b)
(c) Flags which do not contain a commercial message, logo, or colors.
Art works, including, but not limited to, wall murals which do not
contain a commercial message, logo, or colors, and/or which contain
pictorial representations referring to businesses, merchandise, or
products.
(d)
Building colors and lighting which do not contain a commercial
message, logo, or colors.
(e)
Interior site signs located on the interior of the grounds of the following
land uses: a passive outdoor public recreational facility, an active
outdoor public recreational facility, or an outdoor institutional facility,
which are primarily oriented to persons within the grounds.
(f)
Interior building signs located on the interior of a building and not
attached to a window, which are primarily oriented to persons within
the building.
(g)
Window displays of merchandise, pictures, or models of products or
services incorporated in a window display, which are not directly
attached to an interior or exterior window surface.
(h)
§ 90-620.230 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-620.230
1:899
SIGN, ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY — A sign or portion thereof that
displays electronic, static images, static graphics or static pictures, with
or without information, defined by a small number of matrix elements
using different combinations of light-emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics,
light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area where
the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means
of fade, repixelization or dissolve modes. Electronic graphic display signs
include computer-programmable, microprocessor-controlled electronic or
digital displays. Electronic graphic display signs include projected images
or messages with these characteristics projected onto buildings or other
objects.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGING — An electronic changeable-copy sign or
an electronic graphic display sign.
SIGN, FLASHING — A directly or indirectly illuminated sign or portion
thereof that exhibits changing light or color effect by any means so as
to provide intermittent illumination that changes light intensity in sudden
transitory bursts and creates the illusion of intermittent flashing light by
streaming, graphic bursts showing movement, or any mode of lighting
which resembles zooming, twinkling, or sparkling.
SIGN, FLAT WALL — A sign painted on a building, and any other sign, the
back of which is attached to the facade of a building and where no part of
the structure of the sign extends more than 12 inches out from the facade,
as measured near the points of attachment to the building.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign which has its own base of support from
the ground, extending more than three feet in height from the ground and
not attached to a building. These include ground (or monument) signs, dualpost
(or two-pole) signs, and pylon (or highway) signs.
SIGN, GOVERNMENT — A sign that is constructed, placed or maintained
by the federal, state or local government or a sign that is required to be
constructed, placed or maintained by the federal, state or local government,
either directly or to enforce a property owner's rights.
SIGN, GROUND — A freestanding sign, not extending more than three feet
in height from the ground.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign which contains an element designed to
emanate artificial light internally or externally.
SIGN, INTEGRAL — A sign that is embedded, extruded or carved into the
material of a building facade; a sign made of bronze, brushed stainless steel
or aluminum, or similar material attached to the building facade.
SIGN, NONACCESSORY — A sign related to commercial or similar
activities, other than the activities actually engaged in on the site on which
such nonaccessory sign is located. Such signs are also known as "billboards"
and "off-premises advertising signs."
SIGN, ON-BUILDING — A category of sign that is permanently affixed,
attached, or otherwise a part of a building. These include: wall signs,
§ 90-620.230 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-620.230
1:900
awning signs, canopy signs, marquee signs, projecting signs, and cabinet
signs.
SIGN, PEDESTRIAN — A category of sign mounted just at or above sidewalk
level, designed for pedestrian visibility rather than motorists. These
include: blade signs and suspended signs.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign attached to a building, portions of which
extend out beyond 12 inches from the point of attachment, typically having
two or more viewable sides, but for purposes of this division, only one side
need be counted as a side for measuring its allowable area and the sign
count. Signs printed on or affixed to awnings and canopies shall also be
considered projecting signs.
SIGN, ROOF — A sign, the lowest point of which is visually separate from
and above the highest point of the roof.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A banner, pennant, poster or advertising display
constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard,
plywood or other like materials and that appears to be intended or is
determined by the Code Official to be displayed for a limited period of time.
SIGN, VEHICLE — Any sign attached to or displayed on a vehicle.
SIGN, VIDEO DISPLAY — A sign that changes its message or background in
a manner or method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery,
which may or may not include text, and depicts action or a special effect to
imitate movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a
progression of frames which give the illusion of motion, including, but not
limited to, the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light,
or expanding or contracting shapes, not including electronic changeablecopy
signs. Video display signs include projected images or messages with
these characteristics projected onto buildings or other objects.
SMOKE UNIT — The number obtained when the smoke density, in
Ringelmann number, is multiplied by the time of emission, in minutes.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A system intended to convert solar energy into
thermal, mechanical or electrical energy.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-INTEGRATED — A solar energy
system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather
than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an
architectural or structural part of the building. Building-integrated systems
include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water systems that are
contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights, shading devices and
similar architectural components.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, FLUSH-MOUNTED — A solar energy system that
is mounted flush with a finished building surface, at no more than six inches
in height above that surface.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND-MOUNTED — A solar energy system
mounted on the ground and not attached to any other structure other than
structural supports.
§ 90-620.230 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-620.230
1:901
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, STRUCTURE-MOUNTED — A solar energy
system that is mounted on the facade or roof of either a principal or
accessory structure.
SOLAR PANEL — A group of photovoltaic cells assembled on a panel. Panels
are assembled on-site into solar arrays.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement
of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STORY — The portion of a building included between the surface of a floor
and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, then
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement or
cellar having 1/2 or more of its height above grade shall be deemed a story
for purposes of height regulations.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way usually affording primary access
to abutting property.
STREET FRONTAGE — See § 90-610.50.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — A dividing line between a lot, tract or
parcel of land and a contiguous street.
STREET YARD — The area of a lot located between the street right-of-way
and the principal building on the lot.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the supporting members of
a building or any substantial change in the roof structure or the exterior
walls.
STRUCTURE — Any human-made object with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground,
stream bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled
buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — A structure that meets the criteria
established in § 90-330.10(b).
§ 90-620.230 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-620.230
1:902
STRUCTURE, PERMANENT — A structure placed on or in the ground
or attached to another structure in a fixed and determined position and
intended to remain in place for a period of more than nine months.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY — Any structure, other than a permanent
structure.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in § 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the equalized assessed value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure
has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial
improvement regardless of the work performed. The term does not,
however, include either any project for the improvement of a building
required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations
identified by the Building Official and that are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of an historic structure,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure.
§ 90-620.240. Terms beginning with T. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TOP PLATE — The horizontal timber directly carrying the trusses of a roof
or the rafters.
TRANSPARENCY — See § 90-610.120.
§ 90-620.250. Terms beginning with U. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — Where special conditions affecting a
particular property, that were not self-created, have made strict conformity
with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density
unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the
chapter.
USE — The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use subordinate, and customarily incidental, to the
permitted principal use of the property or building, and located upon the
same lot as the principal use.
§ 90-620.230 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-620.250
1:903
USE, PERMITTED — The utilization of land by occupancy, activity, building
or other structure that is specifically enumerated as permissible by the
regulations of the zoning district in which such land is located.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary use of property or a structure as
permitted on such lot by the regulations of the district in which it is located.
UTILITIES — Public or private facilities, such as water wells, water and
sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, power and communications
transmission lines, electrical power substations, static transformer stations,
telephone and telegraph exchanges, microwave radio relays and gas
regulation stations, but not including sewage disposal plants, municipal
incinerators, warehouses, shops and storage yards.
UTILITY-SCALE ENERGY PRODUCTION — An energy production facility
that produces electric energy for widespread distribution through the
electric power grid.
§ 90-620.260. Terms beginning with V. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VARIANCE — See Division 90-570 and § 90-490.110.
VEHICLE FUELS, ALTERNATIVE — Electricity, CNG (compressed natural
gas), LNG (liquefied natural gas), LPG (liquefied petroleum gas), and
hydrogen.
VEHICLE FUELS, CONVENTIONAL — Gasoline and diesel fuels.
VEHICULAR USE AREA — An outdoor area on a lot that is used for storage
and operation of motor vehicles, including parking lots, vehicle storage
areas, vehicle display areas, loading areas, driveways, and drive-through
lanes.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the applicable regulations of this zoning chapter, including
the flood protection regulations. A structure or other development without
required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing
certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to
be in violation of this zoning chapter until such time as that documentation
is provided.
VISION SETBACK AREA — An unoccupied triangular space at the street or
alley corner of a lot, as established by Division 90-437.
§ 90-620.270. Terms beginning with W. [Ord. No. 19-2020,
6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 90-620.250 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § 90-620.270
1:904
WALKWAY — A clearly identified path for nonmotorized movement between
buildings, structures, destinations, or other walkways on or adjacent to a
site.
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a
reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of
the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
WATERSHED — The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
WELL — An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its
intended use.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM — A device that directly converts
wind energy into usable thermal, mechanical, or electrical energy, including
such devices as windmills and wind turbines. The system includes towers
and supporting structures and directly connected facilities, such as
generators, alternators, inverters, batteries, and associated control
equipment.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, SMALL — A wind energy
conversion system with a power-related capacity of no more than 100 kW
that is primarily intended to produce power for on-site consumption, as a
supplement to utility power or in lieu of utility power. Small wind energy
systems are often connected to the electric utility for the purpose of net
metering.
§ 90-620.280. Terms beginning with X. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(Reserved)
§ 90-620.290. Terms beginning with Y. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
YARD — An actual (as opposed to required) open, unoccupied space that
exists on a lot between a building and a lot line.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending along the full length of the front lot lines
between the side lot lines.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line
between the side lot lines.
§ 90-620.300. Terms beginning with Z. [Ord. No. 19-2020, 6-8-2020]
(Reserved)
§ 90-620.270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-620.300
1:905
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Village of Mount
Pleasant adopted since the 2019 republication of the Code, indicating its
inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation
which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code
material (NCM).]
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
20-2018 9-24-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 90
32-2018 10-22-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 90
33-2018 10-22-2018
Traffic and Vehicles
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment Ch. 78; Ch. 90
34-2018 1-14-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 90
39-2018 12-10-2018 Fees and Charges
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 30; Ch. 90
41-2018 12-10-2018 Traffic and Vehicles
Amendment
Ch. 78
44-2018 1-14-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 90
45-2018 1-14-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 90
3-2019 1-28-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2
7-2019 2-18-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
13-2019 5-13-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 90 2
15-2019 5-28-2019 Comprehensive Plan NCM 2
17-2019 6-24-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 90 2
19-2019 7-22-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 90 2
20-2019 8-12-2019 Salaries NCM 2
§ 90-620.300 MOUNT PLEASANT CODE § DL-1
1:906
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
24-2019 11-11-2019 Buildings and
Building
Regulations: In
General Amendment
Ch. 14, Art. I 2
28-2019 11-11-2019 Licenses and
Permits: Direct
Sellers Amendment
Ch. 46, Art. II 2
3-2020 3-23-2020 Utilities: Sewer Use
Amendment
Ch. 82, Art. II 2
4-2020 2-24-2020 Buildings and
Building
Regulations:
Electrical
Amendment
Ch. 14, Art. II 2
7-2020 5-11-2020 Alcohol and Alcohol
Beverages: In
General Amendment
Ch. 6, Art. I 2
8-2020 5-11-2020 Administration:
Boards,
Commissions and
Committees
Amendment
Ch. 2, Art. IV 2
19-2020 6-8-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 90 3
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:907