PREFACE
This code contains a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of
Menasha, Wisconsin.
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1989 Code, as supplemented by
ordinances subsequently adopted by the Common Council. It does not contain any legislative
history. The official minutes of the Common Council would contain any legislative history.
Numbering System
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local
government codes. The numbering is by: Title-Chapter Article; such as 15-1A. If a Chapter does
not have any articles, then it is designated by 0. Each section consists of two parts separated by a
dash. The figure before the first dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the first dash
refers to the position within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is 1-2 and the first
section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the
same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using
another dash. New articles and new divisions will be numbered in the same way and may be placed
at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the
end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new
article or division.
Indices and Search Mechanisms
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed
under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology
and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are
numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the
particular item in which the user is interested. Search mechanisms work in the same manner as
most Internet search engines.
Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the ability to maintain updates as soon after passage and
publication as possible. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent
amendatory legislation will be inserted bi-monthly. The date of the latest update appears above.
The City Attorney and the City Clerk maintain a hard copy of this code along with all updates and
amendments. For any questions, please contact either the City Clerk or City Attorney.
The Code, as published at this web-site does not contain certain sections not easily produced in
this format. These include:
1. All Ordinances of the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission.
2. Any charter ordinances.
3. All zoning designations for individual parcels and the zoning map.
4. Annexations by legal description.
5. Legal descriptions of the boundary of the City.
6. Any right or franchise granted by the Common Council to any person, firm, or corporation,
specifically cable television.
7. Any ordinances or resolutions dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating,
opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating any street or public way in the City.
8. Any ordinance or resolution establishing or prescribing street grades of any streets in the
City.
9. Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or special
assessments.
10. Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City.
11. Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City.
12. Any appropriation ordinance or resolution.
13. The issuance of Corporate bonds and notes of the City of whatever name or description.
14. Water, sewer, and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main
construction.
15. Any flood plain designation or maps.
City of Menasha Code of
Ordinances
Title 1 – General Provisions for Use of Code of Ordinances
1-1 Use and construction of Code of Ordinances
1-2 Enforcement of Ordinances; Issuance of Citations
Title 2 - Government and Administration
2-1 City Government; Elections
2-2 Mayor; Common Council
2-3 Municipal Officers and Employees
2-4 Boards, Commissions and Committees
Title 3 – Finance and Public Records
3-1 Finance
3-2 Special Assessments
3-3 Public records
3-4 Disposal of Lost, Abandoned, and Surplus Property
Title 4 – Administrative Determinations Review
4-1 Review of Administrative Determinations
Title 5 – Public Safety
5-1 Law Enforcement
5-2 Fire Prevention
5-3 Fire Prevention Code; Hazardous Materials
5-4 Emergency Government
Title 6 – Public Works
6-1 Board of Public Works; Grades
6-2 Streets and Sidewalks
6-3 Driveways
6-4 Trees and Shrubs
6-5 City of Menasha Official Map
Title 7 – Licensing and Regulation
7-1 Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals
7-2 Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2.A Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
7-2.B Operators License
7-3 Cigarette Licenses
7-4 Direct Sellers
7-5 Auctions
7-6 Restaurant and Retail Food Establishment Licensing
7-7 Regulation and Licensing of Fireworks
7-8 Street Use Permits
7-9 Tattoo Parlors
7-10 Hotel and Motel Room Tax
7-11 Miscellaneous Business Licenses
7-12 Licenses to Pay Local Claims; Appellate Procedures; Insurance Requirements
Title 8 – Health and Sanitation
8-1 Health and Sanitation
8-2 Weights and Measures
8-3 Refuse Disposal and Collection
Title 9 – Public Utilities
9-1 Cable Television
9-2 Water Utility Regulations
9-3 Sewer Utility Regulations
9-3.A General Regulations
9-3.B Industrial Pretreatment
9-4 Communications Utility
Title 10 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
10-1 Traffic and Parking
10-1.A General Provisions
10-1.B Controlled Intersections; Street Traffic Regulations
10-1.C Parking Regulations
10-1.D Miscellaneous Provisions
10-1.E Enforcement and Penalties
10-2 Bicycles
10-3 Snowmobiles
10-4 Abandoned and Junked Vehicles
Title – 11 Offense and Nuisances
11-1 State Statutes Adopted
11-2 Offences Against Public Safety and Peace
11-3 Offences Against Property
11-4 Obscenity
11-5 Offences Involving Alcoholic Beverages
11-6 Offences by Juveniles
11-7 Public Nuisances
Title 12 – Parks and Navigable Waters
12-1 Park Regulations and City Recreation Programs
12-2 Regulation of Boating and Navigable Waters
Title 13 – Zoning
13-1 Zoning Code
13-1.A Introduction
13-1.B General provisions
13-1.C Zoning Districts
13-1.D Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
13-1.E Traffic Visibility, Loading, Parking and Access
13-1.F Signs and Billboards
13-1.G Satellite Earth Stations, Television or Radio Antenna Towers, Wind Energy
Systems, Accessory Uses, Home Occupations
13-1.H Mobile Homes
13-1.I Annexation
13-1.J Administration
13-1.K Changes and Amendments to the Zoning Code
13-1.L Appeals
13-1.MDefinitions
13-2 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
13-2.A Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Statement of Purpose and Title
13-2.B General Provisions
13-2.C Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District
13-2.D Administrative Provisions
13-2.E Penalties; Definitions
13-3 Floodplain Zoning
13-3.A Introduction
13-3.B General Provisions
13-3.C Floodway District (FW)
13-3.D Flood Fringe District (FF)
13-3.E General Floodplain District (GFP)
13-3.F Nonconforming Uses
13-3.G Administration
13-3.H Amendments
13-3.I Enforcement and Penalties
13-3.J Definitions
Title – 14 Subdivision Regulations
14-1 Subdivision Regulations
Title – 15 Building Code
15-1 Building, Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes
15-1.A Building Codes
15-1.B Electrical Code
15-1.C Plumbing Code
15-1.D Mechanical Code
15-1.E Penalties and Fees
15-2 Construction Site Erosion Control
15-3 Fair Housing
15-4 Grievances Regarding Access to Public Buildings By Handicapped Persons
15-5 Housing Code
120294
1:1
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances for the City of Menasha,
Wisconsin; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included
Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code
of Ordinances; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; and Providing When This Ordinance
Shall Become Effective.
The Common Council of the City of Menasha, Wisconsin, Does Ordain as Follows:
SECTION 1
The Code of Ordinances is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of
Menasha, Wisconsin," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive
ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent Ordinances of the City passed on
or before April 18, 1989 to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof.
SECTION 2
All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect from and after July 21, 1989, and all
Ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Menasha, enacted on final passage on
or before April 18, 1989, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from the Code after July 21, 1989, except as hereinafter
provided.
SECTION 3
(a) The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect the following, except that some
of the following provisions existing at the time of adoption may be amended by this
recodification:
(1) Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any
contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance;
(2) Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the
City, or any contract or obligations assumed by the City;
(3) The administrative Ordinances or resolutions of the City not in conflict or
inconsistent with the provisions of the Code;
(4) Any appropriation ordinance or resolution;
(5) Any right or franchise granted by the Common Council to any person, firm or
corporation, specifically cable television;
(6) Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating,
opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the
City;
(7) Any ordinance or resolution establishing the prescribing of street grades of any
streets in the City;
(8) Any ordinance providing for local improvement or assessing taxes or special
assessments therefor;
(9) Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the
City;
(10) Any ordinance annexing property to the City;
120294
1:2
(11) Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, demolition,
moving or removal of buildings or other structures, except that these ordinances have
been amended as part of this recodification;
(12) Zoning ordinances; one- and two-family dwelling building code; and any other
building codes except that these ordinances have been amended as part of this
recodification.
(13) The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the City of whatever name or
description.
(14) Water, sewer and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main
construction.
(b) Nor shall the repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has
been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance.
SECTION 4
A copy of the Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, preserved in loose-leaf form,
or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of
the City Clerk or someone authorized by the Clerk, to insert in their designated places all
amendments, ordinances or resolutions which indicate the intention of the Common Council to make
the same a part of the Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to
extract from the Code all provisions which may be repealed from time to time by the Common
Council. This copy of the Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it.
SECTION 5
All ordinances or parts in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
SECTION 6
This ordinance shall become effective on July 21, 1989.
Passed, Approved and Adopted by the Common Council on This 18th Day of April, 1989, Pursuant
to Section 66.035, Wis. Stats.
ATTEST:
_____________________________
Mayor
_____________________________
City Clerk
120294
1:3
CHAPTER 1
Use and Construction of Code of Ordinances
SEC. 1-1-1 TITLE OF CODE; CITATION.
These collected Ordinances shall be known and referred to as the "Code of Ordinances, City of
Menasha, Wisconsin." References to the Code of Ordinances, City of Menasha, Wisconsin, shall be
cited as follows: "Sec. 2-1-1, Code of Ordinances, City of Menasha, Wisconsin."
SEC. 1-1-2 PRINCIPLES OF CONSTRUCTION.
The following rules or meanings shall be applied in the construction and interpretation of ordinances
codified in this Code of Ordinances unless such application would be clearly inconsistent with the
plain meaning or intent of the ordinances:
(a) ACTS BY AGENTS. When an ordinance requires an act be done by a person which may
be legally performed by an authorized agent of that principal person, the requirement shall be
construed to include all acts performed by such agents.
(b) CODE AND CODE OF ORDINANCES. The words "Codes," "Municipal Code" and
"Code of Ordinances" when used in any section of this Code shall refer to this Code of
Ordinances of the City of Menasha unless the context of the section clearly indicates
otherwise.
(c) COMPUTATION OF TIME. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by
these Ordinances, the day of the act or event from which the period of time begins to run
shall not be included, but the last day of the period shall be included, unless it is a Saturday,
a Sunday or a legal holiday. If the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7)
days, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. As used
in this Section, "legal holiday" means any statewide legal holiday specified by state law and
any other City holiday designated by the Common Council.
(d) FINE. The term "fine" shall be the equivalent of the word "forfeiture," and vice versa.
(e) GENDER. Every word in these Ordinances referring to the masculine gender shall also be
construed to apply to females, and vice versa.
(f) GENERAL RULE. All words and phrases shall be construed according to their plain
meaning in common usage. However, words or phrases with a technical or special meaning
shall be understood and construed according to that technical or special meaning if such is
the intent of the Ordinances.
(g) JOINT AUTHORITY. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three (3) or more
City officers or employees shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
officers of other persons.
(h) PERSON. The word "person" shall mean any of the following entities: natural persons,
corporations, partnerships, associations, bodies politic or any other entity of any kind which
is capable of being sued.
(i) REPEAL. When any ordinance having the effect of repealing a prior ordinance is itself
repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive the prior ordinance or any part thereof,
unless expressly so provided.
(j) SINGULAR AND PLURAL. Every word in these Ordinances referring to the singular
120294
1:4
number only shall also be construed to apply to several persons or things, and every word in
these Ordinances referred to a plural number shall also be construed to apply to one (1)
person or thing.
(k) TENSE. The use of any verb in the present tense shall not preclude the interpretation of the
verb in the future tense where appropriate.
(l) WISCONSIN STATUTES. The term "Wisconsin Statutes" and its abbreviation as "Wis.
Stats." shall mean, in these Ordinances, the Wisconsin Statutes for the year 1985-86, as
amended.
(m) WISCONSIN ADMINISTRATIVE CODE. The term "Wisconsin Administrative Code"
and its abbreviation as "Wis. Adm. Code" shall mean the Wisconsin Administrative Code as
of the adoption of this Code, as amended or renumbered from time to time.
State Law Reference: Legal holidays, Sec. 256.17, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 1-1-3 CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.
(a) If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each
individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be
governed by that chapter.
(b) If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the
provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the
conflict shall control over the more general provision.
SEC. 1-1-4 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
If any provision of this Code of Ordinances is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional
by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of any other provisions of these Ordinances.
SEC. 1-1-5 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
(a) CODE. The Code of Ordinances, City of Menasha, Wisconsin, shall take effect from and
after passage and publication as provided by state law.
(b) SUBSEQUENT ORDINANCES. All Ordinances passed by the Common Council
subsequent to the adoption of the code of Ordinances, except when otherwise specifically
provided, shall take effect from and after their publication.
State Law Reference: Municipal Code, Sec. 66.035, Wis. Stats.
120294
1:5
SEC. 1-1-6 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
(a) ORDINANCES REPEALED. All general Ordinances heretofore adopted by the Common
Council are hereby repealed. This shall not include any Ordinances or parts of Ordinances
or resolutions relating to the following subjects and not conflicting with the provisions of this
Code, except that some of the following provisions may be amended by this Code of
Ordinances:
(1) Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any
contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance;
(2) Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the
City, or any contract or obligations assumed by the City;
(3) The administrative Ordinances or resolutions of the City not in conflict or
inconsistent with the provisions of the Code;
(4) Any appropriation ordinance or resolution;
(5) Any right or franchise granted by the Common Council to any person, firm or
corporation;
(6) Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating,
opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the
City;
(7) Any ordinance or resolution establishing or prescribing the street grades of any
streets in the City;
(8) Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor;
(9) Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the
City;
(10) Any ordinance annexing property to the City;
(11) Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, maintenance,
demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures;
(12) Zoning ordinances; dwelling building code; and other building code ordinances;
(13) The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the City of whatever name or
description;
(14) Water, sewer and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer and water main
construction.
(b) EFFECT OF REPEALS. The repeal or amendment of any provision of this Code or of any
other ordinance or resolution of the Common Council shall not:
(1) Affect any rights, privileges, obligations or liabilities which were acquired or
incurred or which had accrued under the repealed or amended provision, unless the
City has expressly reserved the right to revoke such right, privilege, obligation or
liability;
(2) Affect any offense, penalty or forfeiture, or prosecution for any offense, or levy of
any penalty or forfeiture which has arisen prior to the repeal or amendment of the
relevant provision of any ordinance of resolution. The preceding sentence shall not
preclude the application of a lesser penalty or forfeiture if the new amending or
repealing provision contains such a lesser penalty or forfeiture. the procedure for
prosecution of any violations of Ordinances repealed or amended shall be conducted
according to the procedure set forth in the new amending or repealing provision or
other procedure currently in effect.
120294
1:6
SEC. 1-1-7 GENERAL PENALTY.
(a) GENERAL PENALTY. Except where a penalty is provided elsewhere in this Code, any
person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of such
violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows. Any person who shall violate
any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than One Dollar
($1.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), together with the costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be
imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding
ninety (90) days. However, no penalty for a violation of any of the ordinances of the City of
Menasha shall be less than the statutory forfeitures provided by state law. The suspension or
revocation of any license or certificate or other privilege conferred by the City shall not be
regarded as a penalty for the purposes of this Code.
(b) JUDGMENT TO INCLUDE COSTS AND SENTENCE. Whenever a forfeiture is
imposed as punishment of any offense or when a penalty or forfeiture is recovered for doing
any act or neglecting to do any act by virtue of any of the provisions of this Code, the
judgment shall also include the costs of prosecution and shall provide for imprisonment in
the county jail for the designated period for default in the payment of such fine, penalty,
forfeiture or costs. All judgments shall be thus rendered whether the provisions under which
a prosecution or proceeding is had shall specifically so direct or not.
(c) CONTINUED VIOLATIONS. Each violation and each day a violation continues or
occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the City from
maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this
Code.
(d) OTHER REMEDIES.
(1) The City shall have any and all other remedies afforded by the Wisconsin Statutes in
addition to the forfeitures and costs of prosecution above.
(2) Execution Against Defendant's Property. Whenever any person fails to pay any
forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of any court for violation of any
ordinance of the City, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment of the
defendant, or after the defendant has been released from custody, issue an execution
against the property of the defendant for said forfeiture and costs.
SEC. 1-1-8 CLERK TO MAINTAIN COPIES OF DOCUMENTS
INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
Whenever any standard code, rule, regulation, statute or other written or printed matter is adopted by
reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth herein and the City Clerk
shall maintain in his office a copy of any such material as adopted and as amended from time to
time. Materials on file at the City Clerk's office shall be considered public records open to
reasonable examination by any person during the office hours of the City Clerk subject to such
restrictions on examination as the Clerk imposes for the preservation of the material.
120294
1:1
CHAPTER 2
Enforcement of Ordinances; Issuance of Citations
SEC. 1-2-1 METHOD OF ENFORCEMENT.
The City of Menasha hereby elects to use the citation method of enforcement of ordinances.
(a) AUTHORITY. Pursuant to the authority of Sec. 66.119, Wis. Stats., as amended, the City
of Menasha hereby elects to adopt and authorize the use of a citation to be issued for
violations of ordinances, including ordinances for which a statutory counterpart exists.
(b) CITATION. The form of the citation is hereby prescribed as found in Sec. 66.119(1)(b),
Wis. Stats., as amended, which is incorporated herein by reference.
(c) SCHEDULE OF CASH DEPOSITS. A schedule of cash deposits is established by
Section 1-2-2, as amended.
SEC. 1-2-2 FORM OF CITATION.
The form of the citation to be used by the City is on file in the City Clerk's office and is adopted by
reference as though fully set forth herein.
SEC. 1-2-3 ISSUANCE OF CITATION.
(a) Any law enforcement officer may issue citations authorized under this chapter as well as
any other part of the City of Menasha Code.
(b) The Fire Chief or his/her designee is authorized to issue citations under SEC. 5-2, 5-3 and
11-7 of the City of Menasha Code.
(c) The Community Development Director or his/her designee is authorized to issue citations
under SEC. 8-1, 8-2, 11-7, 13-1, 13-2, 13-3, 15-1 and 15-2 of the City of Menasha Code.
(d) The Public Works Director or his/her designee is authorized to issue citations under SEC. 6-
2, 6-4, 8-1 and 8-3 of the City of Menasha Code.
(e) The Code Enforcement Officer may issue citations authorized under this chapter as well as
any other part of the City of Menasha Code.
(f) The designations of paragraphs (b) through (d) of this Chapter are in addition to the
authority under Section (a) of this Chapter. Nothing shall be construed to limit the
authorization of a law enforcement officer to issue citations for any of these violations.
(g) No citation may be issued under paragraphs (b) through (d) without the advice and consent
of the City Attorney.
(h) Community Service Officers are authorized to issue citations under SEC. 7-1, 10-1-20—10-
1-38, 10-4, 11-3, and 11-7 of the City of Menasha Code.
SEC. 1-2-4 NONEXCLUSIVITY.
(a) OTHER ORDINANCE. Adoption of this Chapter does not preclude the Common
Council from adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any other
law or ordinance relating to the same or other matter.
120294
1:2
(b) OTHER REMEDIES. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the City or
any authorized officer from proceeding under any other ordinance or law or by any other
enforcement method to enforce any ordinance, regulation or order.
Updated 11/5/2019
CHAPTER 1
City Government; Elections
SEC. 2-1-1 WARD BOUNDARIES.
Ward 1A
All that part of the City of Menasha commencing at the intersection of Walnut Street and Anhaip
Street, the point of beginning, thence southerly along the centerline of Walnut Street to the
southerly corporate limits of the City of Menasha, thence westerly along said corporate limits to a
point coincident with the westerly boundary of Census Block 1007 of Census Tract 30, thence
northerly along the westerly boundary of said Block 1007 to a point coincident with the
southwest corner of Census Block 1004 of said Tract 30, thence northerly along the westerly
boundary of said Block 1004 to a point coincident with the southerly boundary of Census Tract
29 and the southwest corner of Census Block 1001 of said Tract 29, thence northerly along the
westerly line of said Block 1001 to the northerly line of said Tract 29, thence easterly along the
northerly line of said Tract 29 to a point on the east shoreline of Little Lake Butte des Morts,
thence extending southerly along said shoreline to a point coincident with the northeast corner of
Census Block 1009 of said Tract 29, thence continuing westerly along the northerly and westerly
line of said Block 1009 to a point coincident with the northerly line of Census Block 1014 of
Census Tract 30, thence easterly along the northerly line of said Block 1014 to a point coincident
with the southwest corner of Census Block 1013 of said Tract 29, thence northerly along the
westerly line of said Block 1013 to a point coincident with the centerline of Broad Street, thence
continuing easterly along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Kaukauna
Street, thence easterly along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Chute Street,
thence easterly along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Main Street, thence
easterly along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Racine Street, thence
southerly along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Anhaip Street, thence
westerly along said centerline to the point of beginning.
Ward 1B
All that part of the City of Menasha commencing at the centerline of Frederick Street extended to
the east shoreline to Little Lake Butte des Morts and the northwest corner of Census Block 1000
of Census Tract 29, thence westerly along the northerly line of said Tract 29 to the northwest
corner of Block 1001 of said Tract 29, thence southerly along the westerly line of said Block
1001 to a point coincident with the southerly boundary of Census Tract 29, the point of
beginning, thence westerly along the southerly boundary of said Tract 29 to the westerly
corporate limits of the City of Menasha, thence continuing southerly along said westerly
corporate limit to a point coincident with the northerly corporate limits of the City of Neenah,
thence easterly along the southerly corporate limits of the City of Menasha to a point coincident
with the easterly boundary of Census Block 1006 of Census Tract 30, thence northerly along the
easterly line of said Block 1006 to the southeast corner of Block 1005 of said Tract 30, thence
northerly along the easterly line of said Block 1005 to a point coincident with the southerly line
of said Tract 29 and the point of beginning.
Ward 2
All that part of the City of Menasha bounded on the east by Lake Winnebago; bounded on the south
by Nicolet Boulevard; bounded on the north by the Fox River and bounded on the west by a line
commencing at the intersection of the centerlines of Nicolet Boulevard and Walnut Street; thence
north along the centerline of Walnut Street to the intersection with the centerline with Ahnaip
Street; thence northeast along the centerline of Ahnaip Street to the intersection with the centerline
Updated 11/5/2019
of Racine Street; thence northwest along the centerline of Racine Street to the intersection with the
south shore of the Fox River.
Ward 3
All that part of the City of Menasha bounded on the south by the Fox River; thence from the
intersection of the centerline of Appleton Street and the north shore of the Fox River north along
the centerline of Appleton Street to the intersection with the centerline of First Street; thence east
along the centerline of First Street to the intersection with the centerline of De Pere Street; thence
north along the centerline of De Pere Street to the intersection with the centerline of Third Street;
thence east along the centerline of Third Street to the intersection with the centerline of Plank Road;
thence northeast along the centerline of Plank Road to the interaction with the centerline of
Konemac Street; thence southeast along the centerline of Konemac Street to the intersection with
the centerline of Second Street; thence west along the centerline of Second Street to the intersection
with the centerline of Ice Street; thence south along the centerline of Ice Street extended to the north
shore of the Fox River.
Ward 4
All that part of the City of Menasha described as follows; beginning at a point of intersection with
the centerline of Lake Street and the east shore of Little Lake Butte des Morts; this point to be
known as the point of beginning; thence east along the centerline of Lake Street to the intersection
with the centerline of Tayco Street; thence north along the centerline of Tayco Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Sixth Street; thence east along the centerline of Sixth Street to the
intersection with the centerline of De Pere Street; thence south along the centerline of De Pere
Street to the intersection with the centerline of Fifth Street; thence east along the centerline of Fifth
Street to the intersection with the centerline of London Street; thence south along the centerline of
London Street to the intersection with the centerline of Plank Road; thence southeast along the
centerline of Plank Road to the intersection with the centerline of Third Street; thence west along
the centerline of Third Street to the intersection with De Pere Street; thence south along the
centerline of De Pere Street to the intersection with the centerline of First Street; thence west along
the centerline of First Street to the intersection with the centerline of Appleton Street; thence south
along the centerline of Appleton Street to the intersection with the north shore of the Fox River;
thence west along the north shore of the Fox River to the intersection with the centerline of Racine
Street; thence northwest along the centerline of Racine Street to the intersection with the centerline
of Main Street; thence west along the centerline of Main Street to the intersection with the
centerline of Chute Street; thence north and west along the centerline of Chute Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Lush Street; thence south along the centerline of Lush Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Kaukauna Street; thence northwest along the centerline of
Kaukauna Street to the intersection with the centerline of Broad Street; thence west along the
centerline of Broad Street to its intersection with the Government Canal; thence north along the
west shore of the Government Canal to the east shore of Little Lake Butte des Morts; thence north
along the east shore of Little Lake Butte des Morts to the point of beginning.
Ward 5A
All that part of the City of Menasha commencing at the center of the intersection of Milwaukee
Street and Ninth Street, the point of beginning, thence westerly along the northerly corporate
limits of the City of Menasha to a point coincident with the westerly boundary of Census Block
1012 of Census Tract 27, thence southerly along the westerly boundary of said Block 1012 to a
point coincident with the southerly boundary of Census Tract 27, thence easterly along the
southerly boundary of Census Tract 27 to a point on the east shoreline of Little Lake Butte des
Morts, thence southerly along said shoreline to a point coincident with the centerline of Lake
Street, extended, thence easterly along the centerline of Lake Street to the centerline of Tayco
Updated 11/5/2019
Street, thence northerly along the centerline of Tayco Street to the centerline of Sixth Street,
thence easterly along the centerline of Sixth Street to the centerline of Milwaukee Street, thence
northerly along the centerline of Milwaukee Street to the point of beginning.
Ward 5B
All that part of the City of Menasha commencing at the intersection of the centerline of Ninth
Street, extended, and the east shoreline of Little Lake Butte des Morts, thence westerly along the
northerly corporate limits of the City of Menasha to a point coincident with the easterly boundary
of Census Block 1013 of Census Tract 27, the point of beginning, thence westerly along the
northerly corporate limits of said city to a point on the west shoreline of said lake, thence
continuing southerly along the westerly corporate limits of said city to a point coincident with the
southerly boundary of Census Tract 29, thence easterly along the southerly boundary of said
Tract 29 to a point coincident with the easterly boundary of Census Block 1003 of said Tract 29,
thence northerly along the easterly boundary of said Block 1003 to a point coincident with the
southerly boundary of Census Tract 27, thence northerly along the easterly boundary of Block
1013 of said Tract 27 to the point of beginning.
Ward 6
All that part of the City of Menasha described as follows; beginning at a point of intersection with
the centerlines of Sixth Street and Milwaukee Street; this point to be known as the point of
beginning; thence east along the centerline of Sixth Street to the intersection with the centerline of
State Street; thence north along the centerline of State Street to the intersection with the centerline
of Eighth Street; thence west along the centerline of Eighth Street to the intersection with the
centerline of Appleton Street; thence north along the centerline of Appleton Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Ninth Street; thence west along the centerline of Ninth Street to
the intersection with the City of Menasha corporate boundary line; thence west following along the
City of Menasha corporate boundary line to the intersection with the centerline of Milwaukee
Street; thence south along the centerline of Milwaukee Street to the point of beginning.
Ward 7
All that part of the City of Menasha described as follows; beginning at a point of intersection with
the centerlines of Fifth Street and De Pere Street; this point to be known as the point of beginning;
thence east along the centerline of Fifth Street to the intersection with the centerline of London
Street; thence north along the centerline of London Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Seventh Street; thence west along the centerline of Seventh Street to the intersection of the
centerline with Appleton Road; thence southwest along the centerline of Appleton Road to the
intersection with the centerline of De Pere Street; thence south along the centerline of De Pere
Street to the point of beginning.
Ward 8
All that part of the City of Menasha described as follows; beginning at a point of intersection with
the centerlines of Sixth Street and State Street; this point to be known as the point of beginning;
thence north along the centerline of State Street to the intersection with the centerline of Eighth
Street; thence west along the centerline of Eighth Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Appleton Street; thence north along the centerline of Appleton Street to the intersection with the
centerline of Eleventh Street; thence east along the centerline of Eleventh Street to the intersection
with the City of Menasha corporate boundary; thence south along the City of Menasha corporate
boundary to the intersection with the centerline of Ninth Street; thence east along the centerline of
Ninth Street to the intersection with the centerline of London Street; thence south along the
centerline of London Street to the intersection with the centerline of Seventh Street; thence west
along the centerline of Seventh Street to the intersection with the centerline of Appleton Road;
Updated 11/5/2019
thence southwest along the centerline of Appleton Road to the intersection with the centerline of De
Pere Street; thence south along the centerline of De Pere Street to the intersection with the
centerline of Sixth Street; thence west along the centerline of Sixth Street to the point of beginning.
Ward 9
All that part of the City of Menasha described as follows; beginning at a point of the intersection of
the centerlines extended of Racine Road and Eleventh Street; this point to be known as the point of
beginning; thence north along the centerline of Racine Road (C.T.H. “P”) to the intersection with
the centerline of Olde Midway Road; thence west along the centerline of Olde Midway Road to the
intersection with the centerline of Lakeshore Drive; thence north along the centerline of Lakeshore
Drive to the intersection with the City of Menasha corporate boundary; thence easterly along the
City of Menasha corporate boundary to the intersection with the centerline of Valley Road (C.T.H.
“P”); thence east along the centerline of Valley Road (C.T.H. “P”) to the intersection with the
centerline of Appleton Road (S.T.H. “47”); thence south along the centerline of Appleton Road
(S.T.H. “47”) to the intersection with the centerline of Wittmann Drive; thence west along the
centerline of Wittmann Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Mayer Street; thence south
along the centerline of Mayer Street to the intersection with the centerline of Airport Road; thence
west along the centerline of Airport Road to the intersection with the City of Menasha corporate
boundary; thence southerly along the City of Menasha corporate boundary to the intersection with
the centerline of Eleventh Street extended; thence west along the centerline of Eleventh Street to the
point of beginning.
Ward 10
All that part of the City of Menasha described as follows; beginning at a point of the intersection of
the centerlines of Valley Road (C.T.H. “P”) and Appleton Road (S.T.H. “47”); this point to be
known as the point of beginning; thence east along the centerline of Valley Road to the intersection
with the City of Menasha corporate boundary; thence southerly along the City of Menasha
corporate boundary to the intersection with the centerline of Lucerne Drive; thence west along the
centerline of Lucerne Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Meadowview Drive; thence
south along the centerline of Meadowview Drive to the intersection with Geneva Road; thence west
along the centerline of Geneva Road to the intersection with the centerline of London Street; thence
north along the centerline of London Street to the intersection with the centerline of Lucerne Drive;
thence west along the centerline of Lucerne Drive to the intersection with the centerline of
Appleton Road (S.T.H. “47”); thence north along the centerline of Appleton Road to the point of
beginning.
Ward 11
All that part of the City of Menasha described as follows; beginning at a point of the intersection of
the centerlines of Melissa Street and Ninth Street; this point to be known as the point of beginning;
thence northerly along the centerline of Melissa Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Grove Street; thence west along the centerline of Grove Street to the intersection with the centerline
of Ida Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Ida Street to the intersection with the
centerline of Geneva Road; thence east along the centerline of Geneva Road to the intersection with
the centerline of Meadowview Drive; thence north along the centerline of Meadowview Drive to
the intersection with the centerline of Lucerne Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of
Lucerne Drive to the intersection with the City of Menasha corporate boundary; thence southerly
along the City of Menasha corporate boundary to the intersection with the centerline of Manitowoc
Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Manitowoc Road to the intersection with the
centerline of Meadowview Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Meadowview Drive to
the intersection with the centerline of Ninth Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Ninth
Street to the point of beginning.
Updated 11/5/2019
Ward 12
All that part of the City of Menasha described as follows; beginning at a point of the intersection of
the centerlines of Melissa Street and Ninth Street; this point to be known as the point of beginning;
thence west along the centerline of Ninth Street to the intersection with the centerline of Appleton
Road (S.T.H. “47”); thence northerly along the centerline of Appleton Road to the intersection with
the centerline of Airport Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Airport Road to the
intersection with the centerline of Mayer Street; thence north along the centerline of Mayer Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Wittmann Drive; thence east along the centerline of
Wittmann Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Appleton Road (S.T.H. “47”); thence
southerly along the centerline of Appleton Road to the intersection with the centerline of Lucerne
Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Lucerne Drive to the intersection with the centerline
of London Street; thence southerly along the centerline of London Street to the intersection with the
centerline of Geneva Road; thence east along the centerline of Geneva Road to the intersection with
the centerline of Ida Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Ida Street to the intersection
with the centerline of Grove Street; thence east along the centerline of Grove Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Melissa Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Melissa
Street to the point of beginning.
Ward 13
All that part of the City of Menasha described as follows; beginning at a point of the intersection of
the centerlines of London Street and Ninth Street; this point to be known as the point of beginning;
thence east along the centerline of Ninth Street to the intersection with the centerline of Melissa
Street; thence south long the centerline of Melissa Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Plank Road (S.T.H. “114”); thence westerly along the centerline of Plank Road to the intersection
with the centerline of Baldwin Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Baldwin Street
extended to the intersection with the centerline of Fourth Street extended; thence westerly along the
centerline of Fourth Street to the intersection with the centerline of Konemac Street; thence
northerly along the centerline of Konemac Street to the intersection with the centerline of Plank
Road (S.T.H. “114”); thence northerly along the centerline of London Street to the point of
beginning.
Ward 14
All that part of the City of Menasha described as follows; beginning at a point of the intersection of
the centerlines of Melissa Street and Ninth Street; this point known as the point of beginning;
thence south along the centerline of Melissa Street to the intersection with the centerline of Plank
Road (S.T.H. “114”); thence westerly along the centerline of Plank Road to the intersection with
the centerline of Baldwin Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Baldwin Street extended
to the intersection with the centerline of Fourth Street extended; thence westerly along the
centerline of Fourth Street to the intersection with the centerline of Konemac Street; thence south
along the centerline of Konemac Street to the intersection with the centerline of Second Street;
thence west along the centerline of Second Street to the intersection with the centerline of Ice
Street; thence south along the centerline of Ice Street extended to the intersection with the north
shoreline of the Fox River; thence easterly along the north shoreline of the Fox River to the
intersection with the westerly shoreline of Lake Winnebago; thence northerly along the west
shoreline of Lake Winnebago to the intersection with the centerline of Fire Lane No. 1 extended;
thence north along the centerline of Fire Lane No. 1 to the intersection with the centerline of Plank
Road (S.T.H. “114”); thence west along the centerline of Plank Road to the intersection with the
City of Menasha corporate boundary; thence northerly along the City of Menasha corporate
boundary to the intersection with the centerline of Manitowoc Road; thence northerly along a line
that intersects with the centerline of Ninth Street; thence west along the centerline of Ninth Street to
Updated 11/5/2019
the point of beginning.
Ward 15
All that part of the City of Menasha described as follows; beginning at a point of the intersection of
the centerlines of Plank Road (S.T.H. “114”) and Oneida Street (U.S.H. “10”); this point known as
the point of beginning; thence north along the centerline of Oneida Street to the intersection with
the City of Menasha corporate boundary; thence northerly along the City of Menasha corporate
boundary 210 feet (+/-); thence westerly along the City of Menasha corporate boundary 335 feet
(+/-); thence southerly along the City of Menasha corporate boundary 165 feet (+/-) to the
intersection with the centerline of Midway Road (C.T.H. “AP”); thence west along the centerline of
Midway Road to the intersection with the centerline of Stead Drive; thence south along the
centerline of Stead Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Manitowoc Road; thence
westerly along the centerline of Manitowoc Road to the intersection with the centerline of
Meadowview Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Meadowview Drive to the intersection
with the centerline of Ninth Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Ninth Street to the
intersection with the City of Menasha corporate boundary; thence southerly along the City of
Menasha corporate boundary extended to a point of intersection with the centerline of Plank Road
(S.T.H. “114”); thence along the centerline of Plank Road to the point of beginning.
Ward 16
All that part of the City of Menasha bounded on the north by Midway Road (C.T.H. “AP”), on the
east by Harmon Street, on the south by Natures Way and on the west by Oneida Street (U.S.H.
“10”) more specifically described as follows; beginning at a point of the intersection of the
centerlines of Midway Road (C.T.H. “AP”) and Oneida Street (U.S.H. “10”); this point to be
known as the point of beginning; thence easterly along the centerline of Midway Road to the
intersection with the City of Menasha corporate boundary; thence southerly along the City of
Menasha corporate boundary to the intersection with the centerline of Plank Road/Carpenter Street;
thence south along the centerline of Carpenter Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Manitowoc Road thence west along the centerline of Manitowoc Road to the intersection with the
centerline of Grassymeadow Lane; thence south along the centerline of Grassymeadow Lane to the
intersection with the centerline of Ridgecrest Lane; thence west along the centerline of Ridgecrest
Lane to the intersection with the west plat line of the Southfield Subdivision; thence south along the
west plat line of the Southfield Subdivision to the northwest corner of Lot 2 CSM No. 500; thence
east along the north line of Lot 2 CSM No. 500 to the northeast corner of Lot 1 CSM No. 500;
thence south along the east line of Lot 1 CSM No. 500 to the intersection with the centerline of
Natures Way extended; thence west along the centerline of Natures Way to the intersection with the
centerline of Oneida Street (U.S.H. “10”); thence north along the centerline of Oneida Street to the
point of beginning.
Ward 17
All that part of the City of Menasha described as follows; beginning at a point of the intersection of
the centerlines of Oneida Street (U.S.H. “10”) and S.T.H. “114”; this point to be known as the point
of beginning; thence easterly along the centerline of S.T.H. “114” and U.S.H. “10” to the
intersection with the centerline with Lake Park Road (C.T.H. “LP”); thence north along the
centerline of Lake Park Road to the intersection with the centerline of Manitowoc Road; thence
west along the centerline of Manitowoc Road to the intersection with the centerline of Kernan
Avenue; thence north along the centerline of Kernan Avenue to the intersection with the centerline
of Bedford Lane; thence west along the centerline of Bedford Lane to the intersection with the
centerline of Plank Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Plank Road 500 feet (+/-) to the
intersection with the City of Menasha corporate boundary; thence northerly and following along the
City of Menasha corporate boundary to the intersection with the centerline of Plank Road; thence
Updated 11/5/2019
westerly along the centerline of Plank Road to the intersection with the centerline of Carpenter
Street; thence south along the centerline of Carpenter Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Manitowoc Road; thence west along the centerline of Manitowoc Road to the intersection with the
centerline of Grassymeadow Lane; thence south along the centerline of Grassymeadow Lane to the
intersection with the centerline of Ridgecrest Lane; thence west along the centerline of Ridgecrest
Lane to the intersection with the west plat line of the Southfield Subdivision; thence south along the
west plat line of the Southfield Subdivision to the northwest corner of Lot 2 CSM No. 500; thence
east along the north line of Lot 2 CSM No. 500 to the northeast corner of Lot 1 CSM No. 500;
thence south along the east line of Lot 1 CSM No. 500 to the intersection with the centerline of
Natures Way extended; thence west along the centerline of Natures Way to the intersection with the
centerline of Oneida Street (U.S.H. “10”); thence south along the centerline of Oneida Street to the
point of beginning.
Ward 18
Part of the Northwest 1/4 of the Southeast 1/4 of Section 7, T20NR18E located in the City of
Menasha, Township 20 North, Range 18 East, Calumet County, Wisconsin described as follows:
Commencing at the Center of said Section 7; thence North 86 degrees 31 minutes 50 seconds
West, along the North line of the Southwest 1/4 of said Section 7, a distance of 429.01 feet;
thence South 01 degree 47 minutes 46 seconds West, 134.42 feet; thence South 88 degrees 57
minutes 04 seconds East, along the centerline of Manitowoc Road, 1595.13 feet to the point of
beginning; thence South 00 degrees 29 minutes 40 seconds West, 279.57 feet; thence South 88
degrees 57 minutes 04 seconds East, 156.00 feet; thence North 00 degrees 29 minutes 40 seconds
East, along the East line of the Northwest 1/4 of the Southeast 1/4 of said Section 7, a distance of
279.57 feet; thence North 88 degrees 57 minutes 04 seconds West, along the centerline of said
Manitowoc Road, 156.00 feet to the point of beginning.
Ward 19
A parcel of land in the Southwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of Section 7, Township 20 North,
Range 18 East, in the City of Menasha, Calumet County, Wisconsin described as follows:
Beginning at a point on the West line of the Southwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of said Section 7
a distance of 214.00 feet North of the Southwest corner thereof; thence North on the West line of
the Southwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of said Section 7 a distance of 150.00 feet, thence East a
distance of 243.00 feet; thence South a distance of 150.00 feet; thence West a distance of 243.00
feet to the place of beginning, excepting therefrom that part lying within the right of way limits
of USH 10 as laid out under Department of Transportation Project 1501-1-21, STH114-Appleton
Road.
Ward 20
Parts of the Northeast 1/4 of the Northwest 1/4 of Section 18, T20NR18E located in the City of
Menasha, Township 20 North, Range 18 East, Calumet County, Wisconsin described as follows:
Commencing at the Center of said Section 7; thence North 86 degrees 31 minutes 50 seconds
West, along the North line of the Southwest 1/4 of said Section 7, a distance of 429.01 feet;
thence South 01 degree 47 minutes 46 seconds West, 134.42 feet; thence South 88 degrees 57
minutes 04 seconds East, along the centerline of Manitowoc Road, 1595.13 feet; thence South
00 degrees 29 minutes 40 seconds West, 279.57 feet; thence South 88 degrees 57 minutes 04
seconds East, 156.00 feet; thence North 00 degrees 29 minutes 40 seconds East, along the East
line of the Northwest 1/4 of the Southeast 1/4 of said Section 7, a distance of 279.57 feet; thence
South 88 degrees 57 minutes 04 seconds East, along the centerline of said Manitowoc Road,
764.60 feet; thence South 00 degrees 29 minutes 40 seconds West, 238.00 feet; thence South 88
degrees 57 minutes 04 seconds East, 554.17 feet; thence South 00 degrees 42 minutes 10 seconds
West, along the West line of the Southwest 1/4 of said Section 8, a distance of 1,063.12 feet;
Updated 11/5/2019
thence South 89 degrees 48 minutes 43 seconds East, along the South line of Certified Survey
Map #570, a distance of 278.87 feet; thence South 00 degrees 42 minutes 10 seconds West,
1,302.04 feet; thence North 89 degrees 37 minutes 19 seconds West, along the South line of the
Southwest 1/4 of said Section 8, a distance of 278.86 feet; thence North 89 degrees 16 minutes
08 seconds West, along the South line of the Southeast 1/4 of said Section 7, a distance of
2293.29 feet; thence South 00 degrees 44 minutes 37 seconds West, 959.26 feet; thence North 82
degrees 02 minutes 43 seconds West, along the North right-of-way line of U.S.H. “10”, a
distance of 514.61 feet; thence, along the North right-of-way line a distance of 11.30 feet along
an arc of a curve to the left, having a radius of 11,306.25 feet and a chord which bears North 81
degrees 58 minutes 46 seconds West, 11.30 feet to the point of beginning; thence North 05
degrees 25 minutes 39 seconds East, along the East line of lands described in Jacket 2829 Image
6 & 7, a distance of 159.96 feet; thence North 82 degrees 02 minutes 49 seconds West, along the
North line of said described lands, a distance of 75.00 feet; thence South 05 degrees 25 minutes
39 seconds West, along the West line of said lands described in Jacket 2829 Image 6&7, a
distance of 160.28 feet; thence East along said North right-of-way line of U.S.H. “10”, to the
point of beginning.
Ward 21
Lot Six (6) of Block Four (4) in Grove Subdivision, Part of the SE ¼ of Section 11, T20N R17E
in the City of Menasha, Winnebago County, Wisconsin.
Ward 22
A parcel of land in the SE ¼ of Section 11, T20N R17E in the City of Menasha, Winnebago
County, Wisconsin commencing at the SE corner of Section 11, thence westerly 33 feet, along
the center line of Ninth Street to a point, thence northerly 33 feet, to the northwest intersection of
Ninth Street and Melissa Street right-of-way, thence westerly along the north right-of-way line of
Ninth Street 2267 feet, more or less, to the SW corner of Grove Subdivision, Lot 1, Block 1,
thence northeasterly along the Appleton Road east right-of-way line 254.65 feet to a point 10 feet
north of the southerly line of Lot 4 of Block 1 of said subdivision, the point of beginning, thence
southeasterly 150 feet along a line 10 feet north of and parallel to the southerly line of said Lot 4
to the easterly line of said Lot 4, thence northeasterly 55 feet along the easterly line of said Lot 4,
to the northerly line of said Lot 4, thence northwesterly 150 feet of said Lot 4 to the westerly line
of said Lot 4, thence southwesterly 55 feet along the westerly line of said Lot 4, to the point of
beginning.
Ward 23
All that part of the North 27 acres of the Northeast 1/4 of the Northeast 1/4 of Section 11,
Township 20 North, Range 17 East, in the City of Menasha, Winnebago County, Wisconsin,
described as follows:
Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Section 11; thence South 89°40' West along the
north line of Section 60 feet; thence South 01°39' East, 643.5 feet; thence South 89°40' West,
150 feet; thence South 1°39' East, 22.6 feet to a point of curvature of a 1,700.08 foot radius
curve to the right; thence Southwesterly along the line of the 1,700.08 foot radius curve to the
right, 145.8 feet to the point of beginning; thence continuing Southwesterly along the line of said
1,700.08 foot radius curve about 84.2 feet to the South line of the North 27 acres of the Northeast
1/4 of the Northeast 1/4 of said Section 11; thence Easterly along the said South line of the
North 27 acres, 150.8 feet to the Westerly right-of-way line of State Trunk Highway No. 47;
thence Northeasterly along the 1,850.08 foot radius curve in said Westerly highway right-of-way
line to a point which is North 89°40' East of the point of beginning; thence South 89°40' West to
the point of beginning, containing 0.30 acres.
Updated 11/5/2019
Ward 24
All that part of the North 27 acres of the Northeast 1/4 of the Northeast 1/4 of Section 11,
Township 20 North, Range 17 East, in the City of Menasha, Winnebago County, Wisconsin,
described as follows:
Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Section 11, thence South 89°40' West along the
North line of said Section 60 feet; thence South 01°39' East 643.5 feet, thence South 89°40'
West, 150 feet; thence South 1°39' East, 22.6 feet to a point of curvature of a 1,700.08 foot radius
curve to the right; thence Southwesterly along the line of the 1,700.08 foot radius curve to the
right, 145.8 feet to the point of beginning; thence South 89°40' West, 151 feet; thence
Southwesterly 24.42 feet along the arc of a 50 foot radius curve to the right ; thence South
1°39'East, 80 feet to the South line of the North 27 acres of the Northeast 1/4 of the Northeast
1/4 of said Section 11; thence Easterly along the said South line of the North 27 acres, 165 feet,
thence Northeasterly along the 1,700.08 radius curve, 84.2 feet to the point of beginning
containing 0.30 acres.
Ward 25
All that part of the North 27 acres of the Northeast 1/4 of the Northeast 1/4 of Section 11,
Township 20 North, Range 17 East, in the City of Menasha, Winnebago County, Wisconsin,
described as follows:
Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Section 11, thence West along the North line of said
Section 60 feet to the Westerly right-of-way line of State Trunk Highway No. 47; thence South
01°39' East along the Westerly line of said Highway, 643.5 feet, the place of beginning; thence
West parallel with the North line of said Section, 150 feet; thence South 1°39' East, 22.6 feet to a
point of curvature of a 1,700.08 foot radius curve to the right; thence Southwesterly along the
line of the 1,700.08 foot radius curve to the right, 145.8 feet; thence East parallel with the North
line of said Section to the Westerly line of said Highway; thence Northerly along the Westerly
line of said Highway to the place of beginning containing 0.57 acres.
Ward 26
That part of the Southeast One-quarter of Section 10, Township 20 North of Range 17 East in the
City of Menasha, Winnebago County, Wisconsin commencing at the at a point 377 feet North
and 660 feet West of the Southeast corner of Section 10; thence North 307 feet; thence East 407
feet; thence North 75 feet; thence East to the West Line of County Trunk Highway P; thence
Southwesterly along the West line of said highway to a point which is 363.2 feet West and 373
feet North of the Southeast corner of Section 10, the point of beginning; thence West 120 feet;
thence north 75 feet; thence East to the West line of said highway ; thence Southwesterly along
the West Line of said highway to the point of beginning, containing 0.34 acres.
Ward 27
All that part of the West one half (W1/2) of the Southwest 1/4 (SW14), Section (11) Township
20 North, Range 17 East, City of Menasha , County of Winnebago, State of Wisconsin described
as follows:
Commencing at a point on the West Line on the West half of the Southwest Quarter of said
Section 11, 183 feet South of the Northwest corner thereof, thence East 33 feet to the East Right
of Way Line of County Trunk Highway P and the point of beginning, thence East 120 feet,
thence South 81.75 feet, thence West 120 feet to the East Line of said highway, thence north
81.75 feet to the point of beginning, containing 0.228 acres.
Ward 28
All that part of the Northwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of Section 11, Township 20 North of
Range 17 East in the City of Menasha, Winnebago County, Wisconsin described as follows:
Updated 11/5/2019
Commencing at a point on the West Line of said Section 11 at a point 1,853 North of the
Southwest corner, running thence East at right angles to the said West line 33 feet to the East
Right of Way line of County Trunk Highway P and the point of beginning, thence East 135 feet;
thence North, parallel with said Right of Way Line 120 feet; thence West 135 feet to said Right
of Way line; thence South along said Right of Way line to the point of beginning, containing
0.372 acres.
Ward 29
All that part of the West one half (W1/2) of the Southwest 1/4 (SW14), Section (11) Township
20 North, Range 17 East, City of Menasha, County of Winnebago, State of Wisconsin described
as follows:
Commencing at a point on the West line of said Section 11 one thousand eight hundred fifty
three (1,853) feet north of the Southwest corner of said Section; thence East 33 feet to the East
Right of Way line of County Trunk Highway P and the point of beginning; thence East 135 feet,
thence South 60 feet; thence West 135 feet to the East Right of Way Line of said highway, thence
North along the East line of said highway to the point of beginning, containing 0.186 acres.
Ward 30
That part of the Northwest 1/4 of the Northwest 1/4 of Section 13, Township 20 North, Range 17
East, in the City of Menasha, Winnebago County, Wisconsin, described as follows:
Commencing at the Northwest corner of said Section 13, thence South 89°06' 52" East 331.01
feet, along the North line of the said Northwest 1/4; thence South 00°02'54" West 213.44 feet, to
the point of beginning; thence South 00°02'54" seconds West 19.35 feet, along the East right-ofway
line of Woodland Drive; thence South 44°53'55" East 218.05, along the west line of Lot One
(1) of Certified Survey Map No. 6822, as filed in Volume 1 of Survey Maps on Page 6822,
recorded on March 21, 2014 as Doc. No. 1660046, Winnebago County Register of Deeds; thence
South 44°41'31" East 166.94 feet along said West line; thence North 45°18'29" East 197.84 feet,
along the south line of said Lot 1; thence North 31°03'01" West 173.87 feet, along the east line of
said Lot 1; thence North 89°13'13" West 322.30 feet, along the north line of said Lot 1, to the
point of beginning, containing 1.51 acres.
Ward 31
That part of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter (SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4), Section Ten
(10), Township Twenty (20) North, Range Seventeen (17) East, in the City of Menasha,
Winnebago County, Wisconsin, described as follows: Commencing at a point that is 538 feet
North and 660 feet West of the Southeast corner of said Section 10, the point of beginning;
thence North 146 feet; thence East to the Westerly line of County Trunk Highway "P"; thence
Southwesterly, along the Westerly line of said Highway to a point due East of the point of
beginning; thence due West to the point of beginning, containing 1.49 acres.
Ward 32
All that part of the South East one-quarter (1/4) of the South East one-quarter (1/4) of Section
Ten (10), Township Twenty (20) North, Range Seventeen (17) East, in the Town of Menasha,
Winnebago County, Wisconsin, and described as follows: to-wit: Beginning at a point on the
South line of Section Ten (10), one hundred fifty-three (153) feet West of the South East corner
of said Section Ten (10), thence North one hundred fifty-three (153) feet, thence West one
hundred twenty (120) feet, thence South one hundred fifty-three (153) feet to the South line of
Section Ten (10) thence East one hundred twenty (120) feet to the place of beginning.
Containing 0.42 acres.
Updated 11/5/2019
Ward 33
A parcel of land being part of the Southwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of Section 11, and part of
the Southeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of Section 10, all in Township 20 North, Range 17 East,
Town of Menasha, Winnebago County, Wisconsin, bounded and described as follows:
Commencing at the Southwest corner of Section 11; thence N89°34’49”E, 308.61 feet (Recorded
as 309.00 feet) along the South line of the Southwest 1/4 of Section 11 to the Southerly extension
of the West right-of-way line of Appleton Street and the point of beginning; thence
N00°02’47”E, 32.59 feet along the extended West right of way line of Appleton Street to the
North right-of-way line of Ninth Street; thence continuing North along said West right of way
line, 540 feet, more or less, to the South right of way line of Eleventh Street; thence West along
said South right of way line, 342 feet, more or less, to the West right of way line of Warsaw
Street; thence South along said West right of way line, 573 feet, more or less, to the South line of
the Southeast 1/4 of said Section 10; thence East along said South line of said Sections 10 and 11
342 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning. Containing 4.50 acres.
Ward 34
All that part of the Southeast 1/4 of the Southeast 1/4 of Section 10, Township Twenty (20)
North Range Seventeen (17) East, Town of Menasha, Winnebago County, Wisconsin described
as follows: Commencing at a point that is 684 feet north of and 660 feet west of the Southeast
corner of said Section 10 and the point of beginning; thence East 517.69 feet, more or less, to the
Westerly right of way line of CTH P, thence Northerly along said Westerly line 242.58 feet ,
more or less, to a point that is North 89 degrees, 52 minutes 49 seconds West 75.49 feet of a
point on the East line of said Southeast 1/4, said point on said East line being 1742.23 South of
the East 1/4 corner of said Section; thence North 89 degrees 52 minutes 49 seconds West 583.06
feet to a point; thence South 0 degrees 19 minutes 48 seconds West, 230.99 feet to the point of
beginning. Containing 3.1 Acres.
Ward 35
That part of Lot 1 of Certified Survey Map 1619 recorded as Document No. 665262 and
corrected by affidavit as Document No. 667192 being part of Government Lot 4 and the
Southeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of Section 10, Township 20 North, Range 17 East, Town of
Menasha, Winnebago County, Wisconsin, commencing at the Southeast corner of said Section
10; thence N89° 52’ 30”W, along the south line of said Section 10, 1409.34 ft. to the west right
of way line of the C. M. St. Paul and Pacific Rail Road; thence N00° 29’ 29”W, along the said
right of way line 45.80 ft. to the point of curvature; thence northerly along said right of way line,
545.53 ft. along the arc of a 1942.86 ft. radius curve to the right, the chord of which bears N07°
33’ 09”E, 543.74 ft.; thence S89° 24’ 28”W, 359.75 ft. to the previous right of way line of the
Tri-County Expressway; thence N32° 52’ 52”W, along the said right of way line, 226.93 ft.;
thence N74° 07’ 22”W, along the said right of way line, 87.00 ft. to a point of intersection at the
new right of way line of the Tri-County Expressway; thence N89° 10’ 41”E, parallel with the Tri-
County Reference Line, and also being the new right of way line for the Tri-County Expressway,
580 ft., more or less, to the City of Menasha corporate boundary and the point of beginning;
thence N89° 10’ 41”E, 62.51 ft., more or less, to the westerly right of way line of the C. M. St.
Paul and Pacific Rail Road; thence southerly along said right of way line, 181 ft., more or less,
along the arc of a 1942.86 ft. radius curve to the left, the chord of which bears S19° 01’ 41”W, to
a point of intersection with said corporate boundary; thence northerly along said corporate
boundary 170 ft., more or less, to the point of beginning. Said parcel contains .10 acres.
Ward 36
Part of the NW 1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 12, Township 20 North, Range 17 East in the Town
of Menasha, Winnebago County, Wisconsin described as follows, viz: Commencing at the
Updated 11/5/2019
Northwest corner of said Section 12 and the point of beginning; thence South 89° 48' 00" East,
along the North section line,198 feet; thence South 00° 16' 31"West, parallel with the West line
of said Section 12, a distance of 165 feet; thence North 89° 48' 0: West, parallel with the North
line of said section, 198 feet more or less to the West line of said Section 12, thence Northerly
along the West line of said Section 12, 165 feet more or less to the point of beginning.
Containing 0.76 Acres.
Ward 37
That part of the Southwest quarter of Section 1, Township 20 North, Range 17 East , Town of
Menasha, Winnebago County, Wisconsin commencing at the Southwest corner of said Section 1;
thence North 01°17'59" West along the West line of said Section 1, 1,123.94 feet to a point;
thence North 88°41' 56"East, 140.33 feet to the point of beginning; thence North 67°51'39"east
along the Northerly line of CSM 2503, recorded as Document Number 793929 Winnebago
County R.O.D., 147 feet, more or less, to a point 140 feet South of the North line of the
Southwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of said Section 1;thence Westerly along a line 140 feet South
of and parallel to the North line of the Southwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of said Section 1, 278
feet, more or less, to the West line of said Section 1; thence South 1°17'59" East along the West
line of said Section 1 to a point 250 feet south of the Northwest corner of the Southwest 1/4 of
the Southwest 1/4 of said Section 1; thence Easterly along a line 250 feet South of and parallel to
the North line of the Southwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of said Section 1, 134 feet, more or less,
to the Westerly line of said CSM 2503; thence North 5°38'27" East along the westerly line of
said CSM, 55 feet , more or less, to the point of beginning. Containing 0.33 acres.
Ward 38
That part of the Northeast 1/4 of Section 11, Town 20 North, Range 17 East, in the Town of
Menasha, Winnebago County, Wisconsin, described as follows, viz:- Commencing at the
Southwest corner of said Northeast 1/4; thence North 89 degrees 25 minutes East, along the
South line of said Northeast 1/4, 750 feet; thence North 0 degrees 35 minutes West, 1,054.65
feet, to the point of curvature of an 897.47 foot radius curve to the right, having a 356.67 foot
long chord bearing North 10 degrees 52 minutes 42 second East and a 22 degree 55 minutes 24
second central angle; thence North 4 degrees 29 minutes east, 158.52 feet, along a subchord of
the said curve which has a 10 degree 8 minutes central angle, to the place of beginning (said
point also being 764 feet North 89 degrees 25 minutes East and 1,212.55 feet North 0 degrees 35
minutes West of the point of commencement ); thence Northeasterly, along an arc of the above
described curve having a 199.92 foot chord bearing North 15 degrees 56 minutes 42 second East
and a 12 degree 47 minutes 24 second central angle to the point of curvature of an 897.47 foot
radius curve to the left; thence continuing Northeasterly along an arc of said curve to the left to a
point on the North right-of-way line of Wittmann Drive that is 1,558 feet North of (measured at
right angles to) the South line and 865.11 feet East of the North-South 1/4 line of said Section
11; thence East along said North right-of-way line 493.46 feet, more or less to a point that is
1,358.57 feet East of the North-South 1/4 line of said Section 11; thence Northerly parallel with
the North-South line of said Northeast 1/4, 194.3 feet to a point on the City of Menasha corporate
boundary; thence Easterly 578.38 feet, more or less, to the Easterly right-of-way line of Parkside
Drive; thence Southerly 344 feet, more or less, along said Easterly right-of-way line extended
Southerly to the South right-of-way line of Wittmann Drive thence; Westerly 256.78 feet along
said South right-of-way line to a point; thence South 0 degrees 35 minutes East, 285.45 feet;
thence South 89 degrees 25 minutes West 736.55 feet to the point of beginning. Said parcel
containing 7.73 acres.
Updated 11/5/2019
SEC. 2-1-2 ALDERMANIC DISTRICTS.
Aldermanic District 1
All that part of the City of Menasha that lies north of Nicolet Boulevard and Abby Avenue; south of
the Fox River, including that part of the City of Menasha that lies north of the Fox River; bounded
on the north by a line commencing at the intersection of the centerlines of Racine Road and the Fox
River; thence north along the centerline of Racine Road to the intersection with the centerline of
Main Street; thence west along the centerline of Main Street to the intersection with the centerline
of Chute Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Chute Street to the intersection with the
centerline of Lush Street; thence south along the centerline of Lush Street to the intersection with
the centerline of Kaukauna Street; thence northwest along the centerline of Kaukauna Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Broad Street; thence west along the centerline of Broad Street to
the intersection with the Government Canal; thence north along the west shore of the Government
Canal to Little Lake Butte des Morts.
Aldermanic District 2
All that part of the City of Menasha bounded on the west by the eastern shore of Little Lake Butte
des Morts and the Government Canal; and bounded by a line commencing at the intersection of the
centerline of Broad Street and the Government Canal; thence east along the centerline of Broad
Street to the intersection with the centerline of Kaukauna Street; thence southerly along the
centerline of Kaukauna Street to the intersection of Chute Street; thence easterly along the
centerline of Chute Street to the intersection with the centerline of Main Street; thence easterly
along the centerline of Main Street to the intersection with the centerline of Racine Street; thence
southerly along the centerline of Racine Street to the intersection with the north shore of the Fox
River; thence easterly along the north shore of the Fox River to the intersection with the centerline
of Appleton Street; thence north along the centerline of Appleton Street to the intersection with the
centerline of First Street; thence east along the centerline of First Street to the intersection with the
centerline of De Pere Street; thence north along the centerline of De Pere Street to the intersection
with the centerline of Third Street (S.T.H. “114”); thence east along the centerline of Third Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Plank Road (S.T.H.” 114”); thence easterly along the
centerline of Plank Road to the intersection with the centerline of London Street; thence northerly
along the centerline of London Street to the intersection with the centerline of Seventh Street;
thence west along the centerline of Seventh Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Appleton Road (S.T.H. “47”); thence southerly along the centerline of Appleton Road to the
intersection with the centerline of De Pere Street (S.T.H. “47”); thence south along the centerline of
De Pere Street to the intersection with the centerline of Sixth Street; thence west along the
centerline of Sixth Street to the intersection with the centerline of Tayco Street; thence south along
the centerline of Tayco Street to the intersection with the centerline of Lake Street; thence west
along the centerline of Lake Street to the east shore of Little Lake Butte des Morts.
Aldermanic District 3
All that part of the City of Menasha bounded by a line commencing at the intersection of the
centerlines of Sixth Street and State Street; this point to be known as the point of beginning; thence
north along the centerline of State Street to the intersection with the centerline of Eighth Street;
thence west along the centerline of Eighth Street to the intersection with the centerline of Appleton
Street; thence north along the centerline of Appleton Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Eleventh Street; thence west along the centerline of Eleventh Street extended to the intersection
with the centerline of Racine Road extended; thence north along the centerline of Racine Road
(C.T.H “P”) to the intersection with the centerline of Olde Midway Road; thence west along the
centerline of Olde Midway Road to the intersection with the centerline of Lakeshore Drive; thence
north along the centerline of Lakeshore Drive to the intersection with the City of Menasha corporate
Updated 11/5/2019
boundary; thence easterly along the City of Menasha corporate boundary to the intersection with the
centerline of Valley Road (C.T.H. “P”); thence east along the centerline of Valley Road to the
intersection with the centerline of Appleton Road (S.T.H. “47”); thence southerly along the
centerline of Appleton Road to the intersection with the centerline of Wittmann Drive; thence west
along the centerline of Wittmann Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Mayer Street;
thence south along the centerline of Mayer Street to the intersection with the centerline of Airport
Road; thence west along the centerline of Airport Road to the intersection with the City of Menasha
corporate boundary; thence southerly along the City of Menasha corporate boundary to the
intersection with the centerline of Ninth Street; thence east along the centerline of Ninth Street to
the intersection with the centerline of London Street; thence south along the centerline of London
Street to the intersection with Seventh Street; thence west along the centerline of Seventh Street to
the intersection with the centerline of Appleton Road (S.T.H. “47”); thence southwesterly along the
centerline of Appleton Road to the intersection with the centerline of De Pere Street (S.T.H. “47”);
thence south along the centerline of De Pere Street to the intersection with the centerline of Sixth
Street; thence west along the centerline of Sixth Street to the point of beginning.
Aldermanic District 4
All that part of the City of Menasha bounded by a line commencing at the intersection of the
centerline of Lake Street and the east shore of Little Lake Butte des Morts; this point to be known
as the point of beginning; thence northerly along the east shore of Little Lake Butte des Morts to the
intersection with the City of Menasha corporate boundary; thence following the City of Menasha
corporate boundary to the east to the intersection with the centerline of Appleton Street; thence
south along the centerline of Appleton Street to the intersection with the Eighth Street; thence east
along the centerline of Eighth Street to the intersection with the centerline of State Street; thence
south along the centerline of State Street to the intersection with the centerline of Sixth Street;
thence west along the centerline of Sixth Street to the intersection with the centerline of Tayco
Street; thence south along the centerline of Tayco Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Lake Street; thence west along the centerline of Lake Street to the point of beginning.
Aldermanic District 5
All that part of the City of Menasha bounded by a line commencing at the intersection of the
centerlines of Ninth Street and London Street; this point to be known as the point of beginning;
thence west along the centerline of Ninth Street to the intersection with the centerline of Appleton
Road (S.T.H. “47”); thence northerly along the centerline of Appleton Road to the intersection with
the centerline of Airport Road; thence west along the centerline of Airport Road to the intersection
with the centerline of Mayer Street; thence north along the centerline of Mayer Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Wittmann Drive; thence east along the centerline of Wittmann
Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Appleton Road (S.T.H. “47”); thence southerly along
the centerline of Appleton Road to the intersection with the centerline of Lucerne Drive; thence
easterly along the centerline of Lucerne Drive to the intersection with London Street; thence
southerly along the centerline of London Street to the intersection with the centerline of Geneva
Road; thence east along the centerline of Geneva Road to the intersection with the centerline of Ida
Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Ida Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Grove Street; thence east along the centerline of Grove Street to the intersection with the centerline
of Melissa Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Melissa Street to the intersection with the
centerline of Plank Road (S.T.H. “114”); thence westerly along the centerline of Plank Road to the
intersection with the centerline of Baldwin Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Baldwin
Street extended to the intersection with the centerline of Fourth Street extended; thence westerly
along the centerline of Fourth Street to the intersection with the centerline of Konemac Street;
thence northerly along the centerline of Konemac Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Updated 11/5/2019
Plank Road (S.T.H. “114”) and London Street; thence northerly along the centerline of London
Street to the point of beginning.
Aldermanic District 6
All that part of the City of Menasha bounded by a line commencing at the intersection of the
centerline of Ice Street extended and the north shore of the Fox River; this point to be known as the
point of beginning; thence easterly along the north shoreline of the Fox River to the intersection
with the westerly shoreline of Lake Winnebago; thence northeasterly along the west shoreline of
Lake Winnebago to the intersection with the centerline of Fire Lane No. 1 extended; thence north
along the centerline of Fire Lane No. 1 to the intersection with the centerline of Plank Road (S.T.H.
“114”) and Oneida Street (U.S.H. “10”); thence north along the centerline of Oneida Street to the
intersection with the City of Menasha Corporate boundary; thence northerly along the City of
Menasha corporate boundary 210 feet (+/-); thence westerly along the City of Menasha corporate
boundary 335 feet (+/-); thence southerly along the City of Menasha corporate boundary 165 feet
(+/-) to the intersection with the centerline of Midway Road (C.T.H. “AP”); thence west along the
centerline of Midway Road to the intersection with the centerline of Stead Drive; thence south
along the centerline of Stead Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Manitowoc Road;
thence westerly along the centerline of Manitowoc Road to the intersection with the centerline of
Meadowview Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Meadowview Drive to the intersection
with the centerline of Ninth Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Ninth Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Melissa Street; thence south along the centerline of Melissa
Street to the intersection with the centerline of Plank Road (S.T.H. “114”); thence westerly along
the centerline of Plank Road to the intersection with the centerline of Baldwin Street; thence
southerly along the centerline of Baldwin Street extended to the intersection with the centerline of
Fourth Street extended; thence westerly along the centerline of Fourth Street to the intersection with
the centerline of Konemac Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Konemac Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Second Street; thence west along the centerline of Second Street
to the intersection with the centerline of Ice Street; thence south along the centerline of Ice Street to
the point of beginning.
Aldermanic District 7
All that part of the City of Menasha bounded by a line commencing at the intersection of the
centerlines of Appleton Road (S.T.H. “47”) and Valley Road (C.T.H. “P”); this point to be known
as the point of beginning; thence east along the centerline of Valley Road to the intersection with
the City of Menasha corporate boundary; thence southerly along the City of Menasha corporate
boundary to the intersection with the centerline of Manitowoc Road; thence westerly along the
centerline of Manitowoc Road to the intersection with the centerline of Meadowview Drive; thence
northerly along the centerline of Meadowview Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Ninth
Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Ninth Street to the intersection with Melissa Street;
thence northerly along the centerline of Melissa Street to the intersection with the centerline of
Grove Street; thence west along the centerline of Grove Street to the intersection with the centerline
of Ida Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Ida Street to the intersection with the
centerline of Geneva Road; thence west along the centerline of Geneva Road to the intersection
with the centerline of London Street; thence northerly along the centerline of London Street to the
intersection with the centerline of Lucerne Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Lucerne
Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Appleton Road (S.T.H. “47”); thence northerly along
the centerline of Appleton Road to the point of beginning.
Aldermanic District 8
All that part of the City of Menasha bounded by a line commencing at the intersection of the
centerlines of Plank Road (S.T.H. “114”) and Oneida Street (U.S.H. “10”); this point to be known
Updated 11/5/2019
as the point of beginning; thence north along the centerline of Oneida Street to the intersection with
the centerline of Midway Road (C.T.H. “P”); thence easterly along the centerline of Midway Road
to the intersection with the centerline of Kernan Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of
Kernan Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Manitowoc Road; thence east along the
centerline of Manitowoc Road to the intersection with the centerline of Lake Park Road (C.T.H.
“LP”); thence south along the centerline of Lake Park Road to the intersection with the centerline of
S.T.H. “114”/U.S.H. “10”; thence westerly along the centerline of S.T.H. “114”/U.S.H. “10” to the
point of beginning.
SEC. 2-1-3 ELECTIONS.
(a) ANNUAL CITY ELECTION. The annual City election shall be held on the first Tuesday
in April.
(b) POLLING HOURS. The polls for all elections shall open at 7:00 a.m. and close at 8:00
p.m.
(c) REGISTRATION. All electors for all elections shall be required to be registered. The
City Clerk shall receive applications for registration at his/her office during regular business
hours and at the polling places on the date of the election. Registration is also affective if
done in conformance with State of Wisconsin law.
(d) POLLING PLACES.
(1) First and Second District – Menasha Senior Center, 116 Main Street.
(2) Third and Fourth District – Boys and Girls Club of Menasha, 600 Racine Street.
(3) Sixth District – Jefferson School, 105 Ice Street.
(4) Fifth and Seventh District – Clovis Grove Elementary School, 974 Ninth Street.
(5) Eighth District – Winnegamie Dog Club, Inc., 2043 Manitowoc Road.
SEC. 2-1-4 NON-PARTISAN PRIMARY FOR CITY OFFICES.
(a) Whenever two (2) or more candidates file nomination papers, including members of the
School Board, candidates for elective City offices shall be nominated by a non-partisan
primary conducted pursuant to Section 8.05(4), Wis. Stats. Such candidate shall file with
his nomination papers a declaration that he will qualify for the office to which he may be
elected.
(b) This Section shall be deemed to be an amendment to the Charter of the City of Menasha
relating to the terms of office of Aldermen, a charter ordinance providing for a primary for
the office of the Mayor already being in effect. Sec. 66.01, Wis. Stats., being a part of the
general charter law of the City of Menasha shall not apply to the terms of Aldermen.
State Law Reference: Section 8.05(4), Wis. Stats.
Updated: 5/21/2018
CHAPTER 2
Mayor; Common Council
SEC. 2-2-1 COMMON COUNCIL
The Aldermen of the City shall constitute the Common Council. The Common Council shall be
vested with all the powers of the City not specifically given some other officer, as those powers set
forth elsewhere throughout this Code.
State Law Reference: Section 62.11, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 2-2-2 ALDERMEN
(a) ELECTION, TERM, NUMBER. The City shall have eight (8) Aldermen in addition to the
Mayor, who is a member of the Common Council by virtue of the office as Mayor. The eight
(8) Aldermen shall constitute the Common Council. One (1) Alderman shall be elected from
each Aldermanic District. Aldermen from the even-numbered Aldermanic Districts shall be
elected at the annual City election in the even-numbered years, and Aldermen from the oddnumbered
Aldermanic Districts shall be elected at the City election in the odd-numbered
years, all to hold office for a period of two (2) years.
(b) APPOINTMENT AS MAYOR. An alderman shall be eligible for appointment as Mayor to
fill an unexpired term.
State Law Reference: Section 62.09, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 2-2-3 MAYOR
(a) ELECTION. The Mayor shall be elected in even-numbered years for a term of four (4)
years.
(b) DUTIES.
(1) The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive officer of the City. The Mayor shall be
responsible for directing the overall operations of the City. The Mayor shall take care
that the City ordinances and the State Statutes are observed and enforced.
(2) The Mayor shall, from time to time, provide the Council such information and
recommend such measures as the Mayor may deem advantageous to the City. When
present, the Mayor shall preside at the meetings of the Council.
(3) The Mayor shall be responsible for coordination and operation of all City
departments.
(4) The Mayor shall review the development of the City budget.
(5) The Mayor shall provide direction for the City's economic development and other
long-range plans.
(6) The Mayor shall work on plans for service and personnel levels.
(7) The Mayor may participate in the sale and purchase of property on behalf of the City.
(8) The Mayor shall analyze and interpret federal, state and county legislation to
determine its impact on the City.
(9) The Mayor shall have such other duties and responsibilities as are prescribed in the
Wisconsin Statutes and this Code of Ordinances.
(c) VETO POWER. The Mayor shall have the veto power as to all acts of the Council, except
such as to which it is expressly or by necessary implication otherwise provided. All such
acts shall be submitted to the Mayor by the City Clerk and shall be in force upon approval
evidenced by the Mayor’s signature, or upon failing to approve or disapprove within five (5)
days, which fact shall be certified thereon by the Clerk. If the Mayor disapproves, the
Mayor’s objection shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall present them to the Council at its
Updated: 5/21/2018
next meeting. A two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the members of the Council shall then make the
act effective, notwithstanding the objection of the Mayor.
State Law Reference: Section 62.09(8), Wis. State.
SEC. 2-2-4 PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL
The Common Council at its first meeting subsequent to the regular election and qualification of new
members shall, after organization, annually choose from its members a President who, in the
absence of the Mayor, shall preside at meetings of the Council and, during the absence or inability
of the Mayor, shall have the powers and duties of the Mayor, except that the President shall not
have power to approve an act of the Council which the Mayor has disapproved, by filing objections
with the City Clerk. When so officiating, the President shall be styled "Acting Mayor."
State Law Reference: Section 62.09(9)(e), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 2-2-5 STANDING COMMITTEES; ACTION ON COMMITTEE REPORTS.
(a) STANDING COMMITTEES. At the organizational meeting of the Common Council in
each year following the annual election, each of the following committees, shall be
established; the general duties of which shall be as follows.
(1) ADMINISTRATION COMMITTEE. The Administration Committee shall consist
of eight (8) aldermen. The Administration Committee shall have jurisdiction over the
departments of City Clerk, City Treasurer, City Assessor and City Attorney. It shall
be the duty of this Committee to audit and act on all demands, claims and actions
against the City. The Administration Committee shall study all resolutions referred
to it. The Administration Committee shall also have jurisdiction over the Board of
Health, Community Development Department, Finance Department, Health
Department, Parks & Recreation Department, Personnel Department, and the Police
and Fire Departments in all matters not under the jurisdiction of the Police
Commission, Fire Commission and Joint Finance and Personnel Committee. This
Committee shall confer with the Police Chief, Fire Chief, and other department
heads under its jurisdiction. This Committee shall investigate all applications for
licenses that are brought before the Common Council, except licenses and permits
issued by the City Clerk as a ministerial duty. When action is required regular
Administration Committee meetings shall take place on the first and third Monday of
the month following the regular Common Council meetings provided that all such
demands, claims, and accounts shall not be acted upon except at regular meetings of
the Council. In addition, the Committee shall have the following general
responsibilities:
i. Review any proposed changes in the City's insurance coverage and risk
management program
ii. Have primary, but not exclusive, responsibility for reviewing the City's Code
of Ordinances for adequacy.
iii. Review Common Council action regarding proposed federal, state and county
legislation impacting upon the City and its residents.
iv. Review for Common Council adoption policies and procedures regarding
City operations and the delivery of services to the public.
v. Review for Common Council adoption resolutions expressing the policy of
the City regarding matters for which a formal declaration of official policy is
required.
vi. Consider any other matters which may be referred by the Common Council.
vii. The Administration Committee is empowered to seek bids or quotes, or
neither, and has the obligation and the right to call on representatives of
Updated: 5/21/2018
various insurance companies to discuss their program.
viii. Selection of insurance companies to service the City’s requirements shall be
based upon residence of the full time agent handling the insurance, but not
limited thereto; net premium, and service rendered in the past and ability to
perform in the future. The recommendations of the Administration
Committee shall be subject to Common Council ratification, as to selection
of the individual carrier and the amounts thereof.
(2) BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Board of Public Works shall consist of eight
(8) Aldermen. Pursuant to Charter Ordinance O-24-79, the City of Menasha hereby
elects pursuant to Chapter 66 of the Wisconsin Statutes to provide that the actions
of the Board of Public Works shall be subject to Common Council approval and
mayoral veto. The Board of Public Works shall have jurisdiction over the
Department of Public Works which is supervised by the Director of Public Works
and consists of the following divisions: Engineering, Streets, Bridges, Sanitation, and
Municipal Buildings. This Board also has jurisdiction over parking meter and
parking lot operations. It shall be the duty of this Board to study all resolutions
referred to it, confer with the Director of Public Works, order street improvements
and order work to be performed by personnel under its jurisdiction. All
recommendations of this Board must be approved by the Common Council before
going into effect. The Board of Public Works shall have jurisdiction over all public
buildings and grounds, voting places for elections and all public improvements.
When action is required regular Board of Public Works meetings shall take place on
the first and third Monday of the month. In addition, the Board shall perform such
duties as outlined by State Law. The Board of Public Works shall also have the
following general responsibilities:
i. Review policy guidelines regarding public improvements.
ii. Review and approve any unusual requests for use of the City buildings.
iii. Review any proposed changes, remodeling, additions, etc., to the City Hall or
other city buildings and/or property.
iv. Review traffic or pedestrian safety matters, prior to needed action for
Common Council approval.
v. Except for traffic enforcement, all other matters pertaining to traffic, traffic
flow, streets, and related matters shall be referred to the Board of Public
Works for recommendation.
vi. Consider any other matter which may be referred by the Common Council.
(3) PERSONNEL COMMITTEE. The Personnel Committee shall consist of all
members of the Common Council and the Mayor. The Personnel Committee shall
have jurisdiction over but not be limited to personnel matters, administration of labor
contracts and contract negotiations as well as any other matters which may be
forwarded to it by the Mayor or the Common Council. It may be considered an
Executive Committee. The Personnel Committee shall also have the following
general responsibilities:
i. Establish policies for the supervision and control of City officers and
employees unless state law otherwise provides.
ii. The Committee Chairman shall take an active part in labor negotiations with
all collective bargaining units.
iii. Review for the Council all salary adjustments for non-union personnel. In
addition to other duties which may be delegated to the Personnel Committee
from time to time by the Common Council, it shall review for the Council the
hiring of full-time new personnel that are not considered replacements but
added employees.
iv. Review for the Common Council any issue involving grievances as required
Updated: 5/21/2018
by any labor contract.
(4) NEENAH-MENASHA JOINT FIRE FINANCE & PERSONNEL
COMMITTEE.
i. ORGANIZATION AND APPOINTMENT. The Neenah Menasha Fire
Rescue Joint Finance & Personnel Committee shall consist of six Council
members, three from Neenah and three from Menasha and shall include the
Council Presidents of both cities, a member of the Neenah Finance &
Personnel Committee, the chair(s) of the Menasha Administration Committee
or Personnel Committee, and two alderpersons at-large, one appointed by the
Mayor of Neenah from the Neenah Common Council and one appointed by
the Mayor of Menasha from the Menasha Common Council. The at-large
alderperson shall be appointed for one-year terms that may be renewed. In the
event of the chair of either the Neenah Finance & Personnel Committee or
the Menasha Administration Committee or Personnel Committee is also the
President of the respective Council, then the Mayor of that city shall appoint
one additional at-large alderperson so that at all times each city shall have
three representatives to this Committee. Such appointment(s) shall be subject
to confirmation by the Common Council.
ii. POWERS & DUTIES. The oversight of the day-to-day operations &
budgetary matters of the Neenah Menasha Fire Rescue shall be conducted by
the Joint Fire Finance & Personnel Committee. The Joint Fire Finance &
Personnel Committee shall review budgetary issues, labor contracts, position
vacancies, proposed new positions, capital outlay items and expenses of
$5000 or more and make recommendations to the Common Councils of the
Cities of Neenah and Menasha. The recommendations of the Joint Finance &
Personnel Committee shall be acted upon separately by the common councils
of both Neenah and Menasha and shall be effective only upon the
concurrence of both councils.
iii. SEVERABILITY. In the event any section, subsection, clause, phrase or
portion of this ordinance is for any reason held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remainder of this ordinance. It is the legislative
intent of the Common Council that this ordinance would have been adopted
if such illegal provision had not been included or any illegal application had
not been made.
(5) PROTOCOL COMMITTEE. The Protocol Committee shall consist of the Mayor
and three (3) aldermen, the Council President, Personnel Committee Chair and one
(1) at-large member. The Committee shall be responsible to make recommendations
of protocol and rules of order to the Common Council at least once during its one
year term. The Committee shall also hear unresolved complaints filed by standing
committee members and either dismiss the complaint or sustain the complaint with
penalty and/or sanction recommendations and report to the Common Council.
(b) SPECIAL COMMITTEES. The Mayor may, from time to time, appoint such special
committee or committees as he/she may deem advisable or as provided for by motion or
resolution stating the number of members to perform such duties as may be assigned to
them.
(c) TIME FOR MAYORAL APPOINTMENTS. All mayoral appointments to boards,
commissions or committees of whatever nature which require Council confirmation shall be
submitted to the Common Council no later than thirty (30) days after the expiration of a
particular term of office, unless the Mayor submits reasons why said position cannot be
Updated: 5/21/2018
filled.
(d) COUNCIL ORGANIZATION. All Council Committees, including the Board of Public
Works, at their first organizational meeting shall name their own chairman and vicechairman
for purposes of organization only. The City Clerk shall call the organizational
meeting of the Administration Committee as soon after Council approval as is convenient.
The Director of Public Works shall call the organizational meeting of the Board of Public
Works as soon after Council approval as is convenient. The Human Resources Director shall
call the organizational meeting of the Personnel Committee as soon after Council approval
as is convenient.
(e) MAYOR'S MEMBERSHIP. The Mayor shall be an ex-officio member of the
Administration Committee and the Board of Public Works, but, however, he shall be a
voting member of the Personnel Committee.
(f) REFERENCE AND REPORTS.
(1) The Mayor shall refer new business coming before the Common Council to the
appropriate committee, unless otherwise referred or disposed of by motion of the
Council.
(2) Committee reports shall be in writing and shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(g) COOPERATION OF CITY OFFICERS.
(1) All City officers shall, upon request of the chairman of the committee, confer with
the committee and supply to it such information as may be requested in connection
with any matter pending before the committee.
(2) It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, or deputy, and all department heads Chief of the
Fire Department and Chief of the Police Department, Director of Public Works, or in
their absence, their assignee, to attend all meetings of their committee of jurisdiction
unless for due cause their attendance has been excused by the Mayor. In the event the
Chiefs of the respective Fire and Police Departments cannot attend and have been
excused by the Mayor, they may delegate a command officer to represent them. The
Fire Chief and the Chief of Police need not attend regular Council meetings unless
requested by the Mayor, the President of the Council or a chairman of a standing
committee. It shall further be the duty of all salaried officers of the City to attend the
Common Council's regular meeting whenever requested by the Mayor, the President
of Council, or the head of any standing committee. When the Chief of Police is not
in attendance at the regular Council meeting, he shall designate an officer to act as
sergeant at arms.
(3) Unless required by any State Statute, no standing committees will have the power to
make recommendations to the Common Council nor to bind the City in any fashion.
All issues reviewed by standing committees must be considered by the Common
Council.
(h) SECRETARY. The City Clerk or designee shall be secretary of the Administration
Committee, the Board of Public Works, and the Personnel Committee. Should a secretary of
a standing committee or Board of Public Works not be able to attend a meeting for any
reason whatsoever, the City Clerk will appoint an acting secretary on a meeting by meeting
basis.
SEC. 2-2-6 GENERAL POWERS OF THE COMMON COUNCIL
(a) GENERAL. The Common Council shall be vested with all the powers of the City not
specifically given some other officer. Except as otherwise provided by law, the Common
Council shall have the management and control of the City property, finances, highways,
streets, navigable waters and the public service, and shall have the power to act for the
government and good order of the City, for its commercial benefit and for the health, safety,
welfare and convenience of the public, and may carry its powers into effect by license,
Updated: 5/21/2018
regulation, suppression, borrowing, taxation, special assessment, appropriation, fine,
imprisonment and other necessary or convenient means. The powers hereby conferred shall
be in addition to all other grants and shall be limited only by express language.
(b) ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY. The Common Council may acquire
property, real or personal, within or without the City, for parks, libraries, historic places,
recreation, beautification, streets, waterworks, sewage or waste disposal, harbors,
improvement of watercourses, public grounds, vehicle parking areas and for any other public
purpose; may acquire real property within or contiguous to the city, by means other than
condemnation, for industrial sites; may improve and beautify the same; may construct, own,
lease and maintain buildings on such property for instruction, recreation, amusement and
other public purposes; and may sell and convey such City owned property.
(c) ACQUISITION OF EASEMENTS AND PROPERTY RIGHTS. Confirming all powers
granted to the Common Council and in furtherance thereof, the Council is expressly
authorized to acquire by gift, purchase or condemnation under Ch. 32, Wis. Stats., any and
all property rights in lands or waters, including rights of access and use, negative or positive
easements, restrictive covenants, covenants running with land, scenic easements and any
rights for use of property of any nature of the public or for any public purpose, including the
exercise of powers granted under Sections 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats.; and may sell and
convey such easements or property rights when no longer needed for public use or
protection.
(d) CITY FINANCES. The Common Council may levy and provide for the collection of taxes
and special assessments; may refund any tax or special assessment paid, or any part thereof,
when satisfied that the same was unjust or illegal; and generally may manage the City
finances.
(e) CONSTRUCTION OF POWERS. Consistent with the purpose of giving to cities the
largest measure of self-government in accordance with the spirit of the home rule
amendment to the Constitution, the grants of power to the Common Council in this Section
and throughout this Code of Ordinances shall be liberally construed in favor of the rights,
powers and privileges of cities to promote the general welfare, peace, good order and
prosperity of the City and its inhabitants.
State Law Reference: Art. XI, Sec. 3, Wis. Const.; Sections 62.09(7) and 62.11, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 2-2-7 COOPERATION WITH OTHER MUNICIPALITIES
The Common Council, on behalf of the City, may join with other villages, towns, or cities or other
governmental entities in a cooperative arrangement for executing any power or duty in order to
attain greater economy of efficiency, including joint employment of appointive officers and
employees and joint purchasing programs.
State Law Reference: Section 66.0301 Wis. Stats.
SEC. 2-2-8 INTERNAL POWERS OF THE COUNCIL
The Common Council has the power to preserve order at its meetings, compel attendance of
Aldermen and fine or expel for neglect of duty and punish by fine members or other persons present
for disorderly behavior. The Common Council shall be judge of the election and qualification of its
members.
State Law Reference: Section 62.11, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 2-2-9 SALARIES
(a) The Mayor and Aldermen who make up the Common Council, whether operating under
Updated: 5/21/2018
general or special law, may, by majority vote of all the members of the Common Council,
determine that a salary or per diem compensation be paid the Mayor and Alderman.
State Law Reference: Section 62.09(6), Wis. Stats.
(b) The annual salary for aldermen shall be $5,190
(c) The salary of the president of the Common Council shall be $300 per annum over and above
the salary given to the other aldermen and shall be payable bi-weekly consolidated with
regular aldermanic salary.
(d) The aldermen's salary shall be paid bi-weekly.
(e) The annual salary for the mayor shall be sixty four thousand and 00/100 dollars ($64,000)
until the 2020 term when it shall increase by one thousand five hundred dollars and 00/100
($1,500.00) each year for four years.
(f) The mayor's salary shall be paid bi-weekly.
SEC 2-2-10 REMOVED 5/21/2018
SEC 2-2-11 REMOVED 5/21/2018
SEC. 2-2-12 OPEN MEETINGS.
Except as provided in Sec. 19.85, Wis. Stats., all meetings of the Common Council, committees
thereof, and boards and commissions, shall be open to the public.
State Law Reference: Section 62.11(3)(c) and Ch. 19, Subch. IV, Wis. Stats.
SEC 2-2-13 REMOVED 5/21/2018
SEC 2-2-14 RECMOVED 5/21/2018
SEC. 2-2-15 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
(a) CREATION OF THE AGENDA FOR COMMON COUNCIL MEETINGS AND
COMMITTEE MEETINGS. Members of the Council and City officers desiring a matter
to be placed on the agenda shall submit the same in writing to the City Clerk, who shall be
responsible for agenda preparation and distribution, not later than end of business day on the
Tuesday preceding the regular meeting. Items not received by the Clerk prior to the Tuesday
deadline shall require the approval of the Mayor for placement on the Council agenda or
approval of the Committee Chair for placement on any Committee agenda. In no event shall
any item be placed on the agenda after noon on the Thursday preceding the regular meeting
unless an emergency exists. The person placing such emergency item on the agenda shall be
required to file with the City Clerk a written statement as to the emergency.
(b) No item may be included in the Common Council packet nor be listed as a communication
unless it is authored. The Clerk may reject any communication if the Clerk determines that
the author is not valid.
SEC. 2-2-16 INTRODUCTION OF BUSINESS, RESOLUTIONS AND
ORDINANCES; DISPOSITION OF COMMUNICATIONS.
(a) SUSPENSION OF RULE. Whenever the Common Council decides to waive the rule
pertaining to ordinances or resolutions as provided in this Section, it may do so by
suspension of its rules requiring a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the Aldermen.
(b) SPECIAL RULES PERTAINING TO RESOLUTIONS AND MAYOR'S
APPOINTMENTS
(1) Resolutions and Mayor's appointments may be introduced by the Mayor or any
Updated: 5/21/2018
member of the Common Council provided the Mayor and the Common Council
receive advance notice. Advance notice shall consist of placing the resolution or
Mayor's appointment in the Aldermen's boxes in the City Hall by at least the
Thursday before the Common Council meets or by having it available for pick up by
the Aldermen at the Police Department. Giving such a resolution or Mayor's
appointment to the Police Department is prima facie evidence that the Aldermen
received said resolution or Mayor's appointment.
(2) The advance notice requirement for resolutions under this Subsection shall not apply
to matters in which the State Statutes set a time limit within which the Common
Council can act on the subject matter of the resolution or matters related to it or
when a public hearing is required by State Statutes.
SEC 2-2-17 REMOVED 5/21/2018
SEC 2-2-18 REMOVED 5/21/2018
SEC 2-2-19 REMOVED 5/21/2018
120294
2:1
CHAPTER 3
Municipal Officers and Employees
SEC. 2-3-1 CITY DEPARTMENT HEADS.
(a) DEPARTMENT HEADS. There shall be ten (10) department heads in the City of
Menasha, to wit:
(1) Director of Public Works.
(2) Finance Director (Treasurer/Comptroller).
(3) Chief of Police.
(4) Fire Chief.
(5) Director of Parks, Recreation, Forestry, and Cemeteries.
(6) Public Health Director.
(7) Community Development Director.
(8) City Attorney/Human Resources Director.
(9) Library Director.
(10) General Manager of Menasha Utilities.
(b) MAYOR AS CHIEF EXECUTIVE. The Department Heads shall be responsible to the
Mayor as Chief Executive Officer of the City except where State Statutes provide
otherwise.
(c) CHAIN OF COMMAND. The following City officials shall report to the following
entities:
(1) Assessor to Finance Director.
(2) City Attorney/Human Resources Director to Mayor.
(3) City Clerk to City Attorney/Human Resources Director.
(4) Director of Community Development to Mayor.
(5) Finance Director to Mayor.
(6) Director of Parks, Recreation, Forestry and Cemeteries to Mayor and Parks and
Recreation Board.
(7) Director of Public Works to Mayor.
(8) Fire Chief to Mayors of Neenah, Menasha and Joint Fire Commission.
(9) Police Chief to Mayor and Police and Fire Commission.
(10) Public Health Director to Mayor.
(11) Library Director to the Library Board.
(12) General Manager of Menasha Utilities to the Water and Light Commission.
SEC. 2-3-2 APPOINTMENT OF CITY OFFICERS.
(a) APPOINTMENT OF CITY OFFICERS. Pursuant to Section 66.0101 and Section
62.09(3)(b)(3), Wis. Stats., the City of Menasha elects that the method of choosing the
following City officers shall be by appointment of the Common Council which shall include
the Mayor on the interview team:
(1) Finance Director (Treasurer/Comptroller).
(2) City Attorney.
(3) City Clerk.
(4) Director of Public Works.
(5) City Assessor.
120294
2:2
(b) APPOINTMENT OF DEPARTMENT HEADS. Should a vacancy occur in any of the
following Department Head positions the Mayor shall make the appointment and shall
include at least one Alderperson on the interview team: Director of Parks, Recreation,
Forestry, and Cemeteries, Public Health Director, and the Community Development
Director; The Police Commission shall be responsible for appointing the Police Chief. The
Neenah-Menasha Joint Fire Commission shall be responsible for appointing the Fire Chief.
(c) SELECTION OF CITY ASSESSOR. The Common Council shall appoint upon such
terms and conditions as it deems advisable and favorable to the city a corporation or an
independent contractor to the office of city assessor. NOTE: Charter Ordinance.
(d) CUSTODY OF OFFICIAL PROPERTY. City officers and employees must observe the
standards of care imposed by Section 19.21, Wis. Stats., with respect to the care and
custody of official property.
(e) OATH OF OFFICE; BONDS OF OFFICERS.
(1) Oath. Every person elected or appointed to any statutory office shall take and file
his official oath within ten (10) days after the notice of his election or appointment.
(2) Bonds. The City Clerk, and such other statutory officers as the laws of Wisconsin
or the Common Council may direct, shall execute and file an official bond in such
form as the Council may determine. The Council may at any time require new or
additional bonds of any officer. All official bonds must be approved by the Mayor
and, when so approved, shall be filed within ten (10) days after the officer executing
the same has been notified of this election or appointment. Official bonds shall be
filed with the City Clerk and shall be recorded by him in a book kept by him for that
purpose.
SEC. 2-3-3 CITY CLERK.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The City Clerk shall be responsible for maintaining all official
City records, contracts, agreements, ordinances, resolutions and minutes. His/her
responsibilities include supervising elections and voter registration and maintaining custody
of the City Seal. The City Clerk shall report to the City Attorney.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The City Clerk shall:
(1) Maintain custody of the City Seal, attest and sign all official documents; attend
Council meetings; file and index Council minutes; ordinances and resolutions in
permanent volumes;
(2) Supervise elections and the registration of voters; provide for the purchase and
maintenance of election equipment; prepare election and registration notices,
advertisements and publications;
(3) Prepare or supervise the preparation and maintenance of necessary records and
reports;
(4) Prepare agendas and data for committee and Council meetings and provide
information and material to City officials; serve as Secretary to City Committees
and Boards;
(5) Prepare licenses and forms;
(6) Plan and oversee publication of the City Directory;
(7) Assist the public, deliver mail and perform other administrative duties as necessary;
(8) Publish all legal notices unless otherwise provided; file and preserve all contracts,
bonds, oaths of office and other documents not required to be filed elsewhere;
(9) Issue all licenses required by ordinance or statute, except as otherwise provided;
(10) Prepare the tax roll and tax notices required by the State of Wisconsin;
120294
2:3
(11) Perform such other duties and responsibilities as determined by the Common
Council as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The City Clerk shall be appointed by the Common
Council. He shall have a three (3) year term of office. The position of City Clerk requires a
minimum of three (3) to five (5) years of public administration experience and some
additional education beyond the high school level in related administrative procedures and
systems, or an equivalent combination of experience and training which provides the
following knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of administration and management methods and techniques;
(2) Knowledge of general municipal government organization, management and
procedures;
(3) Knowledge of election rules, ordinances and procedures;
(4) Ability to develop, implement and maintain record systems;
(5) Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with the Council,
City officials and public;
(6) Ability to communicate, orally and in writing.
State Law Reference: Section 62.09(9), Wis. Stats.
NOTE: Charter Ordinance.
120294
2:4
SEC. 2-3-4 CITY ATTORNEY.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The City Attorney shall be responsible for conducting all the
law business of the City except as otherwise provided. He shall represent the Electric and
Water utilities Commission. In the event of his illness, vacation or inability to attend to
official matters, he may appoint an acting City Attorney without compensation unless
otherwise provided by the Common Council. He shall examine the tax assessment rolls and
other tax proceedings pursuant to law and advise the Assessor. He shall perform all of the
duties pursuant to State Statute and particularly Chapter 62.09(12). Nothing in this Section
shall prevent the City Attorney from representing clients so long as it does not interfere with
his private duties or is in conflict with the Canons of Ethics of the American Bar
Association and the Rules of the Supreme Court of the State of Wisconsin.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The City Attorney shall:
(1) Draft ordinances and resolutions and review contracts, bond issues and all legal
documents in which the City has an interest; he may include on such documents
explanatory notes that explain or clarify legislative intent or legal issues;
(2) Prepare for court trials and attend jury trials;
(3) Be responsible for bringing traffic offenses under the State and City Traffic Code for
enforcement;
(4) Advise the Mayor, Council and department heads on legal matters;
(5) Attend Council meetings and other meetings as needed;
(6) Issue legal opinions in writing when requested and file the same with the City Clerk
pursuant to state Law;
(7) Examine the tax assessment rolls and other tax proceedings and advise the proper
City officers thereof;
(8) Represent all Boards and all Commissions of the City; attend Board of Review and
Board of Appeals hearings;
(9) Be on call at all times for the Chief of Police, the Captains of Menasha Police
Department and the command officer of the Police department in the evening;
conduct training sessions at the request of the Menasha Police Department or on his
own in dealing with new areas of police activity;
(10) Represent the City before the Circuit Courts of Winnebago County on writs of
certiorari;
(11) Act as both prosecutor for the City in violation of its ordinances, rules and
regulations and as a defender of the City when legal actions are brought against it;
(12) Be the magistrate pursuant to law when motor vehicles are impounded and such
hearing shall be held at the Menasha Police Station or the City Hall, at his
discretion, within seventy-two (72) hours of said impoundment;
(13) Be considered a department head;
(14) Perform such duties and responsibilities as determined by the Common Council and
as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(15) Supervisor the City Clerk and part-time support staff.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Common
Council. He shall have a three (3) year term of office. The position of City Attorney
requires five (5) to eight (8) years of experience in municipal law work and trial work and a
J.D. degree in law, or an equivalent combination of experience and training which provides
the following knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of municipal law;
(2) Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with other City employees,
120294
2:5
officials and the public;
(3) Ability and skill in research, preparation and trial presentation;
(4) Ability to organize efficient responses to various department demands;
(5) Knowledge of pertinent forms and procedures;
(6) Must be licensed to practice law in the State of Wisconsin.
State Law Reference: Section 62.09(12), Wis. Stats.
NOTE: Charter Ordinance.
SEC. 2-3-5 CITY COMPTROLLER.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The City Comptroller shall be responsible for the financial
operation of the City which includes accounting, cash collection and disbursement,
assessing, payroll, purchasing and data processing. The City Comptroller shall report to the
Mayor.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The City Comptroller shall:
(1) Plan, organize and conduct central accounting and fiscal control functions;
(2) Supervise the Data Processing Manager, Assessor, Treasurer and support the staff;
(3) Assemble the annual municipal budget request; assure the proper execution of the
budget through accounting and fiscal control records; prepare revenue estimates;
(4) Maintain subsidiary and general ledgers; balance accounts; recommend and, upon
approval, implement improvements to the accounting system;
(5) Approve requisition and purchase orders; pre-audit claims before authorizing
payment; supervise the preparation of payrolls; purchase office and related supplies;
(6) Prepare and present various financial statements and reports;
(7) Serve as Deputy Treasurer;
(8) Assist in the selection of all new employees within their jurisdiction;
(9) Perform such other duties and responsibilities as determined by the Common
Council and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of City Comptroller requires graduation
from a four (4) year college or university with major course work in accounting, a minimum
of five (5) to eight (8) years of experience in accounting and fiscal operations and a
bachelor's degree in accounting or a related field, or any equivalent combination of
education and experience providing the following knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of professional accounting principles, procedures and processes;
(2) Knowledge of data processing and of modern office practices, procedures and
equipment and standard clerical techniques as applied to the maintenance of
accounting systems;
(3) Knowledge of the principles and practices of public finance administration and of
applicable data functions as described in the statutes;
(4) Ability to plan, organize and conduct a central accounting system function;
(5) Ability to analyze and solve a wide variety of accounting and fiscal problems;
(6) Ability to plan, organize and supervise a subordinate staff;
(7) Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with City employees,
officials and the public;
(8) Ability to communicate effectively, orally and in writing.
State Law Reference: Section 62.09(10), Wis Stats.
120294
2:6
SEC. 2-3-6 CITY TREASURER.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The City Treasurer shall be responsible for planning, organizing
and directing the programs and activities of the Treasurer's office. Work includes directing
the receiving, receipting, recording, disbursements of tax moneys and other municipal funds
and maintenance of Central Municipal Accounting records. The City Treasurer shall act as
Comptroller in the absence of the Comptroller. The City Treasurer shall report to the
Comptroller.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The City Treasurer shall:
(1) Plan, organize and direct the programs and activities of the Treasurer's office;
(2) Conduct central accounting and fiscal control functions;
(3) Plan investment strategies and monitor cash flow;
(4) Sign checks for disbursement of municipal funds; record and cancel bonds and
coupons; collect fees for licenses issued by the City;
(5) Supervise the preparation and maintenance of necessary records and reports;
(6) Direct the receiving, receipting, recording and disbursement of tax and utilities
moneys and other municipal funds, disburse tax funds, as appropriate to the County
Treasurer, Board of Education, Sewerage Commission, Town of Menasha and
Vocational District Number 12;
(7) Perform such other duties and responsibilities as determined by the Common
Council and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of City Treasurer requires a minimum of
three (3) to twelve (12) months of experience in revenue administration or related work and
two (2) years of college in public or business administration, accounting or a related field;
or an equivalent combination of education and experience providing the following
knowledge, abilities, and skills:
(1) Knowledge of modern revenue collection and disbursement policies, practices, and
procedures;
(2) Knowledge of applicable City and state laws, policies, and regulations pertaining to
revenue collection and disbursement;
(3) Ability to administer the programs and activities of a municipal Treasurer's Office;
(4) Ability to plan assign, and supervise the work of subordinates engaged in revenue
collection, fiscal record maintenance, and related activities;
(5) Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with City officials,
representatives of other governmental agencies, and the public;
(6) Ability to communicate effectively, orally and in writing.
State Law Reference: Section 62.09(9), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 2-3-7 PERSONNEL DIRECTOR.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Personnel Director shall be responsible for directing,
coordinating and carrying out the human resources functions for the City including the areas
of labor relations, employment, safety, compensation, benefits and government compliance.
The Personnel Director shall report to the Mayor.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Personnel Director shall:
120294
2:7
(1) Conduct labor negotiations and administer all union contracts, including the
handling of grievances and binding arbitration cases;
(2) Advise the Mayor and department heads regarding labor contract administration and
employee relations matters;
(3) Maintain the wage and salary program;
(4) Serve as Affirmative Action Officer for the City;
(5) Maintain records and complete required reports for benefits programs, including
Wisconsin Retirement Fund, Social Security and employee insurance plans; he shall
be the insurance manager handling liability claims against the City;
(6) Carry out the employee safety program including safety meetings, accident
investigation and maintenance of related records;
(7) Recruit, screen and assist in the selection and orientation of all new employees;
(8) Monitor employee absences;
(9) Monitor unemployment claims and represent the City in related hearings;
(10) Develop and maintain personnel policies and procedures;
(11) Administer claims against the City and the City's insurance program.
(12) Perform such other duties and responsibilities as determined by the Common
Council and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Personnel Director requires a minimum
of one (1) to three (3) years of personnel and labor relations experience and a bachelor's
degree in personnel or business management or a related field, or an equivalent combination
of experience and training which provides the following knowledge, abilities, and skills:
(1) Knowledge of personnel management principles;
(2) Knowledge of labor laws and regulations;
(3) Knowledge of City government operations and jobs;
(4) Ability to maintain confidential records;
(5) Ability to assemble data, prepare documentation, and then present information for
arbitration cases, for negotiations and for presentations to the Common Council;
(6) Ability to negotiate and administer a labor contract;
(7) Ability to communicate, orally and in writing.
SEC. 2-3-8 ASSESSOR.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The City Assessor shall be responsible for appraisal of taxable
property in the City. He shall research, list, describe and value with equity all real and
personal property with the exception of manufacturing property. The Assessor shall report
to the Comptroller. He shall have a three (3) year term of office.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The City Assessor shall:
(1) Discover, list and assemble data on residential, commercial and personal property
for assessment purposes;
(2) Maintain records on taxable property;
(3) Prepare and submit the assessment roll to the City Clerk according to state statute;
(4) Conduct valuation of real and personal property, including leased property, based
upon cost studies, sales analysis and interviews with the public;
(5) Develop and supervise the Mass Appraisal computer system;
(6) Perform such other duties and responsibilities as determined by the Common
Council and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of City Assessor requires a minimum of
120294
2:8
three (3) to five (5) years of experience in real estate appraisal and one (1) year of college or
additional training, or an equivalent combination of experience and training which provides
the following knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of real estate appraisal principles and practices;
(2) Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with other City employees,
officials, realtors and the public;
(3) Ability to determine tax status of property;
(4) Knowledge of building construction;
(5) Ability to value real and personal property;
(6) Ability to keep detailed records on taxable property;
(7) Ability to prepare and maintain a department budget;
(8) Ability to plan, organize and supervise a subordinate staff;
(9) Ability to communicate effectively, both orally and in writing;
(10) Candidate for this class must be a Certified Assessor 1, 2, 3 or 4 by the State of
Wisconsin.
State Law Reference: Corporation as Assessor, Section 62.09(1)(c), Wis. Stats.; Affidavit
of Assessor, Section 70.49, Wis. Stats.; Assessor Certification, Section 73.02, Wis. Stats.;
Assessors in Cities, Section 70.05, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 2-3-9 CHIEF OF POLICE
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for managing and
directing the activities of the Police Department, including ensuring that laws and
ordinances are enforced and that measures are implemented to prevent crimes and protect
lives and property. The Chief of Police shall report to the Mayor.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Chief of police shall:
(1) Plan, organize and direct the programs and activities of the Police Department;
(2) Establish and maintain departmental operational policies and procedures;
(3) Supervise, through subordinate staff law enforcement officers, dispatchers and
clerical personnel;
(4) Review daily log and major criminal offenses and ensure follow-up by subordinate
supervisors;
(5) Attend civic and other community organizations to explain and promote functions
of the Police Department and establish favorable public relations;
(6) Oversee operations of 911 Emergency Communication Center;
(7) Communicate with other City employees and officials regarding matters related to
Police Department operations;
(8) Develop the annual Department budget and oversee preparation and maintenance of
departmental records reports;
(9) Develop and recommend policies and procedures for selection and training;
(10) Cooperate with county, state and federal officers in the apprehension and detention
of wanted persons;
(11) Assist in the selection of all new employees within his jurisdiction and assist other
City departments with investigations and department checks.
(12) Perform such other duties and responsibilities as determined by the Common
Council and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Chief of Police requires a minimum of
120294
2:9
eight (8) years of related law enforcement experience, including management experience,
and an additional one (1) to two (2) years of college course work in law enforcement, or an
equivalent combination of experience and training which provides the following
knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of principles and practices of police administration and police methods;
(2) Knowledge of related law enforcement statutes and ordinances;
(3) Knowledge of police communication and dispatch systems;
(4) Ability to communicate, both orally and in writing;
(5) Ability to develop selection and training procedures;
(6) Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with other City employees,
officials and the public;
(7) Ability to respond and make decisions in emergency situations;
(8) Ability to plan, organize and supervise subordinate staff.
State Law Reference: Section 62.13, Wis Stats.
SEC. 2-3-10 POLICE CAPTAIN.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Police Captain shall be responsible for managing and
supervising the activities of a major function of the Police Department. The Captain of
Detectives caries responsibility for criminal investigation, the 911 Emergency
Communication Center and court functions. The Captain of Patrol and Administration
caries responsibility for supervising traffic and patrol functions and for departmental
administration. The Police Captain shall report to the Chief of Police.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Police Captain shall:
(1) Supervise patrol officers, sergeants, investigators, dispatches and related staff;
(2) Review reports regarding arrests and investigations and assign appropriate staff for
follow-up as needed;
(3) Determine personnel and equipment assignments, including preparing work and
vacation schedules and special assignments;
(4) Supervise operations of the communications center to ensure appropriate response
as required;
(5) Purchase or approve the purchase of equipment, materials and supplies;
(6) Prepare and maintain departmental records and reports;
(7) Direct activities of the auxiliary police unit;
(8) Conduct in-service training;
(9) Participate directly in investigations, complaints and related matters as required; and
(10) Perform such other duties and responsibilities as determined by the Common
Council and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Police Captain requires a minimum of
five (5) to eight (8) years of related law enforcement experience, including supervisory
experience, and an additional one (1) to two (2) years of college course work in law
enforcement, or an equivalent combination of experience and training which provides the
following knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of principles and practices of police administration and police methods;
(2) Knowledge of related law enforcement statutes and ordinances;
(3) Knowledge of police communication and dispatch systems;
(4) Ability to communicate orally and in writing, including ability to obtain information
120294
2:10
through interviews and interrogation;
(5) Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with other City employees,
officials and the public;
(6) Ability to respond and make decisions in emergency situations;
(7) Ability to plan, organize and supervise subordinate staff;
(8) Ability to develop and maintain records;
(9) Ability to develop and conduct training;
(10) Ability to use and instruct others in the use of firearms.
SEC. 2-3-11 FIRE CHIEF.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for managing and directing
the activities of the Neenah-Menasha Joint Fire Rescue, including ensuring that services are
provided to the community to minimize losses due to fires, to prevent fires and to control
hazards. The Fire Chief shall report to the Mayors of Neenah, Menasha and to the Joint
Fire Commission.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Fire Chief shall:
(1) Plan, organize and direct the programs and activities of the Fire Department;
(2) Establish and maintain Departmental operational policies and procedures;
(3) Supervise through subordinate staff fire fighters, pump operators, aerial drivers,
lieutenants and captains responsible for Department activities;
(4) Develop staffing plans and work schedules and maintain payroll and other related
records;
(5) Prepare and administer Department budget;
(6) Develop and recommend policies and procedures for selection and training;
(7) Maintain Department operations and records and reports, such as inspections and
records of all firms;
(8) Prepare purchasing specifications for fire apparatus, tools, and equipment;
(9) Provide information to the public and to City employees/officials regarding
Department activities and programs;
(10) Cooperate with other City departments, with officials from other cities and with
state officials in carrying out Department operations;
(11) Assist in the selection of all new employees within his jurisdiction;
(12) Perform such other duties and responsibilities as determined by the Common
Council and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Fire Chief requires a minimum of eight
(8) years of related fire department experience, including management experience, and an
additional one (1) to two (2) years of college course work in fire science, or an equivalent
combination of experience and training which provides the following knowledge, abilities
and skills:
(1) Knowledge of principles and practices of fire department operations and
administration;
(2) Knowledge of fire control equipment, procedures and apparatus;
(3) Ability to develop and implement programs such as training and development, fire
prevention and investigation;
(4) Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with other City employees,
officials and the public;
(5) Ability to communicate orally and in writing;
120294
2:11
(6) Ability to plan, organize and supervise subordinate staff;
(7) Ability to respond and make decisions in emergency situations;
(8) Ability to maintain financial and other records.
State Law Reference: Section 62.13, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 2-3-12 DEPUTY FIRE CHIEF.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Deputy Fire Chief shall be responsible for managing and
supervising the activities of major functions of the Fire Department, including responsibility
for both training and fire prevention/inspection. The Deputy Fire Chief shall report to the
Fire Chief.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Deputy Fire Chief shall:
(1) Develop and conduct training programs on operations and equipment use;
(2) Conduct fire inspections and take follow-up action as necessary;
(3) Maintain fire reports, personnel training records and inspection records;
(4) Respond directly to major fires and emergencies, including assuming command as
necessary;
(5) Plan, organize and supervise fire prevention and arson investigations;
(6) Maintain maintenance and inventory of fire fighting equipment and apparatus;
(7) Manage day-to-day operations in the absence of the Fire Chief;
(8) Perform such other duties and responsibilities determined by the Common Council
and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(9) He shall be the Emergency Government Coordinator.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Deputy Fire Chief requires a minimum
of five (5) to eight (8) years of related fire department experience, including supervisory
experience and an additional one (1) to two (2) years of college course work in fire science,
or an equivalent combination of experience and training which provides the following
knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of principles and practices of fire department operations and
administration;
(2) Knowledge of fire control equipment, procedures and apparatus;
(3) Knowledge of the operation and maintenance requirements of various types of fire
fighting apparatus and equipment;
(4) Ability to plan, organize and supervise subordinate staff;
(5) Ability to plan, assign, direct, review and supervise large-scale operations of fire
fighting equipment and personnel under emergency conditions involving danger to
life and property;
(6) Ability to locate and diagnose existing and potentially hazardous conditions in
buildings and installations and to conduct arson investigations;
(7) Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with subordinates, City
officials and the public;
(8) Ability to communicate, orally and in writing.
SEC. 2-3-13 EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT DIRECTOR.
(a) OFFICE CREATED. There is hereby created the office of Emergency Management of the
120294
2:12
City which shall consist of the following:
(1) Mayor.
(2) Emergency Government Director, who shall be the Deputy Fire Chief.
(3) All Department Heads, and the Manager of the Menasha Electric & Water Utilities.
(b) POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the
following:
(1) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued
or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the
Common Council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or termination
of a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be
filed promptly with the City Clerk.
(2) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary
for carrying out the purposes of this ordinance. Such proclamations, regulations, or
directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents
to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the
disaster prevent or impeded, promptly filed with the City Clerk.
(3) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal and county, Emergency Management
organizations. This duty may be delegated to the Emergency Government Director.
(4) During a declared disaster, the Mayor may expend or commit public funds of the
City when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or
property. Said funds not to exceed $100,000.00.
(5) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the City Attorney, for use of private
property for public shelter and other purposes.
(6) Survey actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the City
and identify and implement measures to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact
of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(7) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for
the City,and recommend for adoption by the Common Council all mutual aid
arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan.
(8) Direction and control of the operations of an Emergency Management organization
as well as the training of Emergency Management personnel.
(9) Marshalling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department
of the City to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the Emergency
Management Plan.
(10) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements in cooperation
with the representatives of other local political bodies as authorized by the Common
Council.
(11) Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies
and equipment, not to exceed the limit in paragraph (4) above, including acceptance
of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving
Emergency Management within the City.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services
which could be used during a disaster, as provided herein.
(13) Delegation of such enumerated powers to the Emergency Government Director as
deemed property.
A comprehensive Emergency Management Plan shall be developed and maintained. The
Plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish assigned responsibilities, tasks,
duties, and powers, and designate staff and employees to carry out the provisions of this
120294
2:13
Section. As provided by City Ordinance, the Plan shall follow the standards and criteria
established by the State Division of Emergency Government of the State of Wisconsin.
When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the
functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of
readiness. The Emergency Management Plan shall be considered supplementary to this
Section.
(c) DECLARATION OF A STATE OF EMERGENCY.
(1) A disaster is hereby defined to be the occurrence or imminent threat of widespread
or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or
man-made cause, including fire, flood, earthquake, wind storm, volcanic activity,
epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, hostile
military or para-military action, including nuclear, biological or chemical war, other
public calamity requiring emergency action or an energy emergency.
(2) The Emergency Government Director will have the authority to request the
declaration of the existence of an emergency by the Common Council during the
time of a disaster as defined above. In the event it is deemed necessary to declare
the existence of an emergency without delay, the Mayor may, if the Common
Council is not in session, do so. Such action shall be subject to ratification by the
Common Council at its next meeting. In no event will such a declaration by the
Mayor continue or be renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or
with the consent of the Common Council.
(3) The Emergency Government Director will, after the declaration of the existence of
an emergency, issue all necessary directives for the operational effectiveness of the
Emergency Management Operations Plan and have prepared for immediate
submission to the Common Council an ordinance invoking and applying all the
powers reasonably necessary to protect the health, security, peace, life, and property
of the City and its inhabitants during the period of such civil emergency.
(d) UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(1) No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the City in carrying out
any emergency management activity authorized by this division without prior
approval by the Mayor, nor shall any person have the right to bind the City by
contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the Mayor
or Common Council.
(2) Any persons who shall willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the
Emergency Government organization in the enforcement of any rules or regulation
issued pursuant to this division, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation
issued pursuant to the authority contained in this ordinance, commits an offense and
shall be subject to the penalty as provided herein.
(3) Any person who shall wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other
means of identification as a member of the Emergency Government organization of
the City, without authority, commits an offense and shall be subject to the penalty as
provided herein.
(4) Any authorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a
warning signal or the termination of a warning commits an offense shall be subject
to the penalty as provided herein.
(5) Any person who by passes a barricade erected by the Emergency Government
Director without having the permission of the Emergency Government Director to
so bypass commits an offense, and shall be subject to the penalty as provided herein.
120294
2:14
SEC. 2-3-14 DATA PROCESSING MANAGER.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Data Processing Manager shall be responsible for the
programming, systems analysis and operational activities of the data processing unit. His
work includes reviewing and approving the application of the new systems to the computer
and establishing development and operational priorities. The Data Processing Manager
shall plan, organize and direct all activities of the data processing unit. The Data Processing
Manager shall report to the City Comptroller.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Data Processing Manager shall:
(1) Be responsible for the programming, systems analysis and operational activities of
the data processing unit. Work includes reviewing and approving the application of
new systems to the computer and establishing development and operational
priorities;
(2) Plan, organize and direct all activities of the data processing unit;
(3) Develop unit policies and procedures; confer with and advise personnel on technical
problems;
(4) Develop system requirements and prepare necessary programs for the computer
application; test and debug programs; operate the computer and its peripheral
equipment; establish system development standards, computer-documentation
standards and computer-operation standards;
(5) Coordinate data processing programs and activities such as training involving other
divisions and departments of the City;
(6) Prepare annual budget request;
(7) Prepare and maintain necessary records, systems documentation and reports;
(8) Perform such other duties and responsibilities as determined by the Common
Council and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Data Processing Manager requires:
(1) Knowledge of the operating characteristics, capabilities, limitations and service
requirements of an electronic computer and its peripheral equipment;
(2) Knowledge of the systems and programming techniques of an electronic computer
and its peripheral equipment;
(3) Knowledge of current practice and developments in the field of electronic computer
operations;
(4) Ability to plan and organize the activities of a data processing unit;
(5) Ability to perform systems analysis and to develop programs to meet systems
requirements;
(6) Ability to program and operate an electronic computer and its peripheral equipment;
(7) Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with the City
employees, City officials, employees and the public;
(8) Ability to communicate effectively, orally and in writing;
(9) Graduation from high school, supplemented by attainment of an associate degree in
computer science and thorough electronic data processing systems analysis and
programming experience, or any equivalent combination of education and
experience providing the knowledge, abilities and skills listed above.
SEC. 2-3-15 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
120294
2:15
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for managing
and directing the Public Works Department, including responsibility for streets and
sanitation, engineering and building maintenance services. The Director of Public Works
shall report to the Mayor.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Director of Public Works shall:
(1) Plan, organize and direct the programs and activities of the Public Works
Department;
(2) Supervise through subordinate supervisory personnel a public works design,
construction, maintenance and operating tasks;
(3) Administer construction contracts;
(4) Prepare purchase requisitions and approve purchases for equipment and supplies;
(5) Meet with civic organizations as City representative to discuss public works
programs, needs and problems;
(6) Meet with other municipal administrators, contractors, engineers, utility companies
and federal, state and county agencies to discuss current and proposed work, work
problems and work procedures;
(7) Prepare operational and capital improvement budgets;
(8) Manage and maintain operating costs of public works services;
(9) Direct the preparation and maintenance of necessary records and reports;
(10) Conduct engineering studies;
(11) Assist in the selection of all new employees within their jurisdiction;
(12) Perform such other duties and responsibilities as determined by the Common
Council and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Director of Public Works requires
certification as a Registered Professional Engineer in the State of Wisconsin and requires a
minimum of five (5) to eight (8) years of civil engineering and public works experience and
a bachelor's degree in civil engineering, or an equivalent combination of experience and
training which provides the following knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of public works construction and maintenance methods, materials and
equipment;
(2) Knowledge of the principles and practices of civil engineering as applied to
municipal public works;
(3) Ability to plan, organize and direct comprehensive municipal public works
program;
(4) Ability to plan and schedule for municipal public works needs;
(5) Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with City officials,
employees, officials of other governmental jurisdictions, professional engineers,
contractors and the public;
(6) Ability to communicate, orally and in writing.
SEC. 2-3-16 CITY ENGINEER.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The City Engineer shall be responsible for managing the City
Engineering Department. He shall perform necessary administrative and engineering
functions and act as Director of Public Works in the absence of the Director of Public
Works. He shall report to the Director of Public Works.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The City Engineer shall:
(1) Supervise, direct and schedule the work of the engineering office and field
120294
2:16
personnel;
(2) Design public works construction projections and serve as Project Engineer;
(3) Write and maintain current standards and specifications for public works
construction projects;
(4) Assist in budget preparation and purchase of operating equipment;
(5) Attend Council and Committee meetings as required;
(6) Maintain records and prepare reports as required by City, State or Federal law;
(7) Perform such other duties and responsibilities determined by the Common Council
and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of City Engineer requires a minimum of
three (3) to five (5) years of experience in civil engineering and public works construction
and two (2) years of college specializing in civil engineering or a related field, or an
equivalent combination of experience and training which provides the following
knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of methods, equipment, materials and costs for public works
construction, operation and maintenance programs;
(2) Knowledge of applicable laws, codes and regulations;
(3) Working knowledge of principles of government appropriations, budgeting and
procedures;
(4) Ability to plan, organize and supervise a subordinate staff;
(5) Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with other City employees,
officials and the public;
(6) Ability to maintain accurate and complete records and prepare timely and effective
reports.
SEC. 2-3-17 BUILDING SERVICES SUPERINTENDENT.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Building Services Superintendent shall be responsible for
the care, custody and maintenance of City buildings. His work involves the responsibility
for carrying out required programs on City buildings to the end that cleanliness, repair and
safe operation of building structures, equipment and services is assured. He shall report to
the Director of Public Works.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Building Services Superintendent
shall:
(1) Supervise custodians and janitors at the Public Safety Building, City Administration
Building, Memorial Building, Senior Citizens Center and City Hall;
(2) Supervise contract services for snow removal, landscape maintenance, equipment
maintenance, building repair and sanitation as may be needed;
(3) Set up and schedule building and building mechanical maintenance and operating
programs for daily, weekly, monthly and longer periods;
(4) Perform such janitorial, custodial, repair and operational activities that are not
delegated to other employees or contractors;
(5) Be responsible for purchasing all custodial supplies and equipment;
(6) Assist in the establishment of required budgets;
(7) Perform such other duties and responsibilities determined by the Common Council
and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Building Services Superintendent
requires a minimum of three (3) to five (5) years of experience in custodial and building
120294
2:17
service activity and supervision and a high school diploma, or an equivalent combination of
experience and training which provides the following knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of all aspects of custodial and janitorial procedures;
(2) Ability to plan, organize and supervise a subordinate staff and contract personnel;
(3) Ability to develop and recommend required budgets and to control costs for
conformance to budgets in regard to purchasing.
SEC. 2-3-18 STREETS AND SANITATION SUPERINTENDENT.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Streets and Sanitation Superintendent shall be responsible
for managing and supervising the maintenance, repair and minor construction for streets and
sanitary sewer systems and for supervising garbage and waste collection and bridge
operations. He shall report to the Director of Public Works.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Streets and Sanitation
Superintendent shall:
(1) Plan, organize and direct municipal street and storm and sanitary sewer minor
construction, maintenance and repair activities and garbage and refuse collection
activities;
(2) Plan and supervise directly and through a subordinate supervisor skilled,
semi-skilled and unskilled workers engaged in the maintenance, repair, cleaning and
construction of streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, manholes and catch
basins, storm and sanitary sewers and related facilities; in the collection and disposal
of garbage and refuse; and in bridge operations;
(3) Provide general direction to coating, resurfacing, patching, grading, minor
construction and similar operations performed on the municipal street system;
recommend priority of streets to be maintained; determine methods and materials to
be used;
(4) Supervise the maintenance of mechanical equipment;
(5) Direct the inspection, maintenance and repair of the municipal storm and sanitary
sewer systems;
(6) Supervise and oversee snow plowing and snow removal operations;
(7) Order material and review requisitions submitted by subordinates; prepare
equipment and material specifications; maintain close working relationships with
engineering and various other municipal departments and divisions;
(8) Direct the preparation and maintenance of necessary records and reports;
(9) Perform such other duties and responsibilities determined by the Common Council
and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Streets and Sanitation Superintendent
requires a minimum of three (3) to five (5) years of street and sanitation experience,
including supervisory experience and additional training and education beyond high school
in equipment maintenance and operations, or an equivalent combination of experience and
training which provides the following knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of administrative practices and procedures relative to the construction,
maintenance and repair of streets and sewers;
(2) Knowledge of the materials and equipment employed in the construction,
maintenance and repair of streets and sewers;
(3) Knowledge of the basic principles and practices of civil engineering as applied to
the construction, maintenance and repair of street and sewer systems;
120294
2:18
(4) Ability to plan and implement a comprehensive and effective maintenance program
for municipal street systems and sewer systems;
(5) Ability to organize and implement effective snow removal operations;
(6) Ability to plan, organize and supervise the work of skilled, semi-skilled and
unskilled employees;
(7) Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with City officials,
employees and the public;
(8) Ability to communicate, orally and in writing.
(9) A valid Wisconsin driver's license.
SEC. 2-3-19 OFFICE/STREETS AND SANITATION COORDINATOR.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTIONS. The Office/Streets and Sanitation Coordinator shall be
responsible for preparing reports and records of Street and Sanitation operations, including
maintaining costs of operations and related personnel records. Will also be responsible for
assisting the Streets and Sanitation Superintendent in supervising employees involved in
maintenance, repair and minor construction for streets and sanitary sewer systems and to
assist in supervising municipal solid waste collection and bridge operations. Will assist the
Streets and Sanitation Superintendent in all day-to-day operations and in carrying out
special projects. The person in this position shall report to the Streets and Sanitation
Superintendent.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Office/Streets and Sanitation
Coordinator shall:
(1) Prepare time and labor distribution cards;
(2) Check invoices against monthly bills;
(3) Compile and prepare cost distribution records and reports, including such costs as
gasoline, extra garbage pickups, mileage, digging permits and snow removal;
(4) Purchase or requisition street maintenance tools and custodial supplies for all
municipal departments; store and issue tools and supplies; order gasoline for all
municipal departments;
(5) Receive telephone calls from the public, provide routine information and handle
routine complaints operate two-way radio in receiving and relaying of messages;
(6) Maintain vacation schedules and file invoices, purchase orders and other items
according to established filing procedures;
(7) Assist in planning, organizing and directing the programs and activities of the
Streets and Sanitation Department;
(8) Assist in supervising skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled personnel engaged in street
and sewer minor construction, maintenance and repair activities, in garbage and
refuse collection activities and in snow removal;
(9) Assist in assuring that work schedules are carried out efficiently and according to
safety standards; handle complaints from the public, instruct and assist subordinates
in the performance of their duties as necessary;
(10) Assist in checking work in progress for conformance to work plans; receive requests
for emergency and other unscheduled work and make necessary adjustments;
perform the duties of the Superintendent as necessary;
(11) Help to prepare and maintain necessary records and reports; and,
(12) Perform such other duties and responsibilities determined by the Common Council
and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
120294
2:19
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Office/Streets and Sanitation
Coordinator requires a minimum of three (3) months to one (1) year of clerical and
bookkeeping experience and additional education beyond the high school level in
bookkeeping and office procedures or an equivalent combination of experience and training
as well as a minimum of one (1) to three (3) years of street and sanitation experience and
some additional education and training beyond the high school level in equipment
maintenance and operations or an equivalent combination of experience and training, all of
the above which provides the following knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of bookkeeping principles and procedures;
(2) Knowledge of routine purchasing and stockroom methods and techniques;
(3) Ability to make arithmetic computations and tabulations with speed and accuracy;
(4) Ability to receive calls and make proper disposition of problems;
(5) Ability to use a computer terminal and be familiar with all existing DPW software
programs;
(6) Ability to prepare and maintain records and reports;
(7) Knowledge of administrative practices and procedures relative to the construction,
maintenance and repair of streets and sewers and of the collection of garbage and
refuse;
(8) Knowledge of the equipment and materials of public works construction,
maintenance and repair;
(9) Ability to plan, lay out and supervise a work program involving public works
construction, maintenance and repair activities;
(10) Familiarity and knowledge of the operations of street and sanitation equipment;
(11) Ability to interpret and work from blueprints;
(12) Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with subordinates,
superiors and the public;
(13) Ability to communicate, orally and in writing.
(14) A valid Wisconsin driver's license.
SEC. 2-3-20 DIRECTOR OF PARKS, RECREATION, FORESTRY AND CEMETERIES.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Director of Parks, Recreation, Forestry and Cemeteries
shall be responsible for planning, organizing, supervising and controlling all Municipal
Park, Recreation, Forestry and Cemetery programs and operations. He shall report to the
Mayor.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Director of Parks, Recreation,
Forestry and Cemeteries shall:
(1) Coordinate the various programs and personnel of the Department;
(2) Supervise directly or through subordinates the staff assigned to the Department;
(3) Be responsible for planning, organizing, developing, executing and evaluating a
year-round comprehensive recreation program;
(4) Be responsible for long range and master plans for park and recreation activity
including plans for acquisition of park property as required;
(5) Assist in recruitment and hiring of all full-time, part-time and seasonal personnel
required for the work;
(6) Prepare and submit an annual budget and control for conformance to the final
budget as authorized;
(7) Coordinate park and recreation programs and facilities with schools and other
120294
2:20
community recreation and beautification programs;
(8) Administer the provisions of applicable labor contracts and deal closely with
personnel administration for required interpretations;
(9) Direct subordinates in planning and designing major park and cemetery projects and
improvements including landscape development;
(10) Represent the Parks and Recreation Board at meetings of the Common Council and
also attend meetings of committees and various community groups as may be
appropriate to provide understanding and appreciation of park and recreation
programs;
(11) Perform such other duties and responsibilities determined by the Common Council
and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Director of Parks, Recreation, Forestry
and Cemeteries requires three (3) to five (5) years in the administration and supervision of
parks and recreation department and a bachelor's degree with emphasis on parks, recreation
and forestry, or an equivalent combination of experience and training which provides the
following knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of administrative principles, practices and methods appropriate to
organizing and staffing a municipal park and recreation department;
(2) Knowledge and understanding of appropriate philosophy and goals for park and
recreation programs;
(3) Knowledge of the principles and practices of horticulture and landscaping
appropriate for design of park areas;
(4) Knowledge of materials, methods and equipment required for construction and
maintenance of facilities;
(5) Ability to prepare and maintain a department budget;
(6) Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with other City employees,
City officials and the public;
(7) Ability to communicate, orally and in writing.
SEC. 2-3-21 SUPERINTENDENT OF PARKS, FORESTRY AND CEMETERIES.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Superintendent of Parks, Forestry and Cemeteries shall be
responsible for managing and supervising the maintenance of park, pool and cemetery, pool
and related equipment. He shall prepare daily work schedules for landscape, vehicle and
equipment maintenance, construction, snow removal and ice rink maintenance. He shall
report to the Director of Parks, Recreation, Forestry and Cemeteries.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Superintendent of Parks, Forestry
and Cemeteries shall:
(1) Establish and maintain work schedules and programs for daily and longer periods;
(2) Prepare and maintain records for street tree management;
(3) Make decisions for daily expenditures for park equipment, vehicles and buildings;
(4) Prepare contracts for tree trimming, deadwood removal, tree removal and facility
repairs;
(5) Assist in preparing of the annual department budget;
(6) Assist in developing a comprehensive park master plan;
(7) Perform such other duties and responsibilities determined by the Common Council
and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Superintendent of Parks, Forestry and
120294
2:21
Cemeteries requires a valid Wisconsin driver's license and requires a minimum of three (3)
to five (5) years of parks maintenance and supervisory experience and some additional
education and training beyond the high school level in maintenance operations, equipment
and forestry, or an equivalent combination of experience and training which provides the
following knowledge, abilities and skills;
(1) Knowledge of park, forestry and cemetery maintenance and operations;
(2) Knowledge of materials and equipment used in parks;
(3) Ability to plan, organize and direct the work of skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled
personnel;
(4) Ability to determine priorities and to plan and schedule activities;
(5) Ability to determine and recommend appropriate budgets and to control costs;
(6) Ability to communicate, orally and in writing.
SEC. 2-3-22 PUBLIC HEALTH DIRECTOR.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Public Health Director shall be responsible for planning,
implementing and administering the City's public nursing programs and the staff of the
Health Department. His work includes responsibility for ensuring that the City provides full
range public health programs designed to meet the needs of both the public and private
primary and secondary schools in the City as well as to offer a generalized program oriented
to the complete family. The Public Health Director shall report to the Mayor.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Public Health Director shall:
(1) Plan, administer, supervise and participate in the City public health nursing
program;
(2) Coordinate and supervise school health programs and school visits by nurses and
other departmental staff;
(3) Evaluate and interpret present and potential health needs and resources available to
individuals, families and the community; plan methods to employ all available
resources to their best utilization;
(4) Plan, implement, supervise and participate in special health programs such as
immunization clinics, communicable disease control and vision and hearing testing;
(5) Prepare, present and administer annual budget;
(6) Evaluate departmental staff personnel and maintain administrative records;
(7) Be responsible for preparation of grant applications;
(8) Train and evaluate health professionals and support staff;
(9) Make home visits to school children and families referred; make necessary referrals
of families to medical or social service agencies;
(10) Perform such other duties and responsibilities determined by the Common Council
and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Public Health Director requires
graduation from a four (4) year college or university, supplemented by the attainment of a
master's degree in public health nursing or administration, and a minimum of three (3) to
five (5) years of experience in the field of public health nursing, or an equivalent
combination of education and experience providing the following knowledge, abilities and
skills:
(1) Knowledge of the principles of public health administration and public health
nursing supervision;
(2) Knowledge of local health department policies and practices and of relationships
120294
2:22
between state and local departments;
(3) Knowledge of trends in general health education;
(4) Knowledge of the goals, methods of practice and resources of professions and
agencies participating in public health programs;
(5) Ability to supervise and participate in program planning;
(6) Ability to explain and interpret public health laws, rules and regulations;
(7) Ability to plan, assign and supervise the work of others;
(8) Ability to maintain constructive relationships with community agencies and
professional groups;
(9) Ability to maintain accurate, confidential and complete records and to prepare clear
and concise reports;
(10) Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with other City employees,
officials and the public;
(11) Ability to prepare and maintain a department budget;
(12) Ability to respond and make decisions in emergency situations;
(13) Candidates for this position must possess a license as a registered nurse and be
certified as a public health nurse by the State of Wisconsin.
SEC. 2-3-23 PUBLIC HEALTH NURSE SUPERVISOR.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Public Health Nurse Supervisor shall be responsible for
implementing the City's public nursing programs and for providing direct supervision of the
staff of the Health Department.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Public Health Nurse Supervisor
shall:
(1) Assist in planning, administration, and supervises and participates in the City public
health nursing program;
(2) Coordinate and supervise school health programs and school visits by nurses and
other departmental staff;
(3) Assist in the evaluation and interpretation of present and potential health needs and
resources available to individuals, families and the community; assist in planning
methods to employ all available resources to their best utilization;
(4) Assist in the planning, implementation, supervision, and participates in special
health programs such as immunization clinics, communicable disease control, and
vision and hearing testing;
(5) Perform duties and responsibilities of Public Health Nurse.
(6) Assist in preparation, presentation and administration of annual budget.
(7) Assist in evaluation of departmental staff personnel and maintenance of
administrative records.
(8) Assist in preparation of grant applications.
(9) Assist in selection, training and evaluation of health professionals and support staff.
(10) Make home visits to school children and families referred; make necessary referrals
of families to medical or social service agencies.
(11) Perform the duties and responsibilities deemed necessary in the absence of the
Public Health Director.
(12) Perform such other duties and responsibilities determined by the Common Council
and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Public Health Nurse Supervisor requires
120294
2:23
graduation from a four(4) year college or university the major course work in nursing,
including or supplemented by courses in public health nursing, and a minimum of three (3)
years of experience in the field of public health nursing, or an equivalent knowledge,
abilities, and skills:
(1) Knowledge and abilities required of the position of Public Health Nurse.
(2) Knowledge of the principles of public health nursing, supervision, and
administration.
(3) Knowledge of local health department policies and practices and of relationships
between state and local departments.
(4) Knowledge of trends in general health education.
(5) Ability to supervise and participate in program planning.
(6) Ability to plan, assign, and supervise the work of others.
(7) Ability to cooperate constructively with community agencies and professional
groups.
(8) Ability to maintain accurate and confidential records, and to prepare clear and
concise reports.
(9) Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with other City employees,
officials and the public;
(10) Ability to assist in the preparation and maintenance of a department budget.
(11) Ability to respond and make decisions in the absence of the Public Health Director
in an emergency situation.
(12) Candidates for this position must possess a license as a registered nurse and be
certified as a Public Health Nurse by the State of Wisconsin.
(d) Under chain of command, the Public Health Nurse Supervisor shall report to the Public
Health Director. In the absence of a Public Health Director, the Public Health Nurse
Supervisor shall report to the Mayor.
SEC. 2-3-24 PUBLIC HEALTH NURSE.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Public Health Nurse shall be responsible for providing
public health nursing services to the community on the consultative and referral level as
well as client patient care services. The Public Health Nurse shall report to the Public
Health Director.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Public Health Nurse shall:
(1) Conduct home visits resulting from referrals made by local community and state
agencies; determine needs of individuals and families in the area of maternity and
child care, developmentally handicapped and geriatrics and related areas of
treatment;
(2) Provide public health nursing services in homes, clinics and schools; demonstrate
nursing care that may be safely assumed by others;
(3) Advise and assist individuals and families in carrying out recommendations made
by a physician and in making the necessary adaptations so that the treatment
regimen can be followed;
(4) Conduct school visits during school sessions; administer hearing, vision and
tuberculin tests; administer first aid care to students and school staff and provide
advice to students and parents in regard to injury and illness; refer individuals and
families to social service agencies;
(5) Investigate and follow up communicable disease cases; locate previous contacts or
120294
2:24
exposed persons and arrange for necessary treatment;
(6) Perform such other duties and responsibilities determined by the Common Council
and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Public Health Nurse requires graduation
from a four (4) year college or university with major course work in nursing, including or
supplemented by courses in public health nursing, or an equivalent combination of
experience and training providing the following knowledge, abilities and skills, including:
(1) Knowledge and skill in the application of the principles and procedures of public
health nursing;
(2) Knowledge of the social and economic forces in society that affect health, and of
relevant family and group relationships;
(3) Knowledge of City health policies and procedures;
(4) Ability to grasp readily the principles underlying the disease preventive aspects of a
public health program;
(5) Ability to carry out general instructions and to make independent judgments in
relation to the application of nursing principles;
(6) Ability to express ideas clearly, orally and in writing;
(7) Ability to exercise tact, initiative and good judgment in dealing with people;
(8) Candidates for this position must possess a license as a registered nurse and be
certified as a public health nurse by the State of Wisconsin.
SEC. 2-3-25 CITY SANITARIAN.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The City Sanitarian shall be responsible for enforcing
environmental health sections of the State Code and City Ordinances and conducting
activities aimed at preventing disease-endangering situations by inspection, education and
recommending legislative action when appropriate.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The City Sanitarian shall:
(1) Inspect potential ordinance and health violations upon complaint, enlisting
conformance by the violator by persuasion and threat of court action.
(2) Inspect all Class A and B malt liquor license holders, at least annually, and upon
change of ownership, in cooperation with the Chief of Police and Fire Chief.
(3) Oversee follow-through with victims bitten by animals and subsequent inspection of
impounded animals.
(4) Provide education to individuals and the public on preventative and maintenance of
good health practices.
(5) Process and implement the agent of the State Division of Health programs.
(6) Coordinate and monitor dairy product inspections and rodent control.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The City Sanitarian shall be registered in the State of
Wisconsin. A Sanitarian is a person with education in the environmental sciences, who
applies those knowledges, skills and attributes to management of the environment for health
and safety.
SEC. 2-3-26 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Community Development Director shall be responsible for
managing and carrying out the activities of the Community Development Department,
120294
2:25
including responsibility for City planning, zoning, building inspections, code enforcement
and economic development. His activities shall be under the jurisdiction of the
Administration Committee. He shall report to the Mayor.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Community Development Director
shall:
(1) Meet with the public regarding zoning, development, code enforcement and provide
recommendations to City officials;
(2) Serve as Economic Development Coordinator, including responsibility for
downtown redevelopment, housing/business relocation and commercial and
industrial expansion;
(3) Oversee building inspection services;
(4) Maintain records, conduct surveys and provide data in carrying out City planning
functions;
(5) Work with other City employees, City officials and officials from other
municipalities in coordinating planning and development activities;
(6) Prepare applications for State and Federal grants and administer relative grants;
(7) Develop and carry out housing rehabilitation programs, including coordinating
community data and performing acquisition/relocation functions;
(8) Serve as Zoning Administrator;
(9) Act as an advisor to and secretary of the Planning Commission;
(10) Attend meetings of the Planning Commission, Common Council, boards and
committees as required;
(11) Assist in the selection of all new employees within his jurisdiction;
(12) Perform such other duties and responsibilities determined by the Common Council
and as set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Community Development Director
requires a minimum of three (3) to five (5) years of planning, zoning and community
development experience and a bachelor's degree in urban planning or a related area, or an
equivalent combination of experience and training which provides the following
knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of the principles and practices of planning and zoning;
(2) Knowledge of housing rehabilitation, methods, techniques, costs, energy
requirements, zoning requirements and building inspection methods;
(3) Knowledge of municipal laws, civil engineering methods and public works
administration;
(4) Knowledge of research methods and statistical analysis;
(5) Ability to organize and carry out projects;
(6) Ability to supervise the work of others;
(7) Ability to develop and maintain records and reports;
(8) Ability to establish and maintain working relationships with City officials,
employees, officials in other cities and the public;
(9) Ability to communicate, orally and in writing.
SEC. 2-3-27 BUILDING AND PLUMBING INSPECTOR.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Building and Plumbing Inspector shall be responsible for
inspection work in securing compliance with local and national building and plumbing
codes and regulations. His work involves the performance of both field and office work in
120294
2:26
carrying out municipal building and plumbing inspection programs and effecting
compliance with legally established specifications and requirements. He shall report to the
Community Development Director.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Building and Plumbing Inspector
shall:
(1) Inspect building construction and alterations including remodeling and additions for
conformity with building codes and approved plans and specification requirements;
check soil conditions for footing, size of excavations, setbacks, foundation walls,
vents, structural columns and beams; check location and layout of steel reinforcing;
check structural steel sections, wood trusses and roof braces, partitions, firebrick and
fireplaces;
(2) Inspect plumbing installation during construction for compliance with codes and
regulations and examine completed installations for workmanship and use of proper
materials;
(3) Inspect sewer, heating and related installations for compliance with codes and
regulations; issue building, plumbing, heating and electrical permits;
(4) Review plans and assist and advise builders, plumbers, contractors and others
regarding pertinent codes and regulations; consult with supervisors on procedures to
be followed in case that they are not clearly covered by Codes;
(5) Check complaints in regard to defective installations; assist in prosecution of
violators of regulations; review and handle complaints;
(6) Prepare and maintain necessary records and reports;
(7) Direct and monitor the sanitary health issues of the City and, through staff,
investigate complaints and maintain records;
(8) Perform such other duties and responsibilities determined by the Common Council
and set forth in this Code of Ordinances not enumerated above.
(c) POSITION REQUIREMENTS. The position of Building and Plumbing Inspector
requires a minimum of three (3) to five (5) years of experience in a variety of building
construction work, such as plumbing, electrical and HVAC (heating, ventilation and air
conditioning) and two (2) years of additional training beyond high school in a plumbing
apprenticeship or related field, or an equivalent combination of experience and training
which provides the following knowledge, abilities and skills:
(1) Knowledge of the methods, materials and techniques involved in building
construction, repair and alteration;
(2) Knowledge of the methods and practices involved in installing, repairing and
maintaining a variety of plumbing and allied installations, equipment and
appliances;
(3) Knowledge of national and local codes and regulations relating to building
construction and to plumbing and allied installations;
(4) Ability to interpret and enforce building, plumbing and allied codes;
(5) Ability to detect and locate defective building construction and plumbing
installations and to ascertain the stage of construction when defects are most easily
found and remedied;
(6) Ability to work from plans, blueprints and diagrams;
(7) Ability to contact building owners, contractors, craftsmen and others, and to develop
and maintain satisfactory working relationships on inspectional and regulatory
matters;
(8) Possession of a master plumber's license and certified by the State of Wisconsin.
120294
2:27
SEC. 2-3-28 LIBRARY DIRECTOR.
(a) PRIMARY FUNCTION. The Director is responsible for coordinating the library
functions and requirements of the Library Board, the community, the staff and local
government. The Director shall be the executive officer of the board and directly
responsible to it. Qualifications for the Directorship of the library will be a master's degree
in library science from a library school accredited by the American Library Association and
all other pertinent qualifications enumerated in Sec. PL 6.03, Wis. Adm. Code.
(b) MAJOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
(1) Board Relations. The Director shall:
a. Organize and plan agendas for Board meetings in consultation with the
President.
b. Notify Board members of meetings and prepare appropriate public notices.
c. Attend all Library Board or committee meetings, except when officially
excused by the President.
d. Assist Secretary in the preparation and distribution of minutes.
e. Prepare regular monthly reports and otherwise generally apprise the Board
of significant activities, events, problems and concerns of the library.
f. Formulate and recommend policies for Board approval and implement the
same.
(2) Planning. The Director shall:
a. Continually evaluate the effectiveness of library services in relation to
changing needs of the community and develop plans to meet those needs.
b. Evaluate future needs for library services and resources to meet those needs.
c. Prepare long-range plans for the library.
(3) Finance. The Director shall:
a. Prepare an annual budget for Board consideration and adoption.
b. Present the budget as adopted to the Common Council.
c. Represent the library's budgetary interests to the County Board.
d. Make or supervise expenditures of library funds.
e. Prepare bills for approval by the Board at regular meetings and subsequent
payment by the City.
f. Prepare monthly and yearly financial reports on budget accounts, receipts
and endowment funds and present an audit report to the Board.
g. Prepare and send to the Division for Library Services the required annual
report.
h. Prepare an annual review of library insurance policies and recommendations
for any changes.
(4) Personnel. The Director shall be responsible for all aspects of personnel
management, including:
a. Classification of staff positions and periodic revision of job descriptions.
b. Recruitment and interviewing of candidates for positions.
c. Recommendation of employee hiring, firing, promotion and merit bonuses
to the Board.
d. Scheduling, organizing and supervising work operations.
e. Establishment of work rules and regulations.
f. Training and professional development of employees.
g. Promotion of employee work satisfaction and general staff welfare.
120294
2:28
h. Preparation of annual evaluations of all staff members, except pages, aides
and temporary employees.
(5) Public and Patron Relations. The Director shall:
a. Recommend and administer public relations activities.
b. Establish and maintain effective working relationships with other
governmental and educational agencies, civil and community groups, the
general public and the news media.
c. Represent the Library at and speak before community, civic and other
groups regarding the objectives and activities of the library.
d. Be responsible for dealing with patron complaints.
(6) The Director shall supervise selection, acquisition and processing of library
materials to meet public needs within the structure of library selection policies and
budgetary limitations.
(7) The Director shall supervise housekeeping, maintenance and repair of the building
and grounds.
(8) The Director shall maintain a professional state-of-the-art awareness. This shall
include attendance at professional and other meetings as appropriate.
Updated: 8/18/2020
CHAPTER 4
Boards, Commissions and Committees
SEC. 2-4-1 BOARD OF REVIEW.
(a) COMPOSITION. The Board of Review shall consist of five (5) residents of the City,
none of whom may occupy any public office or be publicly employed. Such citizen
members shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the Common Council
for terms of five (5) years, one member to be appointed annually. The Board of Review
members shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by resolution or ordinance by
the Common Council. The City Clerk shall serve as secretary of the Board of Review.
(b) DUTIES. The duties and functions of the Board of Review shall be as prescribed in
Sections 70.46 and 70.47, Wis. Stats.
(c) BOARD'S DUTY. The Board shall carefully examine the assessment roll and correct all
apparent errors in description or computation. It shall add all omitted property but shall not
raise or lower the assessment of any property except after hearing, as provided by the
Statutes.
State Law Reference: Sections 70.46 and 70.47, Wis Stats.
SEC. 2-4-2 LIBRARY BOARD.
(a) ORGANIZATION; TERMS. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. §43.54, a Library Board is created
for the Elisha D. Smith Public Library and shall consist of seven (7) members.
(1) Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Common
Council commencing July first in the year of appointment for three (3) year terms,
except as otherwise provided below. Not more than one (1) member of the
Common Council shall at any time be a member of the Library Board. If appointed,
a member of the Common Council shall serve a one (1) year term commencing May
first in the year of appointment.
(2) The Mayor shall appoint the Menasha Joint School District Superintendent of
Schools or representative to the Library Board.
(3) Members shall be residents of the City, except that the Menasha School District
Superintendent or representative may be a resident of another municipality.
(4) A county may appoint from among residents of the library’s county service area
additional members as prescribed by Wis. Stats. §43.60(3).
(b) DUTIES AND POWERS. The Library Board shall have the duties and powers prescribed
by Wis. Stats. §43.58.
SEC. 2-4-3 WATER AND LIGHT COMMISSION.
(a) HOW CONSTITUTED.
(1) There is hereby created a Water and Light Commission for the City of Menasha
which shall consist of five (5) citizen members of the city who shall serve without
salary. The Common Council shall elect five (5) citizens as members of the
Commission. One of said members shall be elected for a term of one (1) year; one
Updated: 8/18/2020
of said members shall be elected for a term of two (2) years; one of said members
shall be elected for a term of three (3) years; one of said members shall be elected
for a term of four (4) years; and one of said members shall be elected for a term of
five (5) years. The Common Council at its first meeting in the month of September
in each year shall select a member of the Water and Light Commission who shall
hold said office for a term of five (5) years and until his successor is elected and
qualified, commencing on the first day of October following his election. Such
Commissioners, so elected, shall take and file the official oath with the City Clerk
within five (5) days after notice of their election. In case of a vacancy in said
Commission by death, resignation, removal from the City or neglect or refusal of
any person elected to take and file his official oath, the same shall be filled for the
unexpired term by an election by the Common Council. The Commission shall
elect its own officers.
(2) In the event the Council shall appoint the then incumbent Mayor and in turn each
succeeding Mayor upon assuming the office to be a member of the Commission
with full voting powers and all other powers, duties and responsibilities of a
Commissioner. It is the intent of this Section to keep the voting members of the
Commission always at five (5), of which no more than two (2) may be elected
officials of the City government (Charter Ordinance).
(b) SPECIFIC POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall have authority to appoint a
manager, superintendents and such other employees as in their judgment is deemed
necessary and they shall have the power to fix the compensation of said superintendent and
employees. They shall make the rules for their own proceedings and for the government of
their Commission and shall at all times keep full and accurate minutes of their proceedings
and transactions and shall make annual reports to the Common Council and such other
reports, at such other times, as the Common Council may direct or require. The
Commission shall keep books of accounts in the manner and form prescribed by the Public
Service Commission; said books of account shall be open to the public.
(c) OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall have such general powers in
the construction, extension, improvement, and operation of the Water and Light Department
as shall be designated by ordinance or resolution of the Common Council, or by the laws of
the State of Wisconsin.
(d) AUDITING. The Department expenditures shall be audited by the Commission and if
approved, be paid by the City Treasurer upon warrants signed by the President and
Secretary of the Commission. The receipts in the Department shall be paid to the Secretary,
or his assistant and said receipts are to be turned over to the City Treasurer at least once in
every week.
NOTE: Charter Ordinance.
SEC. 2-4-4 BOARD OF APPEALS.
(a) ESTABLISHMENT. A Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed as specified in
Section 62.23(7)(e) of the Wisconsin Statutes. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist
of five (5) members, appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common
Council. The members shall be compensated as determined by the Council and shall be
removable by the Common Council for cause upon written charges and upon public
hearing. The Mayor shall designate one of the members chairman.
Updated: 8/18/2020
(b) POWERS. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement of the City's zoning ordinances.
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of City zoning and floodplain
zoning regulations upon which the Board of Appeals is required to pass.
(3) To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of the
City's zoning regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing
to special conditions, a literal enforcement will result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the zoning code shall be observed, public
safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done; provided, however, that no
such action shall have the effect of establishing in any district a use or uses not
permitted in such district.
(4) To permit the erection and use of a building or premises in any location subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards in harmony with the general purposes of the
zoning code, for such purposes which are reasonably necessary for public
convenience and welfare.
(5) The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or in part or may
modify any order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to
be made regarding the premises. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from or to decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter on which it is required to pass, or to effect any variation in the
requirements of the City's zoning ordinances. The grounds of every such
determination shall be stated and recorded. No order of the Zoning Board of
Appeals granting a variance shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months
from the date of such order unless a zoning permit is obtained within such period
and the erection or alteration of a building is started or the use is commenced within
such a period.
(c) MEETINGS AND RULES. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at
the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. All hearings
conducted by the said Board shall be open to the public. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examination and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office
of the City Clerk and shall be a public record. The Board shall adopt its own rules of
procedure not in conflict with this Section or with applicable Wisconsin Statutes.
(d) OFFICES. The Common Council shall provide suitable meeting space for holding the
Zoning Board of Appeals' hearings.
(e) APPROPRIATIONS. The Common Council shall appropriate funds to carry out the
duties of the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Board shall have the authority to expend,
under regular procedures, all sums appropriated to it for the purpose and activities
authorized herein.
State Law Reference: Section 62.23(7), Wis. Stats.
Updated: 8/18/2020
SEC. 2-4-5 CITY PLAN COMMISSION.
(a) COMPOSITION. The Plan Commission shall consist of seven (7) voting members as
follows: The Mayor, one (1) Alderman, Director of Public Works, Chairperson of the Parks
and Recreation Board and three (3) citizens.
(b) APPOINTMENT.
(1) Election/Appointment of Alderman Members. At its annual meeting in April of
each year the Common Council shall, by two-thirds vote of its members, elect one
(1) of its number as member of the City Plan Commission for a period of one (1)
year from and after the first day of May next ensuing.
(2) Appointment and Terms of Citizen Members. The Chairperson of the Parks and
Recreation Board shall have a one (1) year term. The three (3) citizen members
shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Common Council to hold
office for a period ending respectively one (1), two (2) and three (3) years thereafter
from the succeeding first of May. Annually during April, members shall be
appointed for a term of three (3) years.
(c) ORGANIZATION OF COMMISSION. The Mayor shall serve as presiding officer. The
Plan Commission shall organize by the election of a vice-chairman and such other officers
as may in their judgment be necessary. The Plan Commission shall receive such
compensation as determined by the Common Council.
(d) VACANCIES. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of the
unexpired term in the same manner as appointment for the full term.
(e) COMPENSATION. No compensation shall be paid for service on the Commission.
Citizen members shall take the official oath as required by Sec. 19.01, Wis. Stats., said oath
to be filed with the City Clerk.
(f) RECORD. The Plan Commission shall keep a written record of its proceedings to include
all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Four (4) members shall
constitute a quorum but all actions shall require the affirmative approval of a majority of the
members present of the Commission.
(g) DUTIES. The Plan Commission shall have the following duties and powers:
(1) Mandatory Referrals to Commission. The Common Council or officer of the City
having final authority thereon shall refer to the Plan Commission, for its
consideration and report before final action is taken by the Council, public body or
officer, the following matters: the location of any statue or other memorial; the
location, acceptance, extension, alteration, vacation, abandonment, change of use,
sale, acquisition of land for or lease of land for any street, alley or other public ways,
park, playground, airport, area for parking vehicles, or other memorial or public
grounds; the location, extension, abandonment or authorization for any public utility
whether publicly or privately owned; all plats of lands in the City or within the
territory over which the City is given platting jurisdiction by Chapter 236, Wis.
Stats.; the location, character and extent or acquisition, leasing or sale of lands for
public or semi-public housing, slum clearance, relief of congestion, or vacation
camps for children; and the amendment or repeal of any land use ordinance. Unless
such report from the Commission is made within thirty (30) days, or such longer
period as may be stipulated by the Common Council, the Council or other public
body or officer may take final action without it.
(2) Miscellaneous Powers. The Commission may make reports and recommendations
relating to the plan and development of the City to public officials and agencies,
public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations
Updated: 8/18/2020
and citizens. It may recommend to the Common Council programs for public
improvements. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the Commission,
within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work.
The Commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions,
may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain
necessary monuments and markers thereon. In general, the Commission shall have
such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote
municipal planning in cooperation with the Common Council.
(3) The Comprehensive Plan.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide procedures and criteria
for creating, adopting, amending, and updating the City of Menasha
Comprehensive Plan. The Plan Commission may create, adopt, and, as
necessary, amend, extend or add to the Comprehensive Plan, subject to
Common Council confirmation, for the physical development of the City
including areas outside of its boundaries which, in the Plan Commission's
judgment, bear relation to the development of the City.
b. Applicability. This section shall apply to the creation, adoption,
amendment, and updating to any elements of the City of Menasha
Comprehensive Plan.
c. Comprehensive Plan Elements. The Comprehensive Plan, with the
accompanying maps, plats and descriptive and explanatory matter, shall
show the Commission's recommendations for such physical development,
and shall include, among other things without limitation because of
enumeration, the following elements as required by State of Wisconsin
planning law (§66.1001):
1. Issues and opportunities element
2. Housing element.
3. Utilities and community facilities element
Agricultural, natural and cultural resources element.
5. Economic development element.
6. Intergovernmental cooperation element.
7. Land-use element.
8. Implementation element.
d. Comprehensive Plan Adoption.
1. The Commission shall create and adopt the Comprehensive Plan in
accordance with Wisconsin State planning laws (§66.1001).
2. The Comprehensive Plan adopted under this subsection shall be
updated no less than once every 10 years in accordance with
Wisconsin State planning laws (§66.1001).
e. Comprehensive Plan Amendments.
1. Applicability. The criteria and requirements of this section shall
apply to all applications or proposals for changes to the
comprehensive plan text, goals, objectives, policies, map
designations, or other map changes unless specifically exempted.
The following types of comprehensive plan amendments may be
considered through the comprehensive plan amendment process:
(i) Future Land Use map changes including land use and
growth boundaries;
(ii) Minor technical Future Land Use map corrections;
Updated: 8/18/2020
(iii) Future Land Use or other text changes;
(iv) Changes or corrections to other maps within the plan;
(v) The amendment or adoption of the Utilities and
Community Facilities element of the comprehensive plan
that occurs concurrently with the adoption or amendment of
the city budget; and,
(vi) Amendments necessary to address an emergency situation.
2. Procedure.
(i) In November of each year, the Community Development
Department shall publish notice in the official city
newspaper to announce the City of Menasha
Comprehensive Plan amendment process is open to
accepting applications. At that time, the Community
Development Department will invite public comments and
suggestions regarding changes to the comprehensive plan.
(ii) Applications for all comprehensive plan amendments shall
be considered legislative actions and be subject to the
procedures in this section.
(iii) Applicants proposing Future Land Use Map changes must
schedule a pre-application meeting with staff.
(iv) Applications shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department in writing by the last working
day of December in order to be considered during the
annual review process.
(v) A fee established by the Common Council must accompany
the following changes:
a. Future Land Use map changes including land use and
growth boundaries;
b. Future Land Use or other text changes;
(vi) Two public hearings shall be scheduled and held: an
informal public hearing before the Plan Commission and a
formal public hearing before the Common Council. They
shall be noticed as follows:
? Informal Public Hearing. For all amendments, a
Class One (1) notice shall be published in the
official city newspaper at least seven (7) days prior
to the informal public hearing. Additionally, for
amendments specific to a property or properties,
property owners within one hundred feet (100’) of
the subject property or properties shall be notified
by first class mail at least seven (7) days prior to the
hearing.
? Formal Public Hearing. For all amendments, a Class
One (1) notice shall be published in the official city
newspaper at least thirty (30) days prior to the
formal public hearing. Additionally, for
amendments specific to a property or properties,
property owners within one hundred feet (100’) of
the subject property or properties shall by notified
Updated: 8/18/2020
by first class mail at least thirty (30) days prior to
the hearing. Said notice may be sent together with
the notice for the informal public hearing.
(vii) The Plan Commission shall, by resolution (§66.1001(4)(b)),
make a recommendation to the Common Council within
thirty (30) days of the date of the review meeting or the
Common Council may take action without it.
(viii) The Common Council shall have the authority to approve
or deny the proposed amendment(s). Amendments may not
take effect until the Common Council enacts an ordinance
that adopts the amendment(s) (§66.1001(4)(c)).
(ix) Copies of the adopted amendment(s) shall be sent to the
reviewing authorities as required by State of Wisconsin
planning law (§66.1001) within 30 days of adoption.
3. Submittal Requirements. All requests for comprehensive plan
amendments shall be made in writing, using forms supplied by the
Community Development Department, and shall include the
information listed below. The Department of Community
Development, Plan Commission and/or the Common Council may
require additional information be submitted before taking action.
(i) Future Land Use map amendments:
? Completed application form, signed by the applicant or
owner.
? Property map showing adjacent properties and clearly
outlining the subject parcel(s).
? Where the property is not owned by the applicant, a
letter from the owner giving consent to apply for the
comprehensive plan amendment.
(ii) A description of the purpose of the comprehensive plan
amendment.
(iii) Justification and support for the proposed map amendment.
(iv) All other amendments:
(v) Completed application form.
4. Approval Criteria.
(i) Approval for Future Land Map Changes. To change a
designation, the proposed Future Land Use map
amendment must meet at least one of the following criteria
listed below. Additional documentation may be needed to
address the public facilities, needs, and services that may be
necessary to support the proposed designation. Such
services may include water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage,
transportation (all modes), police and fire protection, and
schools.
? Respond to a substantial change in conditions beyond
the property owner's control applicable to the area
within which the subject property lies;
? Better implement applicable comprehensive plan
policies than the current map designation;
? Correct an obvious mapping error;
Updated: 8/18/2020
? Address an identified deficiency in the Comprehensive
Plan.
(ii) Approval Criteria for Amendments to Text and Other
Maps. To change text, including goals, objectives and
policies, or any map other than the Future Land Use Map,
the amendment must meet at least one of the criteria below:
? Better implement applicable comprehensive plan
policies;
? Correct errors;
? Replace outdated data;
? Address an opportunity for physical, economic, social
or cultural improvement of the city.
(iii) The comprehensive plan amendment(s) shall take into
consideration the comprehensive plans adopted by
neighboring communities, the East Central Wisconsin
Regional Planning Commission, Calumet and Winnebago
Counties, and relevant regional issues.
(iv) Comprehensive plan text amendments and amendments to
other maps within the plan shall be consistent with the State
of Wisconsin comprehensive planning law (§66.1001).
SEC. 2-4-6 PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD.
(a) APPOINTMENTS. The Parks and Recreation Board shall consist of seven (7) persons
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Common Council. Each Board member shall
hold such office for a term of three (3) years, said terms to end September 30 in the year of
expiration. Six (6) of the members shall be citizen members and one (1) member shall be
an Alderman annually selected at the Council's organizational meeting. All members,
including the Chairperson, shall have voting privileges.
(b) COMPENSATION; OATHS. Board members shall receive such compensation as shall
be determined by the Council from time to time. Members shall take an official oath as
prescribed by Sec. 19.01, Wis. Stats., to be filed with the City Clerk.
(c) OFFICERS. The Board shall annually elect one (1) member as chairperson.
(d) PROCEDURE. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. The Chairperson, or acting
Chairperson, shall be considered in determining a quorum. Action shall be by a majority of
those present and voting. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for governing the
conduct of its meetings.
(e) POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board shall have all the powers conferred by law upon
parks and recreation commissions and shall be chargeable with all the duties so required
such as recommend, oversee work, and oversee funds of all parks, playgrounds, and
recreational activities as part of properties within the City. The Parks and Recreation Board
is specifically empowered and directed:
(1) To govern, manage, control, improve and care for all public parks located within, or
partly within and partly without, the corporate limits of the City and secure the quiet,
orderly and suitable use and enjoyment thereof by the people; also to adopt rules and
regulations to promote these purposes.
(2) To acquire in the name of the City for park purposes by gift, purchase, devise,
bequest or condemnation, either absolutely or in trust, money, real or personal
Updated: 8/18/2020
property, or any incorporeal right or privilege, provided gifts to the City of money or
other property, real or personal, either absolutely or in trust, for park purposes shall
be accepted only after they have been recommended by the Board to the Common
Council and approved by said Common Council by resolution.
(3) To recommend to the Council and the Planning Commission the buying, leasing,
selling or transferring of lands in the name of the City for park purposes within or
without the City, as well as the leasing of buildings and boat slips within the
Menasha Marina.
(4) To execute every trust imposed upon the use of property or property rights by the
deed, testament or other conveyance transferring the title of such property to the
City for park purpose.
(5) To have the powers necessary and convenient for the effective and efficient
management, control, supervision and operation of the City park system and
recreation programs, and the Menasha Marina subject to budgetary approval by the
Common Council.
(6) To have jurisdiction of parks, swimming pool and playgrounds throughout the City
and assume full responsibility for the equipping, developing and maintaining the
physical facilities of the park system.
(7) To establish such rules and regulations to promote the quiet, orderly and suitable use
of the City parks, playgrounds, and the Menasha Marina as the Board shall deem
necessary.
(8) To establish rules and regulations, including user fees as deemed necessary as
approved by the Council and desirable for the proper use, care and operation of
parks, park facilities, recreation programs, Menasha Marina and other activities
under their control, provided however that such rules and regulations do not conflict
with the laws of the State of Wisconsin or this Code of Ordinances.
(9) To have jurisdiction of the Menasha Marina and assume full responsibility for the
equipping, developing and maintaining the physical facilities of the Marina.
(10) And such other and further duties as may be necessary for the proper carrying out of
the purposes of said Board.
(11) Nothing in Sec. 2-4-6 affects the statutory or ordinance authority of the Planning
Commission.
(f) PUBLIC RECREATION PROGRAM. The City Parks and Recreation Board shall
determine the recreational needs and shall have jurisdiction over the public recreation
program of the City and shall be empowered to:
(1) Establish park rules and program policies.
(2) Cooperate and coordinate with public school activities.
(3) Cooperate with any private recreational activities.
(4) Approve any schedules of all recreational activities in public parks and school
buildings.
(g) RECORD. The Parks and Recreation Board shall keep a written record of its proceedings
to include all actions taken, a copy of which shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(h) FINANCE.
(1) Budget. The Board shall assist in preparing an annual budget for submission to the
Common Council, which budget shall reflect the Board's recommendations as to
maintenance or acquisition of City parks, open spaces, park and related facilities,
recreation programs, Menasha Marina and equipment, summer or seasonal
employees, etc. Said annual budget request shall contain estimates as to revenues to
be derived from recreation programs or activities as well as estimated expenditures
Updated: 8/18/2020
for operating the parks and recreation system and the Menasha Marina.
(2) Deposits. All revenues and income from the operation of park and recreation
programs shall be deposited with the City Treasurer as general revenue of the City
or to be applied to Tax Incremental Financing debt if otherwise required by law.
(3) Monetary Contributions. All moneys donated to the City specifically for park or
recreation use shall be deposited in City accounts as a non-lapsing fund or reserve
for such specific use.
SEC. 2-4-7 POLICE COMMISSION; NEENAH-MENASHA JOINT FIRE
COMMISSION
(a) POLICE COMMISSION. The Board of Police Commissioners shall consist of five (5)
citizens who are residents of the City, three (3) of whom shall constitute a quorum. The
Mayor shall annually, between the last Monday of April and the first Monday of May,
appoint in writing, to be filed with the secretary of the Commission, one member for a
term of five (5) years, subject to confirmation by the Common Council. No appointment
shall be made which will result in more than three (3) members of the Commission
belonging to the same political party. The Commission shall keep a record of its
proceedings. The Board of Police Commissioners shall have the power and authority
prescribed by s.62.13, Wis. Stats., and this Code of Ordinances.
(b0 NEENAH-MENASHA JOINT FIRE COMMISSION.
(1) ORGANIZATION AND APPOINTMENT. The Board of the Neenah Menasha
Joint Fire Commission shall consist of 6 citizens, 4 of whom shall constitute a
quorum. Three members shall be appointed by the Mayor of Neenah and three
shall be appointed by the Mayor of Menasha. Each Mayor shall annually,
between the last Monday of April and the first Monday of May, appoint in writing
to be filed with the Secretary of the Board, one member for a term of 3 years,
subject to confirmation by the Common Council. Appointments to the initial joint
fire commission shall provide for two members (one from each city) appointed for
one year; two members (one from each city) appointed for two years; and two
members (one from each city) appointed for three years. No appointment shall be
made which shall result in more than 3 members of the Board belonging to the
same political party. Such initial appointments shall also be subject to
confirmation by the Common Council. The chair of the Commission shall be
elected by the board annually at its organizational meeting in May for a one-year
term. The chair of the commission shall rotate annually between the Cities of
Neenah and Menasha. The vice-chair of the commission shall be from the
opposite city than the chair.
(2) POWERS AND DUTIES. See §62.13, Wisconsin Statutes.
State Law Reference: Section 62.13, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 2-4-8 LANDMARKS COMMISSION.
(a) The Landmarks Commission shall be organized by and function under the general
direction of the Common Council.
Updated: 8/18/2020
(b) It is hereby declared a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and use of improvements of special character, special historic interest or
value is a public benefit in that such protection, enhancement, perpetuation and continued
use is believed to:
(1) Serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry, thereby strengthening
the economy of the city.
(2) Safeguard elements of the City's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and
reflected in historic structures, sites, and districts.
(3) Stabilize and improve property values.
(4) Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past.
(5) Promote the use of historic structures, sites and districts for the education,
pleasure and welfare of the people of the City.
(6) Integrate the modern environment with historic buildings and sites.
(c) DEFINITIONS. The following words and terms wherever they appear in this chapter,
shall be construed as herein defined. Words not defined shall be interpreted in accordance
with definitions found in any standard dictionary.
(1) Alteration. A change in the external architectural features of any historic structure
or in the interior of any such structure if the interior feature is specifically
included in the historic designation; a change in the landscape features of any
historic site or place; or work having an adverse effect upon designated
archaeological resources.
(2) Commission. The Landmarks Commission created under this section.
(3) Certificate of Appropriateness. Document issued by the Landmarks Commission,
following a prescribed review procedure, certifying that the proposed actions by
an applicant are found to be acceptable in terms of design criteria relating to the
individual property or the historic district.
(4) Historic Structure. Any improvement which has a special character or special
historic interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural
characteristics of the City, state or nation and which has been designated as a
historic structure pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(5) Historic Site. Any parcel of land whose historic significance is due to substantial
value in tracing the history of aboriginal people, or upon which a historic event
has occurred, and which has been designated a historic site under this section, or
an improvement parcel, or part thereof, on which is situated a historic structure
and any abutting improvement parcel, or part thereof, used as and constituting part
of the premises on which the historic structure is situated.
(6) Historic District. An area designated by the Common Council on recommendation
of the Commission, composed of two or more improvement parcels that together
comprise a district of special character or special historic interest or value as part
of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City, state or nation,
and which has been designated as a historic district pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
(7) Improvement. Any building, structure, place, work of art or other object
constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such
improvement.
(8) Improved Parcel. Unit of property which includes a physical betterment
constituting an improvement and the land embracing the site thereof, and is
treated as a single entity for the purpose of levying real estate taxes. Provided,
Updated: 8/18/2020
however, that the term "improved parcel" shall also include any unimproved area
of lands which is treated as a single entity for such tax purposes.
(d) COMPOSITION AND TERMS.
(1) A Landmarks Commission is created whose members shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to the confirmation by the Common Council, as follows:
a. Community Development Director as an ex officio, non-voting member;
b. Six members at large;
c. An Alderman appointed for one (1) year at annual reorganization meeting.
(2) The Mayor shall consider prospective member's interest, knowledge, or expertise
in historical, architectural, geological, archeological, or cultural preservation.
Consideration shall also be given as to whether any member owns property in the
designated historic district or a building otherwise designated as historic by the
commission.
(3) All at large members shall be appointed for three-year terms with the first
appointments staggered such that three of the original appointees serve three-year
terms, two serve two-year terms and the remaining member serves a one-year
term. The alderman member shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the Common Council at its annual organization meeting. The Community
Development Director shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Landmark's
Commission for an unlimited term.
(4) Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as
appointments for a full term.
(5) The Landmarks Commission shall select a chair, vice-chair and secretary and shall
then adopt rules and regulations for its operation consistent with the provisions of
this section.
(e) POWERS AND DUTIES. The Landmarks Commission shall have the following powers
and duties:
(1) To develop appropriate criteria and standards for identifying and evaluating
neighborhoods, places, structures and improvements which might be classified as
landmarks, landmark sites, historic districts or specially designated landmarks.
(2) To identify landmarks, landmark sites, and historic districts within the City
subject to official designation by the Common Council; and which upon such
official designation shall be subject to the provisions herein.
(3) Other Duties. In addition to those duties already specified in this Section, the
Commission shall:
a. Cooperate with the historic preservation officer for the State of Wisconsin,
and the State Historic Preservation Review Board, in attempting to include
such properties hereunder designated as historic structures, sites, or
districts in the National Register of Historic Places.
b. Where necessary and appropriate recommend to the Planning Commission
that the City acquire an interest in historic properties by purchase,
donation or bequest, including the use of "preservation easements", where
appropriate.
c. Establish appropriate markers for officially designated landmarks and
historic districts.
Updated: 8/18/2020
d. Promote public education, interest and support for the preservation and
enhancement of historic landmarks, landmark sites, and historic districts.
e. To advise owners of landmarks, landmark sites or structures of the
benefits, problems and techniques of preservation and encourage their
participation in preservation activities.
(f) BUDGET AND FINANCE. For the purposes enumerated in Section 1(b) of this
Chapter, the Landmarks Commission may:
(1) Any funds deemed necessary shall be included in the Community Development
Department budget. The Community Development Director shall monitor all
expenditures consistent with City policy.
(2) Upon authorization by the Common Council, apply for state and/or federal
funding.
(3) Upon authorization by the Common Council, raise funds and accept grants or gifts
from public and private sources. Such funds shall be placed in a separate account
as may be established by the City Comptroller and may be used upon
authorization by the Common Council.
(4) Recommend contracting for services using such funds as may be authorized in the
Community Development Department's budget or from other sources as may be
approved by the Common Council. All such contracts require Common Council
approval and shall be administered by the Community Development Director.
(g) DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC STRUCTURES. For purposes of this ordinance, a
historic structure, historic site, or historic district designation may be placed on any site,
natural or improved, including any building, improvement, or structure located thereon,
or any area of particular historic, architectural, archeological, or cultural significance to
the City, such as historic structures, sites or districts which:
(1) Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political, economic, or social history of the
nation, state, or community; or
(2) Are identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state,
or local history; or
(3) Embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen
inherently valuable for a study of a period, style, method of construction, or of
indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or
(4) Are representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer, or architect
who influenced his age; or
(5) Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important to prehistory or
history.
a. Designation of historic structures and historic sites.
1. The commission may, after notice and public hearing, designate
historic structures and historic sites or rescind such designation or
recommendation after application of the criteria in section (4),
above. At least 10 days prior to such hearing, the commission shall
notify the owners of record, as listed in the office of the city
assessor, who are owners or property in whole or in part situated
within 100 feet of the boundaries of the property affected. These
owners shall have the right to confer with the commission prior to
final action by the commission on the designation. Notice of such
hearing shall also be published as a Class 1 Notice under the
Wisconsin Statutes. The commission shall also notify the
following: department of public works, redevelopment authority,
Updated: 8/18/2020
parks department, fire and police departments, health department,
building inspection department, plan commission, and the city
assessor. Each such department may respond to the commission
with its comments on the proposed designation or rescission.
2. The commission shall then conduct such public hearing and, in
addition to the notified persons, may hear expert witnesses and
shall have the power to subpoena such witnesses and records as it
deems necessary. The commission may conduct an independent
investigation into the proposed designation or rescission. Within
ten days after the close of the public hearing, the commission may
designate the property as either a historic structure or historic site,
or rescind the designation. After the designation or rescission has
been made, notification shall be sent to the property owner or
owners. Notification shall also be given to the city clerk, building
inspection department, plan commission, and the city assessor. The
property owner may appeal such decision to the common council
within 30 days. The commission shall cause the designation or
rescission to be recorded, at city expense, in the county register of
deeds office.
(h) DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC SIGNS.
(1) A sign may be designated to be eligible for listing on the Historic Sign Inventory
when it has been in existence, but not necessarily continually visible or displayed,
for a period of forty (40) years or more, and meets at least one (1) or more of the
following criteria:
a. Is identified with the history of a product, business or service advertised.
b. Reflects the history of the building or a Historic District on/in which the
sign is located.
c. Is integrated into the architecture of the building on which they sign is
located and may be exemplary of a historically significant architectural
style of the building.
d. The sign, if removed from a Historic Structure, will harm the integrity of
the building or cause significant damage to its materials.
e. Is recognized as a popular focal point in the area by reason of its
prominent location, long existence, large size or unusual design.
f. Exemplifies or reflects the City’s cultural, social, economic, political,
engineering and/or architectural history.
(2) The Commission may, after notice and public hearing, evaluate and designate a
sign as historically significant or recommend rescinding a previous designation of
historical significance upon application of criteria provided in this section above.
A review of eligibility for listing on the Historic Sign Inventory may be initiated
by the Landmarks Commission or the owner of an improvement parcel which
contains a potential Historic Sign. Where a property owner petitions the
Commission to review eligibility for listing on the Historic Sign Inventory, the
owner shall provide sufficient supporting documentation for Commission
evaluation.
(3) At least ten (10) days prior to such hearing, the Commission shall, by regular mail
or person service, notify persons listed as owners of relevant improvement parcels
containing a potential Historic Sign and owners of improvement parcels sistuated
Updated: 8/18/2020
within one hundred (100) feet of the boundary of the improvement parcel
containing the potential Historic Sign of the date, time and place of hearing.
Notice of such hearing shall also be published as a Class 2 Notice, under the
Wisconsin Statutes. Publication shall cure any defect in the service of notice. The
Commission shall also notify the Director of the Department of Community
Development. The Department of Community Development may respond to the
Commission within fifteen (15) days of notification with its comments, if any, on
the proposed listing of the sign on the Historic Sign Inventory or rescission of
such listing. The Commission shall then receive such reports and conduct a public
hearing. It may call witnesses, including experts, and may subpoena such
witnesses and records as it deems necessary. The Commission may view the sign
in issue and direct the conduct of an independent investigation into the proposed
listing of the sign on the Historic Sign Inventory or rescission of such listing.
(4) The Commission shall approve or deny the designation of the sign as a Historic
Sign. If approved for designation as a Historic Sign, the Commission shall direct
that it be included on a Historic Sign Inventory and, if located on a building or
structure designated as a Historic Structure or site, identified as such. Historic
signs shall be exempt from the provision of Article F of the Menasha Code of
Ordinances. The Historic Sign Inventory shall be on file and available for public
inspection in the Community Development Department.
(i) PRESERVATION AND ADOPTION OF HISTORICAL PROPERTIES. Guideline
criteria in the development of historic district plans are as follows:
(1) Regulation of construction, reconstruction, and exterior alteration shall conform to
the criteria and standards in subsection (G)(1).
(2) All new structures shall be constructed to a height visually compatible with the
building and environment with which they are visually related.
(3) The gross volume of any new structure shall be visually compatible with the
buildings and environment with which it is visually related.
(4) In the street elevation of a building, the proportion between the width and height
in the façade should be visually compatible with the building and environment
with which it is visually related.
(5) The proportions and relationships between doors and windows in the street façade
should be visually compatible with the buildings and environment with which it is
visually related.
(6) The rhythm of solids to voids, created by openings in the façade, should be
visually compatible with the buildings and environment with which they are
visually related.
(7) The existing rhythm created by existing building masses and spaces between them
should be preserved.
(8) The materials used in the final façade should be visually compatible with the
buildings and environment with which they are visually related.
(9) The texture inherent in the façade should be visually compatible with the
buildings and environment with which it is visually related.
(10) Colors and patterns used on the façade (especially trim) should be visually
compatible with the buildings and environment with which they are visually
related.
Updated: 8/18/2020
(11) The design of the roof should be visually compatible with the buildings and
environment with which they are visually related.
(12) The landscape plan should be sensitive to the individual building, its occupants
and their needs. Further, the landscape treatment should be visually compatible
with the buildings and environment with which it is visually related.
(13) The street façade should blend with other buildings via directional expression.
When adjacent buildings have a dominant horizontal or vertical expression, this
expression should be carried over and reflected.
(14) Architectural elements should be incorporated as necessary to relate the new with
the old and to preserve and enhance the inherent characteristics of the area.
a. Review and adoption procedure.
1. Landmarks Commission
The Landmarks commission shall hold a public hearing when
considering the plan for a historic district. Notice of the time,
place, and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication as
a Class 1 Notice under the Wisconsin Statutes in the official city
paper. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing
shall also be sent by the city clerk to the council member of the
aldermanic district or districts in which the historic district is
located, and the owners of record, as listed in the Office of the city
assessor, who are owners of the property within the proposed
historic district or are situated in whole or in part within 100 feet of
the boundaries of the proposed historic district. Said notice is to be
sent at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing.
Following the public hearing, the Landmarks commission shall
vote to recommend, reject, or withhold action on the plan. This
recommendation shall be forwarded to the city plan commission
and the common council.
2. The City Plan Commission
The plan commission shall review the historic district plan and
make a recommendation to the common council. The plan
commission shall make its recommendation on the historic district
plan within 45 days.
3. The Common Council
The common council, upon receipt of the recommendation from
the Landmarks commission and plan commission, shall hold a
public hearing, with notice to be given as noted in subsection 1.,
above, and shall, following the public hearing, either designate or
reject the historic district. Designation of the historic district shall
constitute adoption of the plan in ordinance form prepared for that
district and direct the implementation of said plan. Property owners
may appeal such decision to the common council within 30 days.
(j) REGULATION OF CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION, AND EXTERIOR
ALTERATION.
(1) Certificate of Appropriateness. A Certificate of Appropriateness is required before
a building permit can be issued for the demolition, new construction, exterior
alteration, modification or addition to a designated historic property. Any building
permit not issued in conformity with this ordinance shall be considered void.
Updated: 8/18/2020
Acceptable exterior alterations include, but are not limited to, the construction of
additions, the installation of siding, windows, doors, awnings, and signage, or the
application of paint or other exterior coatings.
a. Such application shall contain a description and sketch of the proposed
changes.
b. A copy of the procedures for Landmarks Commission review shall be
provided in writing to each applicant.
c. Within ten (10) days of the referral from the Director of Community
Development, the Landmarks Commission shall schedule a meeting to
review said application. The Landmarks Commission shall utilize the
following criteria to evaluate the appropriateness of the proposed change.
1. In the case of a designated historic district, structure or site, the
proposed work should not detrimentally change, destroy or
adversely affect any exterior architectural feature of the
improvement upon which said work is to be done; and,
2. In the case of the construction of a new structure upon a historic
site, the exterior of such improvement should not adversely affect
the external appearance of other neighboring improvements. Such
improvement shall also harmonize with the external appearance of
other neighboring improvements on such site; and,
3. In the case of any property located in a designated historic district
the proposed construction, reconstruction, or exterior alteration
shall conform to the objectives and design criteria of the Historic
Preservation Plan.
(2) If the Landmarks Commission determines the landmark, landmark site, or
property within a historic district would be adversely affected by the proposed
change or if for any other reason the Commission rejects the request, the
Commission shall state in writing the reasons.
(3) Should the Landmarks Commission fail to act within the specified time period or
refuse to issue a certificate of appropriateness due to the failure of the proposal to
meet the guidelines, the applicant may appeal to the Common Council.
(4) If a Certificate of Appropriateness is granted, building permit applications shall be
made to the Director of Community Development. The application for a
Certificate of Appropriateness must be signed by the owner or his authorized
representative, and the form must be signed by the chairman of the Landmarks
Commission stating its approval, denial, or approval with conditions and the
reasons for the decision.
(5) When considering an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness for new
construction, alteration, repair, or restoration, the Commission shall use the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation as guidelines in making its
decisions. In addition, the Commission may adopt more specific guidelines for
local historic districts and local historic buildings. These guidelines serve as the
basis for determining the approval, approval with modifications, or denial of an
application.
a. The Secretary's Standards for Rehabilitation are:
1. A property will be used as it was historically or be given a new use
that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials, features,
spaces, and spatial relationships.
Updated: 8/18/2020
2. The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved.
The removal of distinctive materials or alteration of features,
spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a property will be
avoided.
3. Each property will be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical
development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from
other buildings, will not be undertaken.
4. Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance in
their own right will be retained and preserved.
5. Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction
techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a
property will be preserved.
6. Deteriorated historic features will be repaired rather than replaced.
Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature will match the old in design,
color, texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement of
missing features will be substantiated by documentary and physical
evidence.
7. Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, will be undertaken
using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to
historic materials will not be used.
8. Archeological resources will be protected and preserved in place. If
such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures will be
undertaken.
9. New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction
will not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial
relationships that characterize the property. The new work will be
differentiated from the old and will be compatible with the historic
materials, features, size, scale, and proportion, and massing to
protect the integrity of the property and its environment.
10. New additions and adjacent or related new construction will be
undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
(k) REGULATION OF DEMOLITION AND NEW CONSTRUCTION. No portion of a
designated historic structure or site shall be demolished, nor shall a new building be
constructed or new use established in a historic district unless such demolition,
construction or use complies with this Section.
(1) A permit is required as described in Section (g). Application shall be made to the
Director of Community Development utilizing the procedures enumerated in
Section (g)(1-2).
(2) In determining whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition,
new construction or alternate use, the Landmarks Commission shall consider:
a. Whether the building or structure is in such a deteriorated condition that it
is not structurally or economically feasible to preserve or restore it.
Updated: 8/18/2020
b. Whether any prospective new structure, or change in use would be
compatible with the buildings and environment or the district in which the
subject property is located.
c. Whether the building or structure is of such architectural or historic
significance that this demolition would be detrimental to the public
interest and contrary to the general welfare of the people of the City and
the state.
d. Whether demolition of the property would be contrary to the purpose and
intent of this chapter and to the objectives of the Historic Preservation
Plan.
e. Whether the building or structure is of such old and unusual or uncommon
design, texture and/or material that it could not be reproduced or be
reproduced only with great difficulty and/or expense.
f. Whether retention of the building or structure would encourage study of
American history, architecture and design or develop and understanding of
American culture and heritage.
(3) These provisions shall not apply to any building or structure which has been
determined by the Building Inspector in consultation with the Community
Development Director to fulfill the requirements of Sec. 66.05 Wis. Stats., and Sec.
11-7-5 and Sec. 15-5-13 City of Menasha Code, or if the City or any other
governmental entity is proceeding under Ch. 32 Wis. Stats.
(l) PENALTIES.
(1) Any person who alters, or constructs a building or structure in violation of this chapter
shall be required to restore the building or structure and its site to its appearance prior
to the violation. Such restoration shall be completed within such time frame as set by
the Landmarks Commission using materials, building design and construction
methods approved by said Commission. Failure to complete the restoration in
conformance with the requirements of the Landmarks Commission shall constitute a
violation of this ordinance. Violations shall be subject to the penalties listed in
Section 13-1-135 of the Menasha Code of Ordinances. Each day the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Any person who demolishes a building or structure in violation of Section (h) shall
forfeit a sum equal to fifty percent (50%) of the value of the building or structure,
should the Landmarks Commission and Common Council make a finding after a
hearing that the demolished structure had major historical significance. The value
shall be determined by using the assessed value from the previous year's property tax
assessment as equalized by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue.
(3) The Community Development or his/her designee, with the advice and consent of the
City Attorney, is authorized to issue a citation or to institute any formal proceeding to
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of this chapter.
(m) MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC STRUCTURES, HISTORIC SITES, AND
HISTORIC DISTRICTS. Every person in charge of an improvement or structure in a
historic district shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions and all interior portions
thereof which, if not maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior portions of such
improvement or structure to fall into a state of disrepair. This provision shall be in addition
to all other provisions of law requiring such improvement to be kept in good repair.
(n) CONDITIONS DANGEROUS TO LIFE, HEALTH, OR PROPERTY. Nothing
contained in this Section shall prohibit the making of necessary construction, reconstruction
alteration or demolition of any historic structure, any improvement on a historic site or in a
Updated: 8/18/2020
historic district pursuant to order of any governmental agency or pursuant to any court
judgment, for the purpose of remedying emergency conditions as determined by the
Community Development Director to be dangerous to life, health, or property. In such
cases, no approval from the Landmarks Commission shall be necessary.
(o) VACANT BUILDING REGISTRATION.
(1) INTENT. It is the intent of this ordinance to require owners of vacant buildings in the
Central Business District (C-2) to register with the City of Menasha and to maintain
these buildings to prevent creation of public nuisance; preserve property values, and
promote the comfort, health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare
of the people of the City of Menasha.
(2) VACANT DEFINED: For the purpose of this Section, a vacant building is defined as
any building, zoned Central Business District (C-2), that has commercial units that are
abandoned, unoccupied, empty, or has a retail business that is not open to the public
more than 13 days a month. A day is a period of time, not less than 4 consecutive
hours in a 24 hour period, which a business is open to the public and an employee of
that business is present at the property.
(3) REGISTRATION:
a. The property owner of any building, within the Central Business District (C-2),
that is or has become vacant, shall file a registration statement with the
Community Development Department, on forms provided by the department,
within 30 days, after the effective date of this ordinance, after the building
becomes vacant or within 30 days after assuming ownership, whichever is later.
1. It is the responsibility of the property owner to register their building with the
city if any of the commercial units within the building are vacant.
2. If the building is not vacant the burden of proof shall lie with the property
owner.
3. There is no fee for the initial registration of a vacant building.
b. The property owner shall renew the registration for successive 6-month periods as
long as the building remains vacant and shall pay a registration renewal fee of
$250 for each registered building.
1. The property owner of any vacant building for which registration is
required by this section shall provide access to the city to conduct an
exterior and interior inspection of the building to determine compliance
with building and health code requirements, following reasonable notice.
If any property owner of a vacant building does not provide access to the
property at the scheduled time, the Community Development Director or
designee may apply for and obtain a special inspection warrant pursuant
to §66.0119, Wis. Stats.
2. Every vacant building shall be subject to city inspection at least once every
six months.
3. In the event the inspector finds a code violation anywhere on the property,
a re-inspection fee of $500 per vacant building inspection will be
imposed until the violation has been corrected. Once the violation is
corrected the fee shall return to $250 per vacant building inspection.
4. A fee of $85 shall be imposed for each time the inspector is unable to gain
access to the structure for the inspection at the time scheduled.
Updated: 8/18/2020
(4) In the event the building no longer meets the definition of vacant, it is the
responsibility of the property owner to contact the city and provide proof the
building is occupied. At this time the building will be removed from the vacant
building registration list.
(5) FAILURE TO REGISTER. Any property owner that fails to register or re-register
a vacant building as required under this section shall, upon conviction, forfeit not
less than $500 nor more than $2,000, together with the costs of the action.
(6) A building vacant for more than a year or a building that has failed multiple
inspections may be recommended by the Landmarks Commission to the Plan
Commission to be blighted pursuant to Wisconsin State Statute 66.1333(2m)(bm).
(7) FEES COLLECTED: All funds collected through the Vacant Building Ordinance
shall be put into the CBD Façade Renovation Grant/Loan Program.
SEC. 2-4-9 HOUSING AUTHORITY.
(a) APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATIONS AND TENURE OF COMMISSIONERS.
(1) The Mayor shall, with the confirmation of the Council, appoint five (5) persons who
are citizens of the City as Commissioners of the Housing Authority. No
Commissioner may be connected in any official capacity with any political party nor
shall more than two (2) be officers of the City.
(2) The Commissioners who are first appointed shall be designated by the Mayor to
serve for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), and five (5) years respectively
from the date of their appointment. Thereafter, the term of office shall be five (5)
years. A Commissioner shall hold office until his successor has been appointed and
has qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner
as other appointments. Three (3) Commissioners shall constitute a quorum. The
Mayor shall file with the City Clerk a certificate of the appointment or
reappointment of any Commissioner and such certificate shall be conclusive
evidence of the due and proper appointment of such Commissioner if such
Commissioner has been duly confirmed as herein provided and has duly taken and
filed the official oath before entering upon his office. A Commissioner shall receive
no compensation for his services but he shall be entitled to the necessary expenses
including traveling expenses incurred in the discharge of his duties.
(b) SELECTION OF OFFICERS. When the office of the first chairman of the Housing
Authority becomes vacant, the Authority shall select a chairman from among its members.
The Authority shall select from among its members a vice-chairman, and it may employ a
secretary (who shall be executive director), technical experts and such other officers, agents
and employees, permanent and temporary, as it may require, and shall determine their
qualifications, duties and compensation. The Authority may call upon the City Attorney or
chief law officer of the City for such legal services as it may require. The Authority may
delegate to one or more of its agents or employees such powers or duties as it may deem
proper.
(c) The Housing Authority shall have all the powers and perform all of the duties conferred
upon it by Section 66.40, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 2-4-10 COMMITTEE ON AGING.
(a) COMPOSITION; TERMS. The Committee on Aging shall consist of eight (8) members
Updated: 8/18/2020
appointed to three (3) year terms by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common
Council. The Public Health Director and Active Older Adult Programming Coordinator of
the Neenah/Menasha YMCA shall be a permanent members of the Committee on Aging.
All other terms commence on May 1 in the year of appointment.
(b) DUTIES. The Committee shall make recommendations to the Mayor and Common
Council regarding the well-being of senior citizens.
SEC. 2-4-11 BOARD OF HEALTH.
(a) Composition; Terms. The Board of Health shall consist of five (5) members and shall
include the Public Health Director and City Physician. Their membership shall be without
regard to their place of residence. The remaining members shall be appointed by the Mayor
and confirmed by the Common Council. An effort shall be made to attempt to have one of
the three citizen members a physician, a registered nurse, or some other person whose
employment or training is in a health related field.
(b) Duties. The board shall have all duties specified by Sec. 251.03 and 251.04, Wis. Stats.,
and shall make such recommendations to the Mayor and Common Council regarding the
health of the citizens of Menasha.
SEC. 2-4-12 NEENAH-MENASHA SEWAGE COMMISSION.
(b) GENERAL POWERS. The Commission shall have the power to plan, design, purchase,
acquire, construct, extend, add to, improve, replace, control, operate, manage, maintain and
hold title to such real and personal property, including, but not limited to, a treatment plan,
interceptor mains, and the plans and specifications developed in connection therewith, in
order to provide the Contracting Municipalities with adequate and sufficient sewage
collection, treatment and disposal services and to produce a treatment plant effluent which
meets effluent standards established by the current Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to the Commission. The Commission shall further
modify, enlarge, abandon or replace such facilities, in whole or in part, from time to time, as
deemed necessary by the Commission to efficiently transport, treat, or dispose of the
Contracting Municipalities' waste water, and to continue to produce a treatment plant
effluent which meets effluent standards established by the current Wisconsin Pollution
Discharge Elimination System permit issued to the Commission and the Commission shall
have the power to handle the disposal of solids (Sludge) generated by the above process,
and the power of Sludge Disposal Operations as hereinbefore defined. The Commission
shall apply and enforce the pretreatment program as required by the Clean Water Act of
1977 (Public Law 95-917) and the General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New
Sources of Pollution (40 C.F.R. Part 403) promulgated by the EPA and any amendments
thereto.
(e) ORDINANCES, RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Commission shall itself adopted
any ordinance and any rules and regulations necessary or expedient to enable it to carry out
its powers and duties as set forth herein. Such ordinances, rules and regulations shall at a
minimum allow the Commission to do the following:
(1) Deny or condition any increased or new discharges to the Local Sewer System or the
Regional System;
(2) Require compliance by Industrial Users with Federal, State of Wisconsin,
Updated: 8/18/2020
Commission and Contracting Municipality pretreatment standards;
(3) Control industrial discharges to the Local Sewer Systems and the Regional System
to insure compliance with (ii) above;
(4) Requirement the development by an Industrial User of a compliance schedule for
the installation of facilities required by the rules and regulations of the Commission;
(5) Require submission by Industrial Users of self-monitoring reports necessary to
assess and assure compliance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the
Commission, upon reasonable notice; and,
(6) No ordinances or rules and regulations shall be promulgated by the Commission
until after a public hearing has been held where all interested parties have had an
opportunity to be heard with respect thereto.
(i) PENALTIES. Any person who shall violate any rule, regulation or order of the
Commission shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100) nor
more that Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000), per day of violation, together with the costs of
prosecution. Each and every day of a continuing violation shall be subject to a daily
forfeiture, together with all costs of prosecution. In addition, any extraordinary expenses
paid or incurred by the Commission as a result of any such violation shall be reimbursed by
the violator.
SEC. 2-4-13 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY STEERING COMMITTEE.
(a) The Information Technology Steering Committee shall consist of the Comptroller,
Information Technology Manager, one Council Member, and four Department Heads or
Supervisory Employees. The Comptroller and Information Technology Manager shall be
permanent members. The Information Technology Supervisor shall be an ad-hoc member
and may vote on issues in the absence of the Information Technology Manager. Any
Department Head or Supervisory Employee may participate in any Information Technology
Committee meeting.
(b) The Chair or Vice-Chair of the Administration Committee shall be the Council Member.
The Mayor shall appoint the Department Head or supervisory employee members.
Confirmation of members does not require Common Council confirmation. Consideration
shall be given in appointing the Department Head members to those who are expected to
have major automation projects scheduled. Department Head or supervisory employee
appointments shall be made to be effective May 1st.
(c) The Council member shall be the Steering Committee Chair. The Committee shall meet at
the call of the Chair, but shall meet at least monthly.
(d) The duties of the Steering Committee shall be to lend direction to the Information
Technology by using short range and long range plans as a guideline. The Steering
Committee shall also insure that the short range and long range plans are appropriately
being implemented. The Steering Committee shall further have the power to recommend to
the Common Council that either the short range or long range plans be updated. Each
member of the committee shall be entitled to one vote on issues before the committee. Any
member may designate a supervisory employee or a Department Head to vote in the absence
of that member, provided, however, that no member shall be allowed to cast more than one
vote. Non-member Department Heads or supervisory employees participating in any
meetings shall not be entitled to vote on Committee issues.
(e) The Steering Committee shall have the power to call in any external experts and consultants
it deems necessary to achieve its duties consistent with budgetary guidelines.
Updated: 8/18/2020
SEC. 2-4-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING MEETINGS AND PUBLIC
NOTICE.
(a) REGULAR MEETINGS; PUBLIC NOTICE. Every Board, Committee and
Commission created by or existing under the ordinances of the City shall:
(1) All meeting notices shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall cause the notice to
be published and/or posted in full compliance with the Open Meeting Law
Requirements.
(2) Post, at the City Hall, an agenda of the matters to be taken up at such meeting.
(b) SPECIAL MEETINGS. Nothing in Subsection (a) shall preclude the calling of a special
meeting or with dispensing with the publication of notice or such posting of the agenda, for
good cause, but such special meetings shall nonetheless comply in all respects with the
provisions of Section 19.81 to 19.89, Wis. Stats.
(c) Unless otherwise provided by statute or ordinance, all citizen members appointed to any
City committee, board, or commission, or authority by the Mayor and/or Common
Council are subject to removal at the pleasure of the Common Council. When such
removal requires a finding of cause, inefficiency, or neglect of duty, said finding may be
based upon any of the following:
(1) The member’s unexcused absence from more than three consecutive meetings of
the committee, board, commission, or authority.
(2) The member’s absence for any reason, excused or unexcused, from 50% or more
of the respective body’s meetings within any twelve-month period of time.
(d) The presiding officer of each City committee, commission, board, and authority shall
promptly notify the Mayor if a member of such body does not comply with the attendance
standards described herein. In the event the absent member is the presiding officer,
any member of the body may notify the Mayor of such absences. If it is desired to remove
such member, the Common Council shall conduct a hearing related to the charges prior
to determining whether to remove such member from office. Removal requires an
affirmative vote of ¾ of all Council members. Upon removal, the Mayor shall declare the
office vacant and shall appoint a new member pursuant to all applicable ordinances and
statutes.
(e) An absence shall be considered unexcused under this section when the appointed official
does not notify the presiding officer or the City Clerk of the absence prior to the meeting.
This section does not preclude removal for cause due to conduct other than absences.
2-4-15 MUNICIPAL COURT
(a) JOINT MUNICIPAL COURT CREATED.
Pursuant to Sections 755 and 66.0301, Wis. Stats., there is hereby created and established
a Joint Municipal Court to be designated Municipal Court for the Cities of Menasha and
Neenah, said court shall become operative on May 1, 2002.
(b) MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
(1) Qualifications: The Joint Court shall be under the jurisdiction of and presided
over by a Municipal Judge, who shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in
Updated: 8/18/2020
Wisconsin, and who resides in one of the municipalities that is a party to the
agreement forming this joint court.
(2) Oath and Bond: The Judge shall, after election or appointment to fill a vacancy,
take and file the official oath as prescribed in Sec. 755.02 (1), Wis. Stats., and at
the same time execute and file an official bond in the amount of $1,000.00. The
Judge shall not act until the oath and bond have been filed as required by Sec.
19.01, Wis. Stats., and the requirements of Sec. 755.03 (2) have been complied
with.
(3) Salary: The initial salary of the Municipal Judge shall be $24,660 effective
August 1, 2006. Thereafter, the salary of the Municipal Judge shall be increased
on each subsequent May 1st by the same percentage increase approved for the City
of Neenah non-represented employees pay plan for that year, rounded to the
nearest dollar.
(c) ELECTIONS.
The Municipal Judge shall be elected at large in the spring election for a term of four
years commencing May 1, 2002. All candidates, for the position of Municipal Judge,
shall be nominated by nomination papers as provided in Sec. 8.10, Wis. Stats., and
selection at a primary election if such is held as provided in Sec. 8.11, Wis. Stats. The
State elections board shall serve as filing officer for the candidates. Electors in all
municipalities that are parties to the agreement shall vote for judge.
(d) JURISDICTION.
(1) The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over incidents occurring on or after
May 1, 2002 as provided in Article VII, Sec. 14 of the Wisconsin Constitution,
Sec. 755.045 and Sec. 755.05, Wis. Stats., and as other provided by State Law. In
addition, it shall have exclusive jurisdiction over actions in the municipalities that
are parties to the agreement, seek to impose forfeitures for violations of municipal
ordinances, resolutions and by-laws.
(2) The Municipal Judge may issue civil warrants to enforce matters under the
jurisdiction of the Municipal Court under Sec. 755.045 (2), Sec. 66.122 and Sec.
66.123, Wis. Stats.
(3) The Municipal Court has jurisdiction over juvenile offenders when a municipality
that is party to the agreement enacts an ordinance under the authority of Sec.
938.17, Wis. Stats.
(e) MUNICIPAL COURT OPERATIONS.
(1) Hours: The Municipal Court shall be open at such location and at such times as
determined by the governing bodies of the municipalities that are parties to the
agreement and the Municipal Judge.
(2) Employees: The Judge shall, in writing, appoint such clerks and deputy clerks as
are authorized and funded by the municipalities.
(f) PROCEDURE IN MUNICIPAL COURT.
The Joint Municipal Court for the Cities of Menasha and Neenah shall operate under
municipal court procedure found in Sec. 800.001 et. Seq., Wis. Stats., and Sec. 938, Wis.
Stats., and actions thereunder shall be commenced by Uniform Municipal Citation.
Forfeiture amounts, under the City ordinance, shall match the Uniform Bail and Bond
Schedule for the State of Wisconsin then in effect and shall include the penalty
assessment under Sec. 165.86 (2) (c), Wis. Stats., and the jail assessment under Sec.
302.46, Wis. Stats. Penalty assessments collected shall be forwarded to the state
treasurer. Jail assessments collected shall be forwarded to the county treasurer. Pursuant
to Sec. 814.65, Wis. Stats., the court costs for each citation issued is Thirty-eight Dollars
Updated: 8/18/2020
($38.00) of which Five Dollars ($5.00) shall be forwarded to the state secretary of
administration. The court shall collect forfeitures and report to the City Clerk the name,
offense and judgment in each case. In the case of nonpayment of forfeitures, the court,
after affording an opportunity to the accused to be heard, may punish an accused for
contempt under Sec. 800.12, Wis. Stats., and may impose a monetary sanction not to
exceed Fifty Dollars ($50.00) and/or imprisonment not to exceed seven (7) days and may
issue warrants for the enforcement of its power of contempt under Sec. 800.095 and Sec.
800.12, Wis. Stats. If allowed by state law, driving privileges may be revoked by the
Municipal Judge in lieu of imprisonment. The Municipal Court may order restitution to
victims of municipal ordinance violations up to Four Thousand Dollars ($4,000.00) and
order contempt as a sanction for the nonpayment thereof, as provided for under Sec.
800.093, Wis. Stats.
(g) ABOLITION.
The parties to the Sec. 66.0301, Wis. Stats., Agreement, agree and understand that the
Joint Municipal Court cannot be abolished during the elected term of the Judge. The
parties agree to provide written notice of withdrawal from the Joint Municipal Court on
or before October 1 of the year preceding the end of the Municipal Judge’s term.
Updated: 7/6/2011
CHAPTER 1
Finance
SEC. 3-1-1 PREPARATION OF TAX ROLL AND TAX RECEIPTS.
(a) Taxes shall be paid and collected in the City of Menasha as provided in Chapter 74.031,
Wis. Stats., and as herein provided.
(b) Twenty-five percent (25%) of real estate tax plus all special assessments shall be known as
the first installment and shall be paid on or before January 31.
(c) If a taxpayer complies with provisions of the preceding Subsection, the first one-third (1/3)
of the remaining seventy-five percent (75%) may be paid without penalty on or before
March 31 of each year, and such payment shall be known as the second installment. The
second one-third (1/3) of the seventy-five percent (75%) of such postponed tax shall be
known as the third installment and may be paid on or before May 31; the fourth installment
may be paid on or before July 31. Any such payments not made within the time specified
shall have added interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or fraction thereof from
the date such payment became due until paid; provided, however, any such tax remaining
unpaid after July 31 shall become subject to interest as provided by statute, namely, one
percent (1%) per month as of January 1 until paid.
State Law Reference: Sections 70.65, 74.03(1)(6) and 74.08, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 3-1-2 DUPLICATE TREASURER'S BOND ELIMINATED.
(a) BOND ELIMINATED. The City of Menasha elects not to give the bond on the City
Treasurer provided for by Sec. 70.67(1), Wis. Stats.
(b) CITY LIABLE FOR DEFAULT OF TREASURER. Pursuant to Sec. 70.67(2), Wis.
Stats., the City shall be obligated to pay, in case the City Treasurer shall fail to do so, all
state and county taxes required by law to be paid by such City Treasurer to the County
Treasurer.
State Law Reference: Section 70.67, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 3-1-3 CITY BUDGET.
(a) DEPARTMENTAL ESTIMATES. On or before September 1 of each year, each officer,
department, board and committee shall file with the City Comptroller an itemized statement
of disbursements made to carry out the powers and duties of such officer, department, board
or committee during the preceding fiscal year, and a detailed statement of receipts and
disbursements on account of any special fund under the supervision of such officer,
department, board or committee during such year, and of the conditions and management of
such fund; also detailed estimates of the same matters for the current fiscal year and for the
ensuing fiscal year. Such statements shall be presented in the form prescribed by the City
and shall be designated as "Departmental Estimates," and shall be as nearly uniform as
possible for the main division of all departments
Updated: 7/6/2011
(b) CONSIDERATION OF ESTIMATES. The Mayor shall consider such departmental
estimates in consultation with the department head.
(c) PROPOSED BUDGET. On or before October 15 of each year, the Mayor shall prepare
and submit to the Common Council an executive budget presenting a financial plan for
conducting the affairs of the City for the ensuing calendar year. The budget shall include
the following information:
(1) The expense of conducting each department and activity of the City for the
ensuing fiscal year and corresponding items for the current year and last
preceding fiscal year.
(2) An itemization of all anticipated income from the City from sources other
than general property taxes and bonds issued, with a comparative statement
of the amounts received by the City from each of the same or similar sources
for the last preceding and current fiscal year.
(3) An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general property taxes
which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the
proposed expenditures.
(4) Such other information as may be required by the Common Council and by
state law.
(5) The annual budget submitted by the Mayor and approved by the Common
Council shall maintain the undesignated general fund balance at not less
than 6% of the general fund budgeted expenditures.
(d) COPIES OF BUDGET. The City Clerk shall provide a reasonable number of copies of
the budget summary thus prepared for distribution to citizens. The entire fiscal budget shall
be available for public inspection in the Office of the City Clerk and City Library during
regular office hours.
State Law Reference: Sec. 62.12, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 3-1-4 CHANGES IN BUDGET.
(a) Upon written recommendation of the Administration Committee, the Council may at any
time, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire membership, transfer any portion of an
unencumbered balance of an appropriation to any other purpose or object. Notice of such
transfer shall be given by publication within ten (10) days thereafter in a newspaper in
general circulation in the City.
(b) Before any transfer of funds is made from one account to another, the Comptroller shall, in
a separate memorandum, advise the Mayor and Common Council as to the remaining
appropriation in the various funds, should such transfer become effective.
SEC. 3-1-5 CITY FUNDS TO BE SPENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH
APPROPRIATION; TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
(a) No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the City, nor shall any obligation for the
expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the
adopted budget or when changed as authorized by Section 3-1-4 of this Chapter. At the
close of each fiscal year, any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the
general fund and shall be subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be made by the
Updated: 7/6/2011
Common Council, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of
improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed within such year, and
any such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall
have been accomplished or abandoned.
(b) Before any transfer of funds is made from one account to another, the City Treasurer shall,
in a separate memorandum, advise the Mayor and Common Council as to the remaining
balances in the various funds, should such transfer become effective.
SEC. 3-1-6 FISCAL YEAR.
The calendar year shall be the fiscal year.
SEC. 3-1-7 PUBLIC DEPOSITORIES.
The Common Council shall designate the public depository or depositories within this state within
which City funds shall be deposited, and when the money is deposited in such depository in the
name of the City, the City Treasurer and bondsman shall not be liable for such losses as are defined
by state law. The Treasurer shall invest and the interest arising therefrom shall be paid into the City
Treasury. A copy of the resolution designating public depositories shall be filed annually with the
State Commissioner of Banking.
State Law Reference: Chapter 34 and Sec. 62.12(7), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 3-1-8 FINANCIAL CLAIMS AGAINST CITY.
(a) PAYMENT OF FINANCIAL CLAIMS. In addition to, and in lieu of the other methods
provided by statute for the payment of financial claims against the City, financial claims
against the City may be paid from the City Treasury after the Comptroller shall have audited
and approved each such claim as a proper charge against the Treasury and shall have
endorsed his approval thereon, after having determined that the following conditions have
been complied with:
(1) That funds are available therefor, pursuant to the budget approved by the Council;
(2) That the item or service covered by such claim has been duly authorized by the
proper official, department head, or board or commission;
(3) That the item or service has been actually supplied or rendered in conformity with
such authorization;
(4) That the claim is just and valid, pursuant to law. The Comptroller may require the
submission of such proof and evidence to support the foregoing as in his discretion
he may deem necessary.
(b) PAYMENT OF REGULAR WAGES OR SALARIES. Regular wages or salaries of
City officers and employees shall be paid by payroll, verified by the proper City official,
department head, board or commission and filed with the Comptroller in time for payment
on the regular pay day.
(c) CLAIMS REPORT. The Comptroller shall file with the Common Council monthly a list
of the claims approved, showing the date paid, name of claimant, department identity and
amount.
Updated: 7/6/2011
SEC. 3-1-9 TEMPORARY INVESTMENT OF FUNDS NOT IMMEDIATELY
NEEDED.
The City Treasurer may invest any City funds not immediately needed, pursuant to Sections
66.04(2) and 219.05, Wis. Stats.
State Law Reference: Sections 66.04(2) and 219.05, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 3-1-10 FACSIMILE SIGNATURES.
In lieu of the personal signatures of the City Clerk, City Treasurer and Mayor, there may be affixed
on order checks the facsimile signatures of such persons adopted by them and approved by the
Common Council, but the use of the facsimile signature shall not relieve such official from any
liability to which he is otherwise subject, including the unauthorized use thereof. Any depository
shall be fully warranted and protected in making payment on any check bearing such facsimile
notwithstanding that the same may have been placed thereon without the authority of the designated
persons.
SEC. 3-1-11 RECEIVING MONEY; RECEIPT FOR SAME.
(a) The City Treasurer or his deputies shall not receive any money into the Treasury from any
source except on account of taxes levied and collected during the fiscal year for which he or
she may then be serving, without giving a receipt therefor in the manner specified by the
Common Council.
(b) Upon the payment of any money (except for taxes as herein provided), the City Treasurer
shall make out a receipt in triplicate for the money so received. The Treasurer shall charge
the amount thereof to the Treasury and credit the proper account. The payment of the
money to any receiving agent of the City or to the City or to the Treasurer shall be
safeguarded in such manner as the Common Council shall direct.
State Law Reference: Section 66.113, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 3-1-12 STATEMENT OF REAL PROPERTY STATUS.
(a) FORMS AUTHORIZED.
(1) The City Treasurer is authorized to prepare a "Statement of Real Property Status"
form which will include such information as is normally sought by interested parties
when ownership of real property is transferred. The form may include the amount
of taxes, the amount of outstanding special assessments, etc.
(2) The Engineering Department is authorized to prepare a form which will include
information on proposed improvements for sewers, water mains, street construction,
curb and gutter, public hearings, etc.
(3) The Assessor is authorized to prepare a form which will include assessments for
land and buildings, size of lot, legal description, zoning, dwelling size, and age of
dwelling.
Updated: 7/6/2011
(4) The Building and Plumbing Inspector and the Health Officer are authorized to
prepare a form which will include any notices of needed repairs, alterations,
violations and corrections which have to be make to the property before it may be
sold.
(b) FEE ESTABLISHED. The Treasurer is authorized to charge a compilation fee to be set
by the Treasurer and to be approved by the Common Council for all forms listed in this
section.
(c) REQUESTS. Requests for the above shall be made at least forty-eight (48) hours before
the closing of the transaction and a check for the fee must be enclosed with the request.
SEC. 3-1-13 ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE BILLING PROCEDURES.
Billings by the City may be paid within thirty (30) days after billing without interest. Thereafter,
interest shall be charged at the rate of one and one-half percent (1-1/2%) per month or any fraction
thereof, until the following fifteenth (15th) day of November. Bills not paid on or before the
fifteenth (15th) day of November shall have added to the total amount due one and one-half percent
(1-1/2%) and said charges shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge and become a lien
upon real estate.
SEC. 3-1-14 ANNUAL AUDITS.
A firm or firms of certified public accountants shall be employed by the City, subject to the
confirmation of the Common Council, to conduct a detailed audit of the City's financial transactions
and its books, and to assist the Finance Officer in the management of the City's financial affairs.
The books audited shall, in addition to the City financial records of the office of the City Clerk,
include the City Treasurer's books, Police Department records, and any other books of any boards,
commission, officers or employees of the City handling City moneys.
SEC. 3-1-15 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF TAXES.
Taxes shall be paid and collected in the City of Menasha as provided in Chapter 74.12, Wis. Stats.,
and as herein provided:
(a) Twenty-five percent (25%) of real estate taxes plus all special assessments shall be known
as the first installment and shall be paid on or before January 31.
(b) If taxpayer complies with provisions of the preceding paragraph, the first one-third (1/3) of
the remaining seventy-five percent (75%) may be paid without penalty on or before March
31 of each year, and such payment shall be known as the second installment. The second
one-third (1/3) of the seventy-five percent (75%) of such postponed tax shall be known as
the third installment and may be paid on or before May 31; the fourth installment may be
paid on or before July 31. Any such payments not made within the time specified shall
have added thereto interest at the rate of eight-tenths (8/10) of one percent (1%) per month
or fraction thereof from the date such payment became due until paid, provided, however,
any such tax remaining unpaid after July 31 shall become subject to interest as provided by
statute; namely eight-tenths (8/10) of one percent (1%) per month as of January 1 until paid.
SEC. 3-1-16 MOBILE HOME PARKING FEE.
Updated: 7/6/2011
(a) On January 1, the Assessor shall determine the total fair market value of each mobile home
in the taxation district subject to the monthly parking fee. The fee shall be applicable to
mobile homes moving into the tax district any time during the year. The City Clerk shall
equate the fair market value, apply the appropriate tax rate and notify the mobile home
owner of the monthly fee to be collected.
(b) The City of Menasha elects, pursuant to state law, to have the park operator collect the
monthly parking fee from the mobile home owner.
(c) Pursuant to Sec. 66.058(3), Wis. Stats., the annual license fee shall be Seventy-five Dollars
($75.00) and shall be paid prior to January 1 of the year following the initial license. There
shall be a Ten Dollar ($10.00) fee for transfer of a license.
(d) Failure of the park operator or the mobile home owner to comply with the reporting
procedures under Sec. 66.058, Wis. Stats., shall subject said owner or operator to the
procedures and penalties under Sections 70 and 74, Wis. Stats., as well as the forfeiture
provisions of Section 1-1-7 of this Code of Ordinances.
120294
3:1
CHAPTER 2
Special Assessments
SEC. 3-2-1 COMMON COUNCIL MAY LEVY SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
(a) The City of Menasha by resolution of its Common Council may levy and collect special
assessments upon property in a limited and determinable area under its police powers for any
municipal work or improvement and may provide for the payment of all or any part of the
cost of the work or improvement. In addition to other methods approved by law, special
assessments for any public work or improvement or any special charge for current services
may be levied in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(b) The favored procedure in the City for proceeding with making specially assessable public
improvements as generally set forth in this Chapter is not intended in any way to disregard or
to bar proceeding under other methods provided by law for making of public improvements
and for the levying of assessments therefor. Nor is this Chapter intended to be an exhaustive,
detailed recodification of the state law under said statutory section. Detailed requirements
still require reference to said statutory section and the subsections there under. The purpose
hereof is to generally define and establish local procedures.
State Law Reference: Section 66.62, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 3-2-2 RESOLUTION AND REPORT REQUIRED.
(a) Prior to making any such special assessments, the Common Council shall declare by
preliminary resolution its intention to exercise its police powers for a stated municipal
purpose. Such resolution shall describe generally the contemplated purpose, the limits of the
proposed assessment district, the number of installments in which the special assessments
may be paid or that the number of installments will be determined at the hearing required
under Section 3-2-5 of this Chapter and direct the proper municipal officer or employee to
make a report thereon. Such resolution may limit the proportion of the cost to be assessed.
(b) The report required by Subsection (a) shall consist of:
(1) Preliminary or final plans and specifications.
(2) An estimate of the entire cost of the proposed work or improvement.
(3) An estimate, as to each parcel of property affected, of:
a. The assessment of benefits to be levied.
b. The damages to be awarded for property taken or damages.
c. The net amount of such benefits over damages or the net amount of such
damages over benefits.
(4) A statement that the property against which the assessments are proposed is
benefited, where the work or improvements constitute an exercise of the police
power. In such case, the estimates required under Subsection (3) shall be replaced by
a schedule of the proposed assessments.
(5) A copy of the report when completed shall be filed with the City Clerk for public
inspection.
(c) When the Common Council determines by resolution that the hearing on the assessments be
held subsequent to the completion of the work or improvement or rendering of the service,
120294
3:2
the report required by Sec. 66.60(3), Wis. Stats., and Subsections (a) and (b) above shall
contain a statement of the final cost of the work, service or improvement in lieu of an
estimate of the cost.
SEC. 3-2-3 COSTS THAT MAY BE PAID BY SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.
The cost of any work or improvement to be paid in whole or in part by special assessment on
property may include the direct and indirect cost thereof, the damages occasioned thereby, the
interest on bonds or notes issued in anticipation of the collection of the assessments, a reasonable
charge for the services of the administrative staff of the City and the cost of any architectural,
engineering and legal services, and any other item of direct or indirect cost which may reasonably be
attributed to the proposed work or improvement. The amount to be assessed against all property for
any such proposed work or improvement shall be apportioned among the individual parcels in the
manner designated by the Common Council.
SEC. 3-2-4 EXEMPTIONS; DEDUCTIONS.
(a) If any property deemed benefited shall by reason of any provision of law be exempt from
assessment therefor, such assessment shall be computed and shall be paid by the City.
(b) A parcel of land against which has been levied a special assessment for the sanitary sewer or
water main laid in one of the streets upon which it abuts shall be entitled to such deduction or
exemption as the Common Council determines to be reasonable and just under the
circumstances of each case when special assessment is levied for the sanitary sewer or water
main laid in the other street upon which such corner lot abuts. Under any circumstances the
assessment will not be less than the long way of such lot. The Common Council may allow
a similar deduction or exemption from special assessments levied for any other public
improvement.
SEC. 3-2-5 NOTICE OF PROPOSED OR APPROVED PROJECT.
(a) NOTICE REQUIREMENTS. On the completion and filing of the report and final
resolution with the City Clerk required in Section 3-2-5(b)(5) of this Chapter, the City Clerk
shall prepare a Notice of Hearing, which notice shall comply with Sec. 66.60(7), Wis. Stats.,
and state the nature of the proposed or approved work or improvement, the general boundary
lines of the proposed assessment district, the place and time at which the report may be
inspected and the place and time at which all interested persons, their agents or attorneys
may appear before the Common Council or Committee thereof and be heard concerning the
matters contained in the preliminary resolution and report. Such notice shall be signed by
the City Clerk who shall cause the same to be published at least once in the official
newspaper and shall mail a copy of such notice at least ten (10) days before the hearing to
every interested person whose post office address is known or can be ascertained with
reasonable diligence. The hearing shall commence not less than ten (10) days and not more
than forty (40) days after the publication or mailing of said notice.
(b) WAIVER OF NOTICE, ASSESSMENTS UNDER. The Council may, without any
notice of hearing, levy and assess the whole or any part of the cost of any municipal work or
whole or any part of the cost of any municipal work or improvement as a special assessment
120294
3:3
upon the property specifically benefited thereby whenever notice and hearing thereon is in
writing waived by all the owners of property affected by such special assessment. In such
cases, the procedure shall be the same as hereinbefore provided excepting for the noticing
and holding of public hearing thereon.
SEC. 3-2-6 COUNCIL ACTIONS AFTER HEARING.
(a) After the hearing, the Common Council may:
(1) Approve, disapprove, modify or re-refer the report to the Director of Public Works or
other designated City official with such directions as it deems necessary to change
the plans and specifications as to accomplish a fair and equitable assessment.
(2) Continue the public hearing, preliminarily approve plans and specifications and, if
the project requires advertising for bids, authorize and direct the advertisement
therefor with a date certain for consideration and taking action thereon, inclusive of
action on said report and action on final resolution.
(b) If an assessment be made against any property and an award of compensation or damage be
made in favor of the property, the Common Council shall assess only the difference between
such assessment of benefits and the award of compensation or damage.
(c) (1) If the work or improvement has not been previously authorized or approved, the
Common Council shall approve the work or improvement and by resolution direct
that the same be done and paid for in accordance with the report finally approved.
(2) If the work or improvement has been approved by the Common Council or work
commenced or completed prior to the filing of the report or prior to the hearing, then
the Common Council shall by resolution confirm the report as made or modified and
provide for payment in whole or in part by assessment.
(d) The City Clerk shall publish the final resolution as required in Section 3-2-5 of this Chapter.
(e) After the publication of the final resolution, any work or improvement provided for and not
yet authorized shall be deemed fully authorized and all awards of compensation or damage
and all assessments made shall be deemed duly and properly made, subject to the right of
appeal by Section 66.60(12), Wis. Stats., or any other applicable provision of law.
SEC. 3-2-7 COMBINED ASSESSMENTS.
If more than a single improvement is undertaken, the Common Council may combine the
assessments as a single assessment on each property affected except that the property owner may
object to any one or more of said improvements.
120294
3:4
SEC. 3-2-8 COUNCIL'S POWER TO AMEND, CANCEL OR CONFIRM
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.
If, after completion or after the receipt of bids, the actual cost of any work or improvement is found
to vary materially from the original estimate, or the assessment is void or invalid for any reason, or if
the Common Council determines to reconsider an assessment, it is empowered, after giving notice as
required in Section 3-2-5 to amend, cancel or confirm any prior assessment; and notice of this
amending, canceling or confirming be given by the City Clerk as provided in Section 3-2-6 of this
Chapter.
SEC. 3-2-9 WHERE COST OF IMPROVEMENT IS LESS THAN ASSESSMENT.
If the cost of the work or improvement is less than the assessment levied, the Common Council
without notice or hearing shall reduce each assessment proportionately. If the assessment has been
paid either in part or in full, the City shall refund the property owner such overpayment.
SEC. 3-2-10 APPEALS; APPEALED ASSESSMENTS PAYABLE WHEN DUE.
(a) Any person against whose property a special assessment is levied under this Chapter may
appeal there from in the manner prescribed by Section 66.60(12) of the Wisconsin Statutes,
as amended, within forty (40) days of the date of the final determination of the Common
Council.
(b) Pursuant to Section 66.60(f), Wis. Stats., it shall be a condition to the maintenance of any
appeal that any assessment appealed shall be paid when due and payable, and upon default in
payment any such appeal shall be dismissed.
SEC. 3-2-11 PAYMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
A LIEN ON PROPERTY.
Pursuant to Subsection (13) of Section 66.60, Wis. Stats., any special assessment levied under this
Chapter shall be a lien on the property against which it is levied on behalf of the City. The Common
Council shall provide for the collection of such assessments and may establish penalties for payment
after the due date. The Common Council shall provide that all assessments not paid by the date
specified shall be extended upon the tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property and all
proceedings in relation to the collection of such delinquent taxes shall apply to such assessment,
except as otherwise provided by statute.
SEC. 3-2-12 SPECIAL CHARGES PERMISSIBLE.
(a) In addition to all other methods provided by law, special charges for current services may be
imposed by resolution by the Common Council by allocating all or part of the cost of the
property served. Such resolution setting forth the property location, the current service
rendered by the City and special charge therefor or cost thereof. Such resolution for special
charges may include snow and ice removal, weed elimination, street sprinkling oiling or
tarring, repair of sidewalks or curb and gutter, garbage and refuse disposal, sewer and water
120294
3:5
service and tree care or removal. The provision for notice of such charges shall be optional
with the Common Council except that in the case of street, sidewalk, curb or gutter repair,
twenty (20) days' notice published in the official City newspaper, or by posting such notice
in three (3) places in the City and a copy of such notice mailed to every interested person
whose post office address is known, at least ten (10) days before the hearing or proceeding.
Such notice shall specify that on a certain date a hearing will be held by the Common
Council as to whether the service in question shall be performed.
(b) Special charges for current services shall not be payable by installments. If not paid within
the period fixed by the Common Council in said resolution, such delinquent special charges,
pursuant to Section 3-2-11, shall become a lien on said property as of the date of such
delinquency and shall automatically be extended upon the current or next tax roll as a
delinquent tax against the property, as provided by Section 66.60(16) of the Wisconsin
Statutes, and all proceedings in relation to the collection, return and sale of property for
delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to such special charge. Notice of special charges for
current services need not be given except as required by Section 66.60(16) of the Wisconsin
Statutes, as amended.
(c) Section 3-2-2(a) of this Chapter shall not be applicable to proceedings under this Section.
State Law Reference: Section 66.60(16), Wis Stats.
SEC. 3-2-13 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
(a) If any assessment or charge levied under this Chapter is invalid because such Statutes are
found to be unconstitutional, the Common Council may thereafter reassess such assessment
or charge pursuant to the provisions of any applicable law.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, or this or other ordinance or resolution, it is
specifically intended and provided by this Chapter that the City may levy special
assessments for work or improvement against the property affected either before or after the
approval of the work plans and specifications, contracting for the work or completing the
work or improvement.
SEC. 3-2-14 INSTALLMENT AND DEFERRED SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
(a) INSTALLMENT PAYMENT.
(1) All special assessments may be paid, at the option of the property owner according to
the following:
a. Special assessments less than or equal to Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00)
shall be paid to the City Treasurer without interest within thirty (30) days of
billing.
b. Special assessments greater than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) but less
than or equal to Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) may be
paid in five equal installments due and payable on or before November 1
commencing with the year the special assessment is levied and each
November 1, thereafter, together with the interest as assigned. Interest shall
accrue at the rate the City has borrowed the money plus 1% for
administrative expenses. Should the money to pay for the project not be
borrowed, interest shall be set at a rate established by the Common Council
120294
3:6
in the final resolution required by Sec. 3-2-6.
c. Special assessments greater than Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars
($2,500.00) may be deferred for the initial five years after passage of the final
resolution required by Sec. 3.2.6. Thereafter they shall be paid in five equal
installments due and payable on or before November 1 commencing with the
sixth year after the special assessment is levied and each November 1
thereafter, together with the interest as assigned. Interest shall accrue at the
rate the City has borrowed the money plus 1% for administrative expenses.
Should the money to pay for the project not be borrowed, interest shall be set
at a rate established by the Common Council in the final resolution required
by Sec. 3-2-6.
(2) The City Comptroller shall enter the first installment due on the subsequent year's tax
roll as a special tax on the property on which the special assessment was levied, and
thereafter this tax shall be treated in all respects as any other city tax, and one of the
subsequent installments shall be included in like manner and with like effect in each
of the annual tax rolls thereafter until all are collected.
(3) If any installment so entered in the tax roll shall not be paid to the City Treasurer
with the other taxes it shall be returned to the county as delinquent and accepted and
collected by the county in the same manner s delinquent general taxes on real estate.
(4) Whenever the Common Council shall permit any special assessment for any such
improvement to be paid in installments, the City Clerk shall cause to be published in
the official paper of the City the "Installment Assessment Notice" as provided under
Chapter 66.54(7), Wis. Stats.
(5) After the time for making election as provided in the notice shall have expired, all
remaining assessment installments may be paid in full before due by the payment of
the installments together with interest to become due at the next installment due date
on all of the remaining installments.
(6) A schedule of the special assessment and all installments thereof shall be recorded in
the office of the City Treasurer.
(b) DEFERRED SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
(1) Deferred Special Assessments Permitted. The Common Council may by motion
direct the City Treasurer to pay all or any portion of special assessments or special
charges extended upon the current or next tax roll against property owned by or upon
which reside worthy, indigent persons in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
74.77, Wis. Stats., with an annual interest rate as established by the Common
Council.
(2) Who May Apply. Applications for deferment of payment shall be made upon a form
provided by the City Clerk, verified by the applicant, and the information only
contained therein shall be treated as confidential, privileged information.
(3) Who Shall Make Determination. Application shall be reviewed by the Board of
Public Works for the Common Council. All the provisions of Section 74.77, Wis.
Stats., shall be applicable.
(4) Duty of City Attorney. Upon the Common Council granting such application, it
shall be the duty of the City Attorney to file the necessary lien on said property.
(5) Deferred Assessments (pursuant to Sections 66.60 and 66.605, Wis. Stats.).
a. Wetlands. Property designated as protected "wetlands" on the DNRapproved
wetlands map shall be assessed, but the assessment deferred.
However, upon change from wetland to developable status in the future, for
any reason, the assessment shall then immediately become due and payable
120294
3:7
as otherwise required by this section. Conclusive evidence of this change to
assessment-due status shall be deemed to exist upon the issuance of any
building permit on any lot or parcel with a contiguous property parcel held
by a single legal entity.
b. Agricultural. Property used in agriculture for crops or pasture and over five
(5) acres in size shall be assessed, but the assessment deferred, upon approval
of request for deferment by the Common Council.
c. Topographically Unbuildable Parcels. If an entire, defined, platted lot is
deemed by the Common Council to be unbuildable, any assessment may be
deferred by the Common Council. However, upon change from
topographically unbuildable parcel to developable status in the future, for any
reason, the assessment shall then become due and payable as otherwise
required by this section. Conclusive evidence of this change to assessmentdue
status shall be deemed to exist upon the issuance of any building permit
for any lot or parcel within a contiguous property parcel held by a single
legal entity.
d. Under paragraph a. above, the wetlands deferred assessment may remain in
force in perpetuity, unless there be the change from wetlands to developable
status in the future. Under paragraph c. above, the topographically
unbuildable parcel deferred assessment may remain in force i perpetuity,
unless there be a change from topographically unbuildable parcel to
developable status in the future.
SEC. 3-2-15 STREET ASSESSMENTS.
(a) It is the policy of the City of Menasha that all property owners shall pay for a road and that
all subsequent repair and maintenance shall be borne from the general funds and shall not be
assessed against the property of the owner. However, nothing shall prevent the abutting
property owners to petition the Council for a higher classification of a road than now exists
or the Council from on its own motion ordering such classification. In that event, the
provisions of Chapter 66.60, Wis. Stats., of the assessment powers or the police powers
permitted by law shall prevail.
(b) Temporary asphalt mats are determined to be one step in the construction of a permanent
finished urbanized road section and may be assessable. When the Director of Public Works
determines that a permanent finished, urbanized road section is needed to replace the
temporary asphalt mat, the assessment policies of this chapter will apply irrespective of 3-2-
15.
SEC. 3-2-16 ASSESSMENT DETERMINATIONS.
(a) SCHEDULE. Special assessments shall be levied against all property fronting or abutting
on a proposed improvement at a rate to be determined per project by the Board of Public
Works on the basis of a unit cost per foot fronting or abutting in the proposed improvement.
Such rates of assessment shall be approved by motion and resolution passed by the Common
Council. Should the bids come in lower than the established assessment ratios, credit may be
granted.
(b) INTERIOR LOTS. On interior lot road construction and improvements including the
120294
3:8
laying of a base course, paving and curb and gutter, said footage shall be determined as
shown on the plat or other recorded instrument. This shall also apply to sanitary sewers and
water mains.
(c) CORNER LOTS. (All Assessments)
(1) If the long side of a corner lot is developed first and any special assessments are
levied, then the entire footage shall be assessed. Later when the short side is
improved, there shall be no assessment.
(2) If the short side of a corner lot is developed first and in which normal assessment
procedures shall apply, then the property owner shall be assessed in full for the short
side and later when the long side is developed said property owner will be given
credit for the footage on the short side.
(d) MULTIPLE FRONTAGE LOTS.
(1) If a lot has been developed so that it fronts two parallel streets or two streets
travelling in the same general direction, any special assessment to be levied will not
exceed the amount subject to assessment if the longest frontage is developed first.
Any assessment levied and paid for any shorter side will be credited against the
assessment which would normally be levied for the longer side.
(2) In the event the lot is also a corner lot, Section 3-2-16(c) will also apply.
(e) LIMITED ACCESS LOTS. If the City improves a street such that there is no benefit to
adjoining property owners, no assessment will be levied.
(f) STREETS. All street assessments shall be based upon excavation, graveling, grading, curb
and gutter, and finished asphalt. Should the Common Council determine that due to the
nature of the affected properties that it is more appropriate to construct streets with concrete,
then assessments will be based upon excavation, graveling, grading, curb and gutter and
finished concrete.
(g) STORM SEWERS. All storm sewer construction shall be based upon an eighteen (18) inch
main in newly developed areas and:
(1) Shall be assessed one hundred percent (100%) based upon frontage.
(2) All storm sewer mains to newly developed areas shall be assessed one hundred
percent (100%).
(h) SANITARY SEWER MAINS. All sanitary sewer mains shall be based upon an eight (8)
inch diameter main in newly developed areas and:
(1) Shall be assessed one hundred percent (100%) based upon frontage.
(2) All sanitary sewer mains to newly developed areas shall be assessed one hundred
percent (100%).
(i) WATER MAINS. All water mains shall be based upon an eight (8) inch diameter main in
newly developed areas and:
(1) Shall be assessed one hundred percent (100%) based upon frontage.
(2) All water mains to newly developed areas shall be assessed one hundred percent
(100%).
(j) SERVICE AND LATERALS. Property owners will be assessed one hundred percent
(100%) for the service laterals from the main to the terminal point on their lots.
(k) STREET LIGHTING. All street lighting in newly developed areas shall be assessed one
hundred percent (100%). Any decorative street lighting must be approved by the Common
Council. Decorative street lighting shall be assessed such that the annual increased charge
above normal street lighting is assessed against benefited property owners.
(l) UNPLATTED LANDS. Where the lands are unplatted and where the property is not to be
served in its entirety by sewer and/or water, then only that portion actually served shall be
120294
3:9
assessed.
(m) NEWLY ANNEXED AND UNDEVELOPED AREAS. Subdividers and other
individuals and corporations bringing into the City of Menasha newly annexed areas with
inadequate public improvements, as determined by the Director of Public Works, shall pay
one hundred percent (100%) assessments for all streets. The same shall hold true for the
undeveloped areas within the City. It shall make no difference whether such road work shall
be considered repair or rebuilding. Such assessments shall include excavation, graveling,
grading, surfacing, and curb and gutter.
(n) DEPRECIATION FACTOR. For property in newly annexed areas where sewer and water
have been previously laid, the owners of the newly annexed lots or parcels not previously
served by such water or sewer mains shall pay in proportion to the depreciated value of the
sewer or water main. The depreciated value shall be determined by the sewer or water
assessments at the time water and sewer mains were laid, less an annual depreciation of
1.25%. The 1.25% shall not be prorated on a monthly basis, but shall commence with
January 1 of each and every year. Such assessment shall not be used to reimburse any
property owners who have been previously assessed.
SEC. 3-2-17 UNPAID UTILITIES BILLS
(a) At least once each year the General Manager or his designee of the Utilities shall certify
to the City Treasurer those utility bills, water, sewer, electric, and storm water deemed by
him as uncollectible with administrative reasons therefore. An unpaid bill in the hands of
a collection agency for more than 120 days without being collected is deemed
uncollectible.
(b) Prior to the General Manager’s certifying to the City Treasurer real estate against which
utility bills are outstanding, he shall serve such notice on the owners of the real estate as
many times as he deems necessary. However, the notice shall contain information to the fact
that a penalty assessment will be made in the amount of 10% unless such utility charges are
paid by November 1st of each year. The deadline for payment of such bills plus penalty shall
be November 15th of each and every year.
(c) Each and every notice shall contain a provision that the user may appeal the amount
owed. In no event will a hearing be granted after November 1st of each and every year.
(1) In the event of a dispute involving electric or water bills, the appeal shall be to the
Electric & Water Utility Commission who shall conduct a hearing.
(2) In the event of a dispute involving sanitary sewer or storm water bills, the appeal shall
be to the Board of Public Works who shall conduct a hearing.
(3) The results of any hearing shall be communicated to the owner of the real estate
pursuant to the notice provisions of sec. 3-2-17(a) and (d).
(d) Pursuant to Statutes, such notice shall be served by delivery to either the owner or occupant,
either personally or by letter addressed to such owner/occupant at the post address of such lot
or parcel of real estate. On November 16th of each and every year, the General Manager of
the Utility or his designee shall certify and file with the Clerk, pursuant to statute, a list of all
lots or parcels of real estate, and state the amount of such arrears, together with any added
penalties that may apply.
(e) Each such delinquent amount, including such penalty, shall thereupon become a lien upon
the lot or parcel of real estate to which utility service has been furnished. All proceedings in
relation to the collection of general property taxes and to the return of sale of property for
delinquent taxes shall apply to said tax if the same is not paid within the time required by law
for payment of taxes upon real estate
120294
3:1
CHAPTER 3
Public Records
SEC. 3-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
(a) "Authority" means any of the following City entities having custody of a City record: an
office, elected official, agency, board, commission, committee, council, department or
public body corporate and politic created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a
formally constituted sub-unit of the foregoing.
(b) "Custodian" means that officer, department head, division head, or employee of the City
designated under Section 3-3-3 or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any
City records or file, deposit or keep such records in his or her office, or is lawfully in
possession or entitled to possession of such public records and who is required by this
Section to respond to requests for access to such records.
(c) "Record" means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or
electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an authority. "Record" includes,
but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films,
recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), and computer printouts. "Record" does not
include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like materials prepared for the
originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the
originator is working; materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and
have no relation to his or her office; materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent
or bequest; and published materials in the possession of an authority other than a public
library which are available for sale, or which are available for inspection at a public library.
(d) "Direct Cost" means the actual cost of personnel plus all expenses for paper, copier time,
depreciation and supplies.
(e) "Actual Cost" means the total cost of personnel including wages, fringe benefits and all
other benefits and overhead related to the time spent in search of records.
SEC. 3-3-2 DUTY TO MAINTAIN RECORDS.
(a) Except as provided under Section 3-3-7, each officer and employee of the City shall safely
keep and preserve all records received from his or her predecessor or other persons and
required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his or her office or which are in the lawful
possession or control of the officer or employee or his or her deputies, or to the possession
or control of which he or she or they may be lawfully entitled as such officers or employees.
(b) Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term of employment, or
whenever the officer or position of employment becomes vacant, each such officer or
employee shall deliver to his or her successor all records then in his or her custody and the
successor shall receipt therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file said receipt with
the City Clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is selected or qualifies, such records
shall be delivered to and receipted for by the Clerk, on behalf of the successor, to be
delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt.
120294
3:2
SEC. 3-3-3 LEGAL CUSTODIAN(S).
(a) Each elected official is the legal custodian of his or her records and the records of his or her
office, but the official may designate the City Clerk to act as the legal custodian.
(b) Unless provided in this Subsection and Subsection (c), the City Clerk or the Clerk's
designee shall act as legal custodian for the Common Council and for any committees,
commissions, boards, or other authorities created by ordinance or resolution of the Common
Council. The following offices or authorities shall have as a legal custodian of records the
individual so named.
(1) The Treasurer and Comptroller shall be the authority and custodians of the
following:
a. Treasurer
1. Investment Records
2. Tax Collection Records
3. City Receipts
4. City Canceled Checks
5. Bank Statements and Bank Reconciliations
6. Bank Deposit Receipts
7. Any other records designated by law to be in the care of the City
Treasurer.
b. The Comptroller shall be the authority and custodian of all other financial
records not enumerated above and of the data processing records of the City
of Menasha.
(2) The Assessor shall be the authority and custodian for all assessment records of the
City.
(3) The Director of Public Works shall be the custodian for all records of the
Department of Public Works.
(4) The Police Chief shall be the authority and custodian for all records in the Police
Department of the City.
(5) The Fire Chief shall be the authority and custodian for all records in the Fire
Department of the City.
(6) The Public Health Director shall be the authority and custodian for all
non-inspection related health records of the City.
(7) The Parks and Recreation Director shall be the authority and the custodian of all
records under his jurisdiction in the City.
(8) The Librarian shall be the authority and the custodian of all records of the Library
Board.
(9) The General Manager shall be the custodian of all records of the Menasha Electric
and Water Utilities.
(10) The Director of Community Development shall be the custodian of all records
pertaining to City planning and zoning, building, plumbing, electrical and health
inspections and permits, and to the sealer of weights and measures.
(c) For every authority not specified in Subsections (a) and (b), the authority's chief
administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but the officer may designate
an employee of his or her staff to act as the legal custodian.
(d) Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his or her absence or in
the absence of his or her designee, and each legal custodian shall send notice of the
designated deputy to the City Clerk.
120294
3:3
SEC. 3-3-4 PUBLIC ACCESS TO RECORDS.
(a) Except as provided in Section 3-3-6 any person has a right to inspect a record and to make
or receive a copy of any record as provided in Sec. 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
(b) Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular office hours.
(c) If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are kept, the records
will be available for inspection and copying upon at least forty-eight (48) hours' advance
notice of intent to inspect or copy.
(d) A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available to City
employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record.
(e) The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose other
reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is
irreplaceable or easily damaged.
(f) The cost of copying, photographing, processing, shall be a fee set from time to time by the
Administration Committee. Nothing in this section shall prevent the Police Department or
Fire Department from requesting of the Administration Committee a different fee since
more than copying records is involved, such as investigations, traffic accidents, witness
statements, etc.
(g) Pursuant to Sec. 19.34, Wis. Stats., and the guidelines therein listed, each authority shall
adopt, prominently display and make available for inspection and copying at its offices, for
the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its organization and the
established times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the methods
whereby, the public may obtain information and access to records in its custody, make
requests for records, or obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof. This Subsection
does not apply to members of the Common Council.
SEC. 3-3-5 ACCESS PROCEDURES.
(a) A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal custodian. A request shall
be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or the information
requested. However, a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject
matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient request. A
request may be made orally, but a request must be in writing before an action to enforce the
request is commenced under Sec. 19.37, Wis. Stats. Except as provided below, no request
may be refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be identified or to
state the purpose of the request. No request may be refused because the request is received
by mail, unless prepayment of a fee is required under Section 3-3-4(f)(6). A requester may
be required to show acceptable identification whenever the requested record is kept at a
private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or regulations so require.
(b) Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and without delay,
either fill the request or notify the requester of the authority's determination to deny the
request in whole or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after conferring
with the City Attorney, determines that a written request is so general as to be unduly time
consuming, the party making the request may first be required to itemize his or her request
in a manner which would permit reasonable compliance.
(c) A request for a record may be denied as provided in Section 3-3-6. If a request is made
orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a written statement of the
120294
3:4
reasons denying the request is made by the requester within five business days of the oral
denial. If a written request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a written
statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written denial of a request shall
inform the requester that, if the request for the record was made in writing, then the
determination is subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under Sec.
19.37(1), Wis. Stats., or upon application to the attorney general or a district attorney.
SEC. 3-3-6 LIMITATIONS ON RIGHT TO ACCESS.
(a) As provided in Sec. 19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records are exempt from inspection
under this Chapter.
(1) Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal law or authorized
to be exempted from disclosure by state law;
(2) Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law enforcement
purposes if federal law or regulations require exemption from disclosure or if
exemption from disclosure is a condition to receipt of aids by the state;
(3) Computer programs and files, although the material used as input for a computer
program/file or the material produced as a product of the computer program is
subject to inspection; and
(4) Pursuant to Sec. 905.08, Wis. Stats., a record or any portion of a record containing
information qualifying as a common law trade secret. "Trade secrets" are defined as
unpatented, secret, commercially valuable plans, appliances, formulas, or processes
which are used for making, preparing, compounding, treating or processing articles,
materials or information which are obtained from a person and which are generally
recognized as confidential.
(b) As provided by Sec. 43.30, Wis. Stats., public library circulation records are exempt from
inspection under this Section.
(c) In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is not specifically
exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with the City Attorney, may
deny the request, in whole or in part, only if he or she determines that the harm to the public
interest resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full access to the
requested record. Examples of matters for which disclosure may be refused include, but are
not limited to, the following:
(1) Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which were necessary and
given in order to obtain the information contained in them.
(2) Pursuant to Sec. 19.85(1)(a), Wis. Stats., records of current deliberations after a
quasi-judicial hearing.
(3) Pursuant to Sec. 19.85(1)(b) and (c), Wis. Stats., records of current deliberations
concerning employment, dismissal, promotion, demotion, compensation,
performance, or discipline of any City officer or employee, or the investigation of
charges against a City officer or employee, unless such officer or employee consents
to such disclosure.
(4) Pursuant to Sec. 19.85(1)(d), Wis. Stats., records concerning current strategy for
crime detection or prevention.
(5) Pursuant to Sec. 19.85(1)(e), Wis. Stats., records of current deliberations or
negotiations on the purchase of City property, investing of City funds, or other City
business whenever competitive or bargaining reasons require nondisclosure.
(6) Pursuant to Sec. 19.85(1)(f), Wis. Stats., financial, medical, social or personal
120294
3:5
histories or disciplinary data of specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely
to have a substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person referred to in
such history or data.
(7) Pursuant to Sec. 19.85(1)(g), Wis. Stats., communications between legal counsel for
the City and any officer, agent or employee of the City, when advice is being
rendered concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in which the City or
any of its officers, agents or employees is or is likely to become involved, or
communications which are privileged under Sec. 905.03, Wis. Stats.
(8) Pursuant to Sec. 19.85(1)(h), Wis Stats., requests for confidential written advice
from an ethics board, and records of advice given by such ethics board on such
requests.
(d) If a record contains information that may be made public and information that may not be
made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the information that may be made
public and delete the information that may not be made public from the record before
release. The custodian shall confer with the City Attorney prior to releasing any such record
and shall follow the guidance of the City Attorney when separating out the exempt material.
If, in the judgment of the custodian and the City Attorney, there is no feasible way to
separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without unreasonably
jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record shall be withheld from
disclosure.
(e) Whenever the assessor, in the performance of his or her duties, requests and obtains income
and expense information pursuant to s. 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., or any successor statute,
then, such income and expense information that is provided to the assessor shall be held by
the assessor on a confidential basis. The assessor may disclose such information in the
performance of duties imposed by law and to the Board of Review in performance of its
official duties, or pursuant to order of a court. Income and expense information provided to
the assessor under s. 70.47(7)(af), unless a court determines that it is inaccurate or otherwise
orders, is not subject to the right of inspection and copying under s. 19.35(1).
SEC 3-3-7 Retention of Public Records
(a) General Records Schedule Adopted. The City of Menasha hereby adopts, by reference, the
Wisconsin Municipal Records Schedule (hereinafter, “Records Schedule”), pertaining to the
retention and destruction of public records, and approved by the State of Wisconsin Public
Records Board (hereinafter, “Records Board”) on August 27, 2018. A copy of the Records
Schedule will be kept on file in the City of Menasha Clerk’s office located at 100 Main
Street, Suite 200, Menasha, WI 54952 and made available for public viewing Monday
through Friday from 8:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m.
(b) Other Records. In the event the City of Menasha creates a record not contemplated by the
Records Schedule, the City may, subject to the Records Board’s prior approval, either adopt
an applicable records retention schedule set forth by the Records Board, if available, or
create its own retention schedule pertaining to the record.
(c) Repeal. All ordinances, or portions thereof, and resolutions, or portions thereof, in conflict
with any portion of the Records Schedule are hereby repealed. Any approved City of
Menasha retention schedule, or portion thereof, for any record not contemplated by the
Records Schedule shall remain in full force and effect.
(d) The following records must be maintained for five years prior to their destruction:
(1) Payroll registers/payroll reports, Social Security or retirement earnings statements.
(2) Utility usage records for City properties.
(3) Performance evaluations.
120294
3:6
(4) Employee medical records.
(e) The following records must be maintained for seven years prior to their destruction:
(1) All other financial records not specified.
(2) Bank statements.
(3) Bonds and coupons (after maturity).
(4) Canceled checks, duplicates, check stubs.
(5) Payroll records.
(6) Receipt forms.
(7) Special assessment records.
(8) Vouchers, purchase orders and supporting documents.
(10) Contracts.
(11) Communications.
(12) Insurance policies.
(13) Oaths of office.
(14) Reports of boards, commissions, committees and officials duplicated in official
minutes.
(15) Resolutions/petitions.
(16) Voter record cards.
(17) Other police records unless otherwise specified.
(18) Police traffic accident reports.
(19) Police telephone line and radio frequency tape recordings, if any.
(20) Police radar maintenance reports.
(21) Police and fire department daily/weekly/monthly/
annual reports.
(22) Police ride-along records, and the liability release.
(23) Police false alarm records.
(24) Police and fire department overtime records.
(25) Police and fire department schedules and attendance reports.
(26) Police receipt books and cash registers receipt rolls.
(27) TIME System criminal history logs.
(28) Police and fire department offense/investigation reports (after statute/limitations has
expired).
(29) Accounts payable/detail listing/check register.
(30) Client medical records.
(31) Professional consultation records (if not part of client medical records).
(32) Legal memos.
(33) Claims paid and supporting papers.
(34) Ethics statements.
(35) Journal entries, journals of proceedings (after publication)
(36) Trust account records.
(37) Certified special assessment roll (after assessment is collected).
(38) Accounts of City and books of account.
(39) Tax receipts.
(40) Time cards, attendance records, salary schedules.
(41) Garnishment, wage assignment records.
(42) Department training records.
(43) General ledger, trial balance.
(44) All other non-specified records.
(45) Fire incident reports.
120294
3:7
(46) Fire inspection reports.
(47) Underground tank inspection reports.
(48) Inventory records. (Or as long as the item is owned.)
(49) Sewer billings and payments.
(50) Journal entries, resolutions, general receipts.
(51) Investment records.
(f) The following records must be maintained permanently.
(1) Legal opinions.
(2) Deeds.
(3) Easements.
(4) Abstracts and title insurance policies (or until property is no longer owned).
(5) Master park plan.
(6) Plats.
(7) Aerial photographs.
(8) Dam information.
(9) Union contracts, grievance and mediation and arbitration records.
(10) Building permit applications.
(11) Code compliance inspection reports.
(12) Board of Appeals decisions and supporting documents.
(13) Copies of booking sheets.
(14) Immunization records.
(15) Relocation orders/maps (latest revision).
(g) The following records must be maintained for 8 years.
(1) Retirement records (after retirement).
(2) Deferred compensation records (after retirement).
(3) Individual employee personnel files (after termination).
(4) Accident reports, injury claims and settlements, injury frequency charts (after
termination).
(5) Dockets, daily detention facility records, cash books.
(6) Arrest records.
(h) Other records must be maintained as indicated.
(1) Constructions plans -- life of structure.
(2) Blueprints -- life of structure.
(3) Warranty records -- until warranty ends or life of product.
(4) Equipment and furnishings inventory -- until superseded.
(5) Litigation records or evidence -- as directed by City Attorney
(6) Apportionment maps -- until next apportionment.
(7) U.S. geological maps -- until new map received.
(8) Report of functional jurisdiction of road -- until new map received.
(9) Certified mileage lists -- until next list received.
(10) Federal election records/electronic ballot tallies -- 22 months.
(11) Detachable recording units -- 21 days after election.
(12) Ballots -- 30 days after election.
(13) Official canvasses -- 10 years after election.
(14) Election notices -- 1 year after election, unless contested.
(15) All other election materials -- 90 days after election.
(16) Bloodborne pathogen records -- 30 years after termination of employment.
(17) Equipment and machine maintenance -- life of equipment.
(18) Inventory -- until superseded.
120294
3:8
(19) Equipment and vehicle registration reports -- life of vehicle.
(20) Assessment rolls -- 15 years.
(21) Financial reports other than annual reports --15 years.
(22) Special assessment payment register (after collected) -- 15 years.
(23) Copies of booking sheets -- permanent.
(24) Fingerprints -- until scanned and classified by State Crime Lab or other police
agency.
(25) Incident records -- 10 years.
(26) Evidence records -- 10 years.
(27) Birth certificate information-- 1 year.
(28) Signatures authorizing vaccinations--10 years.
(29) Communicable disease outbreak records-- until investigation is complete.
(30) Police citizen warning tickets -- six months.
(31) Overnight parking records -- one year.
(32) Requisitions -- one year.
(33) General ledger -- 15 years.
(i) Historical Records. The State Historical Society of Wisconsin has waived the required
statutory 60-day notice required by Sec. 19.21(5)(d), Stats., for the records marked "W".
The designation "N" requires notice to the State Historical Society of Wisconsin. "N/A"
indicates that notice is not applicable due to the permanent retention requirement.
(j) No requested record may be destroyed until after the request is granted or until 60 days after
the request is denied. If an action is commenced under Sec. 19.37, Stats., the requested
record may not be destroyed until a court order is issued or all appeals have been completed.
(k) No record subject to pending litigation may be destroyed until the litigation has been
resolved.
(l) Any public record may be kept and preserved by the use of microfilm or other reproductive
device. Any photographic reproduction shall be deemed an original record for all purposes
if it meets the applicable standards of Sec. 16.61(7) Stats. Once reproduced by
photographic reproduction, the original document may be destroyed or otherwise disposed
of.
(m) The Menasha Historical Society shall be given notice of any intent to destroy records.
Unless the Historical Society gives notice of a list of the specific records they desire to be
retained within 60 days of the notice, the record will be destroyed. Should the Historical
Society remove any records for inspection or any use, the Historical Society is responsible
for their destruction or safekeeping.
(n) The City Attorney will request waiver from the State Historical Society for their inspection
of any records itemized above. Any further requests for waiver will be made by the City
Attorney at the request of the appropriate department head, the Mayor or Common Council.
(o) This ordinance does not apply to records of the Menasha Electric and Water Utility except
as required by
Sec. 3-3-7(2)(j).
(p) Health Department Records. In addition to any requirement of this section, all records of
the City of Menasha Health Department are also subject to any rules regarding record
retention promulgated by the State of Wisconsin Department of Health and Family Services
- division of Public Health; and as amended from to time. The City Clerk and Public Health
Director shall maintain copies of such rules.
SEC. 3-3-8 PRESERVATION THROUGH MICROFILM
120294
3:9
Any City officer or the director of any department or division of City government may, subject to
the approval of the City Clerk, keep and preserve public records in his or her possession by means
of microfilm or other photographic reproduction method. Such records shall meet the standards for
photographic reproduction set forth in Sec. 16.61(7)(a) and (b), Wis. Stats., and shall be considered
original records for all purposes. Such records shall be preserved along with other files of the
department or division and shall be open to public inspection and copying according to the
provisions of state law and of Sections 3-3-4 through 3-3-6 of this Chapter.
120294
3:1
CHAPTER 4
Disposal of Lost, Abandoned, and Surplus Property
SEC. 3-4-1 DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS CITY PROPERTY.
(a) DEFINITIONS.
(1) "Surplus City Property" is that property which is owned by the City of Menasha and
which has no further usefulness to the City. An item of property shall be considered
to have no further usefulness when:
a. The item or its function has been totally replaced by other City property and
no probable future function exists for it; or
b. The City no longer performs the service for which the item was purchased
and no other service can reasonably be provided by the item; or
c. The item is no longer able to reliably or economically perform the work
required of it.
d. The item has been used up such that it does not perform the function for
which it was designed.
e. The item was acquired by the City as a result of a business transaction and
the item does not have any use for any City service.
(2) Surplus property as defined in this Chapter shall not include land or buildings but
shall include fixtures and such salvage as may be taken from a building without
structural damage when such fixtures and salvage are not part of a demolition
contract. Surplus City Property shall not include property which is obtained by the
City as a result of abandonment or loss by the property's original owner. Surplus
City Property shall not include library materials used by the public library for lending
purposes, nor to any other library property acquired pursuant to s.43.58(1) Wis. Stats.
(b) DETERMINATION OF SURPLUS CITY PROPERTY.
(1) The determination as to whether an item constitutes surplus City property shall be
made by the user of the property if the item has been used up such that it does not
perform the function for which it was designed and the original purchase price of the
property was less than $50.
(2) The determination as to whether an item constitutes surplus City property shall be
made by the Department Head if the original purchase price was less than $1,000.
(3) Whenever the fair market value of the item is less than $5,000, the appropriate
Department Head shall determine whether or not the item is surplus City property.
(4) Whenever the fair market value of the item is more than $5,000, the Department
Head shall bring a request to the Common Council for determination that the item is
surplus City property.
(5) Whenever an item of City property is determined to be surplus City property on the
basis that the City no longer performs the service for which the item was purchased,
the disposal procedures of subsection (c) shall be followed.
(6) Value shall include the reasonable cost of the time spent by any city employee in the
marketing of property.
(c) DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS CITY PROPERTY.
(1) Whenever the Common Council determines that an item of property is Surplus City
Property, it shall dispose of such property as it determines.
(2) Whenever the fair market value of an item is less than Five thousand Dollars
120294
3:2
($5000.00) and the appropriate entity has determined, pursuant to the previous
Subsection, that the item is Surplus City Property, the department head responsible
for the items shall dispose of the property by:
a. Donation to a nonprofit organization within the City or to a governmental
agency; or
b. Public auction; or
c. Sale by sealed bid; or
d. Sale on ebay or another similar auction website; or
e. Trade in; or
f. A commercial resale service for City motor vehicles; or
g. Destruction.
(3) In the event of a public auction or sale by sealed bid, the item will be sold in "as-is"
condition to the person submitting the highest bid. The department head responsible
for the item shall determine the time in which the successful bidder must remove the
item. In the event the item is not removed within that time, the item shall revert to
the City and the amount of the bid shall be forfeited to the City. In the event no bids
are received, the item shall be disposed of as determined by the Department Head if
the value is less than $5,000. or by the Common Council if the value is greater than
$5,000.
(4) The department head shall notify the City Comptroller when fixed assets are
disposed of. No public auction or awarding of bids for surplus property shall occur
under this Chapter unless a description of the item to be sold and an advance notice
of the time and place for such auction or bid submission is first published. The
posting of the item of surplus property on the City website and the City Hall posting
bulletin board shall be sufficient publication.
(d) DETERMINATION OF FAIR MARKET VALUES. Whenever this Chapter requires a
determination of the fair market value of an item of property, that determination shall be
made by the department head responsible for the property, whose decision shall be final.
(e) AUTHORITY TO DISPOSE OF PROPERTY.
(1) Except for library materials used by the public library for lending purposes, only the
Department Head may dispose of City property which is not Surplus City Property.
Notice of such disposal shall be given to the Common Council before disposal.
(2) Whenever this Section provides for an auction or other disposition of any property,
the Common Council or Department Head shall be authorized to hire an auctioneer
or take such other action as is necessary to properly dispose of the property provided,
however, that the fees of such auctioneer and all such costs, including those for City
labor and the use of City property, do not exceed the payment received by the City
from the auction or sale of the property.
(f) EMPLOYEE PURCHASE OF SURPLUS CITY PROPERTY
(1) No employee or elected official or any member of their immediate family may
purchase or acquire any item of surplus City property unless such purchase or
acquisition is made pursuant to public auction, sealed bid, or ebay or other
similar auction site and such bid is the highest bid.
(2) In the event that an employee or elected official is the highest bidder for an item of
surplus property, that employee or elected official shall provide notice to the
Common Council of such acquisition.
SEC. 3-4-2 LOST AND ABANDONED PROPERTY.
120294
3:3
(a) CITY CUSTODY OF LOST OR ABANDONED PROPERTY.
(1) Property which appears to be lost or abandoned, discovered by officers or turned in
to the Chief of Police by citizens shall be disposed of according to this Section.
(2) Lost and abandoned property will be examined by the Chief of Police or his designee
for identifying marks in an attempt to determine the owner. If identifying marks are
present, they shall be used by the Chief of Police to attempt to contact the owner to
return the property. If no identifying marks are present, the property shall be taken
into custody by the Chief of Police.
(3) No City employee shall keep for his or her own use property found in the course of
duty, nor take possession of property during off-duty hours when the discovery was
made while on duty.
(4) The Chief of Police shall permit citizens to claim lost property if they can provide
sufficient proof that they are rightful owners.
(5) No City employee shall receive any lost, stolen, abandoned or other unclaimed
property from the Chief of Police, unless that person received a written receipt
signed by the Chief of Police, a copy of which shall remain with the City Clerk.
(b) DISPOSAL PROCEDURES.
(1) Classes of Property. All property which has been abandoned, lost or remained
unclaimed for a period of thirty (30) days after the taking of possession of the same
by the City shall be disposed of as follows, except that if the property is usable for
City operations, the property need not be sold at auction, but may become the
property of the City.
a. Vehicles. Vehicles shall be disposed of as set forth in the applicable
provisions of Title 10, Chapter 4, of this Code of Ordinances.
b. Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages. Intoxicating liquor and
fermented malt beverages shall be destroyed.
c. Firearms, Ammunition and Explosives. Firearms or ammunition shall be
returned to their rightful owner, destroyed, or transferred to the State Crime
Laboratory, the division of law enforcement services of the Department of
Justice, the Federal Bureau of Investigation or the Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms Bureau of the U.S. Department of Treasury. Any explosive,
flammable, or other material proving a danger to life or property may be
disposed of immediately upon taking possession thereof. The Chief of Police
and the Fire Chief, after consulting with the County Sheriff's Department, are
hereby authorized to determine the disposal procedure, provided, however,
that any such procedure will attempt to return to its rightful owner any such
material which appears to have been stolen.
d. Other Property with a Fair Market Value of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00)
of Less. An item of property with a fair market value of One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) or less shall be destroyed or sold at public auction.
Perishable property which deteriorates to a fair market value of less than One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) shall be destroyed.
e. Other Property with a Fair Market Value of Over One Hundred Dollars
($100.00). An item of property with a fair market value of more than One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) shall be sold at public auction or by sealed bid.
f. Illegal property. Property which cannot be legally possessed shall be
destroyed.
g. Bicycles determined to be abandoned or unclaimed may be sold at public
auction or donated to a not for profit organization. The Chief of Police or his
120294
3:4
designee shall determine any specific not for profit organization to whom the
bicycles may be donated.
(2) Disposal by Auction or Sealed Bid.
a. Whenever any property under this Section is sold by public auction or sale or
by sealed bid, such auction or the awarding of bids shall be preceded by a
Class 2 notice describing the property and arranging the time and place for
the auction or bid submission; such notice shall be published in the official
City newspaper. The property auctioned or sold by sealed bid shall be sold
in as-is condition to the highest bidder. No sale or auction shall occur until
the Chief of Police has determined that the property has no value to any
probable investigation or legal proceeding. The department head responsible
for the property shall determine the time in which the successful bidder shall
remove the property. In the event the property is not removed within that
time, the property shall revert to the City and the amount of the bid be
forfeited to the City.
b. Any City official selling property under this Section shall maintain for two
(2) years an inventory of any property not disposed of by auction or sale by
sealed bid and shall include a record of the date and method of disposal, any
payment received for the property, and the name and address of the person
acquiring the property.
(3) Lost Property. Property which is found by persons and delivered to the Chief of
Police for the purpose of locating the former owner shall not be considered
abandoned or unclaimed under this Section until thirty (30) days after mailing to the
person finding the property a notice that he may claim ownership of said property.
The Chief of Police shall determine what portion, if any, of the property or its value
shall be given the finder. This provision shall not apply to any City employee
finding property in the regular course of his employment.
(4) Payment to City Treasury. All sums received from the sale of property under this
Section shall be paid to the City Treasury, including a list of items sold.
State Law Reference: Section 66.28, Wis. Stats.
120294
4:1
CHAPTER 1
Review of Administrative Determinations
SEC. 4-1-1 REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATIONS.
Any person aggrieved by an administrative determination of the Common Council or a board,
commission, committee, agency, officer or employee of the City or agent acting on its behalf may
have such determination reviewed as provided in Chapter 68, Wis. Stats.
State Law Reference: Section 68.01, Wis. Stats.
120294
5:1
CHAPTER 1
Law Enforcement
SEC. 5-1-1 ORGANIZATION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police and such other officers, assistants, and
patrolmen as from time to time may be appointed, pursuant to the provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes, the ordinances, and resolutions of the Common Council, and the rules and regulations of
the Board of the Police and Fire Commission.
SEC. 5-1-2 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
(a) MONTHLY REPORTS. The Chief of Police shall submit a monthly report to the Mayor
and Common Council of activities and transactions of the department during the preceding
month.
(b) POLICE RECORDS. There shall be kept by the Department a suitable record in which
shall be entered the name of every person arrested in the City, the name of the person
making the arrest, the date and cause of the arrest, the Court from which the warrant was
issued, the disposition made of the case, the amount of fine and costs paid and to whom paid,
bond posted, and all complaints in full.
SEC. 5-1-3 RESPONSIBILITIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
(a) DUTIES. In addition to the duties imposed upon him elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances,
the Chief of Police shall:
(1) Have command of the Police Department on administrative matters, subject to the
direction of the Mayor, to the extent that the Council may delegate such authority or
direction to him.
(2) Cause to be maintained accurate records of complaints, crimes, traffic accidents,
ordinance violations, arrests, summons, incidents, and calls for police service and
shall provide a system of periodic summary and analysis to ensure the most efficient
and effective deployment and use of the Department's resources. He shall submit or
cause to be submitted to the various agencies such reports and summaries as are
required by State Statutes or ordinances and shall participate in voluntary programs
designed to improve law enforcement and public safety.
(3) Submit such reports and comply with such administrative procedures as may be
prescribed by the Mayor and Common Council relative to fiscal and administrative
matters.
(4) Submit such reports and/or information and comply with such policies as may be
prescribed by Common Council.
(5) Have exclusive control of the assignment, hours of duty, and transfer of all members
of the Department.
(6) Plan, organize, staff, direct, and control all of the human and material resources of
the Department for the most effective and efficient discharge of its duty to protect
persons and property, preserve the peace, protect the rights of citizens and enforce
120294
5:2
the Wisconsin Statutes and the ordinances of the City as are within its jurisdiction.
He shall supervise the preparation and presentation of annual reports and budgets for
the Police Department. He shall be required to certify to the correctness of all bills
incurred by the Department.
(7) Strive to maintain suitable, productive relationships with other City departments and
with other governmental agencies and private organizations concerned with law
enforcement, crime prevention, administration of justice and public safety. He shall
cooperate and exchange information with other City departments in matters relating
to their various functions.
(8) Plan and execute programs designed to prevent and repress crime, apprehend and
prosecute offenders, recover property, and regulate non-criminal conduct, giving
highest priority in the allocation of resources to crime and other offenses most
hazardous to life and property.
(b) CUSTODY OF DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT. The Chief of Police shall be the
custodian of all City property, equipment and supplies under the control of, or used by, the
Police Department and shall be responsible for the care, maintenance, safeguarding and
accurate records of such property, equipment, and supplies.
(c) CUSTODY OF DEPARTMENT PROPERTY. The Chief of Police shall be the custodian
of all property and shall be responsible for the safekeeping, lawful disposition and accurate
record of the same. He shall see that all property is returned to its lawful owner or otherwise
disposed of according to the applicable statutes.
SEC. 5-1-4 RULES AND POLICIES FOR THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
The Chief of Police shall establish and promulgate Rules of Conduct, Directives and Policies and
Procedures and prescribe such duties for individual members as he may deem necessary for the
effective and efficient command and operation of the Department; provided no such Rules of
Conduct, Directive or Policy Procedure duties or assignment shall be in conflict with the statutes,
ordinances and approved City personnel rules and regulations.
SEC. 5-1-5 MAINTENANCE OF PERSONNEL RECORDS AND
PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS.
The Chief of Police, in cooperation with the Personnel Director, shall cause to be maintained
adequate personnel records of employment, assignment, promotions, attendance, performance and
training for all members of the Department. He shall also comply with all provisions of the Law
Enforcement Standards Board in regard to background investigations. He shall keep himself
adequately informed of the activities of the Department and be assured that the duties of his
subordinates are properly discharged. He shall formulate procedures for recognizing outstanding
performance by Department members for investigating complaints of misconduct by any
Department member and for taking appropriate disciplinary action subject to the provisions of the
applicable statutes and Rules of the Department.
120294
5:3
SEC. 5-1-6 POLICE CHIEF'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR TRAINING.
The Chief of Police is responsible for the training of all members of the Department. He shall cause
adequate and progressive programs of training to be organized and conducted to prepare Department
members in the knowledge, procedures, and techniques of their duties and responsibilities. He will
insure that, within budgetary limitations, members of the Department attend training courses,
seminars, and conferences necessary to maintain and improve their job skills and professional
knowledge. He shall encourage Department members to further their education in Law Enforcement
through study, special courses, college attendance, extension programs, and independent readings.
SEC. 5-1-7 AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE.
(a) AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE ESTABLISHED. There is hereby established an
Auxiliary Police Force for the City of Menasha consisting of a table of organization of
twenty-nine (29) persons, which number may be altered from time to time by the Common
Council.
(b) OFFICER IN CHARGE. The unit shall be under the direction and control of the Chief of
Police and such officers of the Menasha police force as may be assigned and designated by
the Chief.
(c) POLICIES. The Chief of Police shall develop and employ such policies and rules for the
organization, control and operation of the Auxiliary Police as may be required to provide an
effective unit.
(d) FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS. No auxiliary police officer while on duty and in
uniform may carry any lethal weapon.
(e) INSURANCE. The City of Menasha will provide the necessary worker's compensation
insurance.
(f) MAXIMUM HOURS. No auxiliary police officer may work more than five hundred ninety
(590) hours per year.
(g) ARREST POWERS. Auxiliary police officers shall have powers of arrest when
commanded by and under the supervision and direction of a full-time City law enforcement
officer.
(h) STATUS AND PAY. Auxiliary police officers shall be considered employees of the City of
Menasha and will be paid a stipend of Ten Dollars ($10.00) a month to cover mileage and
other expenses.
Updated: 9/18/2019
CHAPTER 2
Fire Prevention
SEC. 5-2-1 IMPEDING FIRE EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.
No person shall impede the progress of the fire engine or fire truck or other fire apparatus of the
Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue Department along the streets or alleys of such City at the time of a fire
or when the Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue Department is using such streets or alleys in response to a
fire alarm or for practice.
SEC. 5-2-2 POLICE POWER OF THE DEPARTMENT; INVESTIGATION OF
FIRES.
(a) POLICE AUTHORITY AT FIRES.
(1) The Fire Chief, assistants, or officers in command at any fire, emergency operations
and hazardous situation are hereby vested with full and complete police authority at
fires, emergency operations and hazardous situation. Any officer of the Department
may cause the arrest of any person failing to give the right-of-way to the Neenah-
Menasha Fire Rescue Department in responding to a fire, emergency operations and
hazardous situation.
(2) The Fire Chief may prescribe certain limits in the vicinity of any fire within which no
persons, excepting firefighters and police officers and those admitted by order of any
officer of the Department, shall be permitted to come.
(3) The Fire Chief shall have the power to cause the removal of any property whenever it
shall become necessary for the preservation of such property from fire or to prevent
the spreading of fire or to protect the adjoining property, and during the progress of
any fire he shall have the power to cause the removal of all wires or other facilities
and the turning off of all electricity or other services where the same impedes the work
of the Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue Department during the progress of a fire.
(b) FIRE INSPECTION DUTIES.
(1) The Fire Chief shall be the Fire Inspector (Fire Marshal) of the City of Menasha and
shall have the power to appoint one or more Deputy Fire Inspectors (Fire Marshals)
and shall perform all duties required of the Fire Inspectors by the laws of the State and
rules of the Wisconsin Department of Commerce, particularly Section 101.14, Wis.
Stats
(2) The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or any Fire Inspector, shall have the right and authority
to enter any building or upon any premises in the City of Menasha at all reasonable
hours for the purpose of making inspections or investigations which, under the
provisions of this Code of Ordinances, he may deem necessary. Should the Fire
Inspector or Fire Marshal find that any provisions of this Code relating to fire hazards
and prevention of fires are being violated, or that a fire hazard exists which should be
eliminated, it shall be his duty to give such directions for the abatement of such
conditions as he shall deem necessary and, if such directions be not complied with, to
report such noncompliance to the City Attorney for further action.
(3) The Fire Inspector, Deputy Fire Inspectors, or officers of the Neenah Menasha Fire
Rescue together compromise the Fire Prevention Bureau which shall inspect all
building premises, except the interior of private dwellings, for the purpose of
Updated: 9/18/2019
correcting any violations of any law or ordinance relating to the fire hazard or the
prevention of fires. Such inspections shall follow the time frames set up in Comm
14.01 in all territory served by the Department.
(4) The Fire Marshal shall maintain records of each inspection completed by the
department, including date, location of buildings, and premises examined and defects
caused to be corrected. The Fire Marshal shall make an annual report to the Common
Council and shall state in such report the number of buildings and premises examined
by department staff and the number of defects caused to be corrected. A copy of such
report shall be filed with the City Clerk.
State Law Reference: Section 101.14(2), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 5-2-3 DAMAGING FIRE HOSE PROHIBITED; PARKING BY HYDRANTS;
BLOCKING FIRE LANES.
(a) DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE. No person shall willfully injure in any manner any hose,
hydrant or fire apparatus belonging to the City, and no vehicle shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of the Fire Department when laid down on any street, private driveway or
other place, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.
(b) PARKING VEHICLES NEAR HYDRANTS. It shall be unlawful for any person to park
any vehicle or leave any object within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant at any time.
(c) NO PARKING NEAR FIRE. It shall be unlawful for any person, in case of fire, to drive or
park any vehicle within one block from the place of fire without the consent and authority of
the Fire Chief or any police officer.
SEC. 5-2-4 FIREMEN MAY ENTER ADJACENT PROPERTY.
(a) ENTERING ADJACENT PROPERTY. It shall be lawful for any firefighters while
acting under the direction of the Fire Chief or any other officer in command to enter upon
the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of a building or other property then on fire for the
purpose of extinguishing such fire and in case any person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any
firefighters in the discharge of his or her duty as is hereinbefore provided, the person so
offending shall be deemed guilty of resisting firefighters in the discharge of their duty.
(b) DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY TO PREVENT THE SPREAD OF FIRE. During
the progress of any fire, the Fire Chief or his assistant shall have the power to order the
removal or destruction of any property necessary to prevent the further spread of fire;
provided that it is inevitable that, unless such property is removed, other property is in
danger of being destroyed by fire.
SEC. 5-2-5 VEHICLES TO YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY.
Whenever there shall be a fire or fire alarm and while operating a vehicle that is responding to
emergencies, every person driving or riding in a motorized or other vehicle shall move and remain to
the side of the street until the fire engine and fire truck and other fire apparatus have passed.
Updated: 9/18/2019
SEC. 5-2-6 INTERFERENCE WITH USE OF HYDRANTS PROHIBITED.
No person shall occupy any portion of such streets or alleys with a motorized or other vehicle
between such fire engine or fire truck or other fire apparatus or any hydrant to which a fire hose may
be, or may be about to be, attached.
SEC. 5-2-7 OPEN BURNING.
(a) OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED. No person, firm or corporation shall build any outdoor
fire within the corporate limits of the City of Menasha excepting as set forth in Subsection
(b) of this Section.
(b) EXCEPTIONS.
(1) Outdoor cooking over a fire contained in a device or structure designed for such
use.
a. Material used to make a cooking fire cannot include construction materials, trash or
rubbish.
b. All cooking devices must be in good working condition to prevent the possible
spread of fire;
c. For all multi-family dwellings more than one story in height, the use and/or storage
of any propane or charcoal portable cooking device or any portable fireplace device
is strictly prohibited above the first floor occupancy.
d. For all multi-family dwellings more than one story in height, the use of any open or
closed outdoor cooking device, any portable fireplace device, or any open flame
device is prohibited within ten (10) feet of the structure on the ground floor or any
combustible material on the ground floor.
e. Recreational Fires.
1. It is the intent of the City of Menasha that citizens shall have the opportunity
to have recreational fires at single-family and two-family dwellings provided
that such fires are in strict compliance with restrictions relating to
recreational fires. It is further the intent of the City of Menasha that the
Police Department and the Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue Department shall
strictly enforce these restrictions so as to insure that such fires do not
compromise safety. Such enforcement shall require an investigation into any
complaint and an independent determination by either the Police Department
or Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue Department as to whether a particular
recreational fire is in compliance with these regulations.
2. A recreational fire is a campfire for the purpose of recreation and personal
enjoyment.
3. A portable fire pit is a structure or device intended to contain and control
outdoor wood fires. This shall include a structure which although not
portable, is designed to contain and control outdoor wood fires.
4. An in-ground fire pit is defined as a fire pit surrounded on the outside by a
non-combustible material such as concrete block or rocks.
5. No recreational fire may be started or allowed to continue burning unless
such recreational fire is contained in a portable fire pit or an in-ground fire
pit.
6. No recreational fire, portable fire pit, or in-ground fire pit shall be closer
than 10 feet from any building, structure, shed, garage, fence, or any
combustible material.
Updated: 9/18/2019
7. All recreational fires shall not have a diameter larger than 30 inches nor may
the fire extend more than 2 feet above the pit.
8. “Portable” fire pits, such as devices commercially designed and intended to
control and contain outdoor wood fires, may be used in accordance with the
manufacturer’s specifications, these regulations, and must be based upon a
non-combustible surface.
9. No recreational fire shall be started or allowed to continue burning when the
wind direction or wind speed will cause smoke, embers, or other burning
materials to be carried by the wind toward any building or other combustible
materials, nor any time when the wind speed exceeds 7mph. Smoke from
any recreational fire shall not create a nuisance for neighboring property
owners. The fire shall be completely extinguished based upon the findings of
the required investigation conducted by either the Police Department or the
Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue Department. The Police Department and the
Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue Department shall strictly enforce this section
so as to comply with the intent of Section e.1. of this ordinance.
10. Material for recreational fires or portable fire pit shall not include rubbish,
garbage, recyclable items, trash or any material made of petroleum-based
materials, and shall not contain any flammable or combustible liquids,
except for devised which are designed to burn LP gas. LP gas devices shall
only be used per the manufacturers listing instructions.
11. Adequate fire suppression equipment shall be immediately available to
control or extinguish the recreational fire. Adequate fire suppression shall be
a garden hose or a large bucket of water within two feet of the fire.
12. All recreational fires or portable fire pits shall be attended at all times by at
least one responsible person of age 18 or older from the ignition of the fire
until the fire is completely extinguished.
13. The property owner and/or person who has started any recreational fire shall
hold the City harmless from any and all damages caused by a recreational
fire.
14. Any party who has started or maintains a recreational fire as defined herein
shall pay any and all costs incurred by the Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue
Department for any service related call as a result of a recreational fire NOT
in compliance with these requirements, if deemed necessary by the Fire
Chief.
15. Any person who wishes to have a recreational fire in a portable fire pit or inground
fire pit must obtain a permit prior to such fire. The permit shall
contain the name and address of the location where the portable fire pit is to
be used. Such permit is not transferable to any other person nor any other
location.
16. The permit specified in paragraph 15 shall require payment of an annual fee
to be established by the Administration Committee upon the
recommendation of the Joint Personnel and Finance Committee. A copy of
Sec. 5-2-7 shall be provided along with the permit.
17. No recreational fire shall be started or allowed to continue unless the permit
and the copy of the ordinance can be produced and shown to anyone who
requests to see the permit.
18. No recreational fire may be started or allowed to continue between 12:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Any such fire is presumed unreasonable and must be
extinguished.
Updated: 9/18/2019
19. Any recreational fire, portable fire pit or in-ground fire pit not in compliance
with all the terms of Sec. 5-2-7 may, in addition to any other penalties, result
in the permanent revocation of the permit.
20. Permits for recreational fires shall be issued only to the property owner or to
a tenant, provided that the tenant supplies the City Clerk with a letter of
approval for the permit signed by the property owner.
(2) Controlled burning of grass or similar vegetation for environmental management
purposes, with the prior written approval of the Fire Chief;
(3) Ceremonial campfire or bonfires, with prior written approval of the Fire Chief;
(4) Whenever approval and special permit are granted by the Fire Chief under
Subsection (b)(2) and (3) of this Section, the permit may specify and be conditioned
on observance of safety restrictions and insurance requirements set forth therein.
(c) FIRE CHIEF MAY PROHIBIT. The Fire Chief is permitted to prohibit any or all
bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances
make such fires hazardous.
(d) BURNING ON STREETS. No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or
sidewalk.
(e) LIABILITY. Persons utilizing and maintaining outdoor fires shall be responsible for any
liability resulting from damage caused by his fire.
SEC. 5-2-8 INSTALLATION, REMOVAL AND INSPECTION OF FLAMMABLE
AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID STORAGE TANKS.
(a) AUTHORITY. The most current version of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, Comm
10, Flammable and Combustible Liquids is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference.
The Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue Department shall also be adopted as part of the
authorized inspection authority related to storage tank inspections pursuant to the
Professional Services Contract between Wisconsin Department of Commerce and the City
of Menasha.
(b) No person may install, remove or alter any underground storage tanks for storage of
flammable or combustible liquids without first obtaining a permit from the Neenah-
Menasha Fire Rescue Department.
(c) INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS - SCOPE OF SERVICE. The Neenah-Menasha Fire
Rescue Department shall perform the following inspection duties related to the storage
of flammable and combustible liquids in the City of Menasha:
(1) Complete plan examinations for all tank installations of less than 5,000 gallons.
Approve/disapprove plans which are submitted based upon the criteria established in
COMM 10, or any successor State law.
(2) Establish permit fees, for approval by the Administration Committee for all work
related to the installation and alterations of tanks less than 5,000 gallons and permit fees for
all tank removals.
(3) Perform installation inspections for tank systems reviewed at either the state or local
level.
(4) Authorize stop work orders when violations of COMM 10 have occurred.
(5) Perform the annual inspection of federally regulated tank systems for compliance with
leak detection, operation and maintenance and the closure requirements established in
COMM 10.
(6) Perform inspections at the closure of tank systems.
(7) Perform any and all duties or authority as set forth in COMM 10, the City of Menasha
Municipal Code, or the contractual inspection agreement with Wisconsin Department of
Updated: 9/18/2019
Commerce as necessary and determined by the Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue Department.
(d) INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS - NOTICE. Notice inspection requirements shall be
as follows:
(1) The Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue Department shall be notified ten (10) days in
advance of any underground storage tank removal.
(2) Twenty-four (24) hour minimum advance notice shall be required for any canceled
installation, upgrade, or removal inspection appointment.
(e) FEES.
(1) Any plan review, new installation inspections or upgrade plan review inspections for
tanks of 5,000 gallons or greater shall require a prepaid fee as established by State
authority.
(2) All other plan review, new installation inspections, upgrade plan review and
inspections, revisions of previously approved plans and all underground storage tank
removals shall require a prepaid fee as established under Sec. 5-2-8(c)(2).
(f) PENALTY.
(1) Any person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
Ordinance 5.07 shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a forfeiture not to
exceed $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution.
(2). Each violation, and each day a violation continues or occurs, shall constitute
a separate offense. Nothing in this ordinance shall preclude the City of Menasha from
maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of this ordinance.
(3) Failure to obtain any permit will result in the doubling of any permit fee.
(4) Failure to remove any contaminated soil within thirty (30) days after completion of
any project will constitute a public nuisance under Sec. 11-7-2.
(5) A stop work order shall be issued until compliance has occurred, and a forfeiture not to
exceed $500.00, together with the costs of prosecution.
SEC. 5-2-9 FIRE ALARMS.
(a) The user of any private alarm system which upon activation, elicits a response from the
Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue Department or Police Department, shall be subject to an
answering fee for each response in the calendar year. If it is determined that the alarm was
discharged falsely, accidentally, or by negligence, including lack of maintenance, answering
fees shall be established by the Administration Committee.
(b) Fees shall not be imposed in the event of any evidence of forcible entry or attempted forcible
entry. Said fee will not be imposed if it can be determined that the alarm was activated by
weather conditions, fire or other acts of God.
(c) If the possessor of the alarm shows to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief or Police Chief, as
appropriate, that a false alarm was not the result of negligence or improper maintenance or
other good and sufficient cause beyond the reasonable control of the possessor of the alarm,
such fee may be waived and the response not counted as a false alarm in computing the fee
established by the ordinance.
(d) The fee established by this ordinance is imposed whether the Winnebago County
Communication Center, the Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue Department or Police Department
receive notification of the alarm by direct connection or through other intermediary means.
(e) Those subject to fees for false alarms shall be notified, in writing, of such fees by the City of
Menasha within thirty days of the receipt of the fee notification. In the event fees remain
unpaid, said fees may be collected as a special tax assessed against the property of the owner.
(f) Alarm users who intentionally activate any alarm shall be subject to the receipt of a City of
Updated: 9/18/2019
Menasha Municipal Summons for said intentional violation of paragraph (a) of this Section.
Intentional activation of any alarm shall be subject to a minimum fine of $200.00 plus costs
per occurrence.
Updated: 9/18/2019
5:1
CHAPTER 3
Fire Prevention Code; Hazardous Materials
SEC. 5-3-1 ADOPTION OF STATE CODES.
(a) Wis. Stats. §35.93 and Wisconsin Administrative Codes SPS 301 to SPS 399 Safety,
Buildings, and Environment and ATCP 93, Flammable and combustible Liquids are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the City Fire Prevention Code. For the
purposes of this section, these provisions are adopted to enable the Fire Department to
note any violations of such codes and to report those violations to the appropriate
community service inspectors. The fire inspectors shall have the authority to cite such
violations on fire inspections.
Overall enforcement responsibility for the provisions of this section will be equally
shared by the building inspector and the fire inspector. The building inspector has
the primary responsibility during construction of the building while the fire inspector has
primary responsibility after the building is completed. Primary responsibility for
particular sections of the above provisions shall be as indicated in the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(b) The International Fire Code currently adopted by the State, hereinafter “IFC” is hereby
adopted as though fully set forth herein, with the following exceptions: (1) Section 105
“permits” of Chapter 1, “Administration.”
(c) NFPA (National Fire Protection Association) codes and standards currently adopted by
the State are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the City Fire Prevention
Code with the same force and effect as though set forth herein in full, unless otherwise
found to be in conflict with superseding state or local codes and/or standards.
(d) Any fire prevention concern not herein addressed by code or adopted standards will be
addressed on the basis of current adopted International Fire Code and/or the
aforementioned National Fire Protection Association Standards.
SEC. 5-3-2 DISCLOSURE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND INFECTIOUS
AGENTS; REIMBURSEMENT FOR CLEAN-UP OF SPILLS
(a) APPLICATION.
(1) All persons, firms or organizations using, researching or producing hazardous
materials and/or infectious agents shall notify the Fire Department as prescribed by
this Section.
(2) The provisions of this Section shall apply to all persons, firms or organizations
using, researching, producing or storing hazardous materials and/or infectious
agents on and after the effective date of this Section.
(b) DEFINITIONS.
(1) "Infectious agent" is a bacterial, mycoplasmal, fungal, parasitic or viral agent known
to cause illness in humans which is used, researched, produced or stored within or
on premises.
(2) "Hazardous materials" are those materials that can cause death or disabling injury
from brief exposure; those materials that could cause a lost-time injury from
exposure; and those materials that could cause temporary disability or injury without
permanent effects which are used, researched, produced or stored within or on
premises except those household consumer products used at the point of
consumption and not used for commercial or experimental purposes. This
definition of hazardous materials shall include radioactive materials.
Updated: 9/18/2019
5:2
(c) INFORMATION REQUIRED.
(1) Any person, firm or organization using, researching, producing and/or storing any
hazardous materials shall provide in writing to the Fire Department the following
information:
a. Address, location of where hazardous materials are used, researched, stored
or produced;
b. The trade name of the hazardous material;
c. The chemical name and any commonly used synonym for the hazardous
material and the chemical name and any commonly used synonym for its
major components;
d. The exact locations on the premises where materials are used, researched,
stored and/or produced;
e. Amounts of hazardous materials on premises per exact location;
f. The boiling point, vapor pressure, vapor density, solubility in water, specific
gravity, percentage volatile by volume, evaporation rate for liquids and
appearance and order of the hazardous material;
g. The flashpoint and flammable limits of the hazardous substance;
h. Any permissible exposure level, threshold limit value or other established
limit value for exposure to a hazardous material;
i. The stability of the hazardous substance;
j. Recommended fire extinguishing media, special firefighting procedures and
fire and explosion hazard information for the hazardous material;
k. Any effect of over-exposure to the hazardous material, emergency and first
aid procedures and telephone numbers to call in an emergency;
l. Any condition or material which is incompatible with the hazardous material
and must be avoided.
m. Any personal protective equipment to be worn or used and special
precautions to be taken when handling or coming into contact with the
hazardous materials;
n. Procedures for handling or coming into contact with the hazardous
materials.
(2) Any person, firm or organization using, researching, producing and/or storing
infectious agent and/or carrier of an infectious agent shall provide in writing to the
Fire Department the following:
a. The name and any commonly used synonym of the infectious agent;
b. Address/location where infectious agents are used, researched, stored and/or
produced;
c. The exact locations where infectious agents are used, researched, stored
and/or produced;
d. Amount of infectious agent on premises per exact locations;
e. Any methods of route of transmission of the infectious agents;
f. Any symptoms of effect of infection, emergency and first aid procedure and
a telephone number to be called in an emergency;
g. Any personal protective equipment to be worn or used and special
precautions to be taken when handling or coming in contact with the
infectious agent;
h. Procedure for handling, clean-up and disposal of infectious agents leaked or
spilled.
(d) REIMBURSEMENT FOR CLEANUP OF SPILLS. Any person who possesses or
controls a hazardous material or infectious agent which was discharged or caused the
discharge of a hazardous material or infectious agent shall reimburse the City for actual and
necessary expenses incurred by the City or its agent to contain, remove or dispose of the
Updated: 9/18/2019
5:3
hazardous substance or infectious agent or take any other appropriate action which is
deemed appropriate under the circumstance.
SEC. 5-3-3 SMOKE DETECTOR REQUIREMENT.
(a) GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SMOKE DETECTORS. All required smoke
detectors shall comply with the provisions of NFPA No. 72-E-1982-Standard on Automatic
Fire Detectors or NFPA No. 74-1980-Household Fire Warning Equipment.
(b) INSTALLATIONS.
(1) Each living unit shall be provided with an approved, listed and labeled smoke
detector sensing visible or invisible particles of combustion, installed in the
basement of the dwelling unit and on each floor level except the attic or storage area
of each dwelling. "Basement" means that portion of a dwelling between floor and
ceiling which is below or partly below and partly above grade but so located that the
vertical distance from the grade to the floor below is more than the vertical distance
from grade to ceiling. A smoke detector will be required in a basement only if the
ceiling height is six (6) feet or more and only if that portion of the structure is used
for storage, heating, air conditioning or living space.
(2) Except as provided in Section ILHR 57.16(2)(b), all smoke detectors connected
with each other or with the manual fire alarm system shall be installed in accordance
with the provision of NFPA No. 72A-1979-Standard for the Installation,
Maintenance and Use of Local Protective Signaling Systems for Guard's Tour, Fire
Alarm and Supervisory Service. Where smoke detectors are interconnected with the
manual fire alarm system, the smoke detectors shall be wired in accordance with the
provisions specified in Section ILHR 16.34, Wis. Adm. Code.
(c) OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
(1) The owner of any rental unit shall be responsible for the installation of a smoke
detector system in compliance with Subsections (b)(1) and (2) above. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to assure that the system is operational prior to initial
occupancy and upon change of tenants.
(2) The tenant shall be responsible for day-to-day maintenance and testing of the smoke
detector system including replacement of batteries where applicable. In the event of
malfunction other than that which can be remedied by day-to-day maintenance, the
tenant shall notify the owner in writing of any such malfunction.
(3) The owner shall have five (5) days upon receipt of the written notice from the tenant
to repair or replace the smoke detector or smoke detection system.
(d) COMPLAINT OF TENANTS. Any time a complaint is received by the Fire Inspector or
Building Inspector from a tenant of a dwelling unit that smoke detectors are not provided,
the Fire Inspector shall issue orders to the owner of said property, requiring that a smoke
detector verification form be completed and signed when the smoke detectors are installed.
(e) VERIFICATION FORM. Upon resale where real property status is requested from the
City for a property used in whole or part for residential purposes, a smoke detector
verification form shall be completed and signed by the owner or agent, indicating that
smoke detectors are installed in said dwellings. A copy of the verification form shall be
kept on file in the Department of Community Development.
(f) If Neenah-Menasha Fire Rescue responds to a non-owner occupied residential property and
finds that properly installed working smoke detectors are not present, it will install smoke
detectors as needed and the property owner will be responsible to pay the cost, as
determined by the Common Council, imposed as a special charge pursuant to §66.0627,
Wis. Stats. Notice of the special charge shall be mailed to the last-known address of the
owner of the parcel and shall be payable within thirty (30) days after billing. Any charge not
paid on or before the next succeeding November 15 shall be placed upon the tax roll for
Updated: 9/18/2019
5:4
collection as other special municipal taxes.
SEC. 5-3-4 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
(a) SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS. Whenever automatic sprinkler equipment is required or
installed, it shall be connected to an adequate water supply with sprinkler heads, valves and
auxiliary equipment of standard types suitable for the individual building to be protected as
determined by Standard 13 National Fire Prevention Association in effect at the date of
installation. No automatic sprinkler equipment shall be installed or altered in a building
until plans have been submitted to the Fire Prevention Bureau and approved. Two (2)
copies of plans shall be submitted and approved plans stamped "Approved by Fire
Prevention Bureau." One (1) copy shall be returned to the owner and the other kept on file
in the Fire Department. This is in addition to plans that are on file with the Building
Inspector.
(b) INSPECTIONS. Every automatic sprinkler system required under this Section shall be
inspected upon installation and at least once a year by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. A
certificate indicating such inspection has been made and that the system is approved shall be
issued to the owner by the Bureau.
(c) MAINTENANCE. The owner or occupant of a building containing the required automatic
sprinkler system or in which one is installed shall maintain the system in an operative
condition at all times. The occupant of the building shall notify the Chief of the Fire
Department prior to interrupting this system for any reason or at the time it is withdrawn or
its service interrupted or curtailed.
(d) FEE REQUIRED. The initial fee for the installation of an automatic sprinkler system
shall be a Ten Dollar ($10.00) base fee for up to One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) in the
value of the system. Thereafter, the fee shall be increased One Dollar ($1.00) per One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) to Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00), and Fifty Cents (50)
per One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) over Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00).
SEC. 5-3-5 RE-INSPECTIONS OR MISSED APPOINTMENTS.
(a) Any person who shall fail to comply with any lawful order of the Fire Chief or a
designated NMFR representative, issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, may
be assessed a re-inspection fee, which fee shall be established by the Common Council.
(b) The Fire Chief shall keep an accurate account of all unpaid inspection fees incurred for
re-inspection or missed appointment services and such fees shall be charged to and paid
by the parcel or lot owner. Notice of the bill for such fees shall be mailed to the lastknown
address of the owner of the parcel or lot and shall be payable within thirty (30)
days after billing. Any charge not paid on or before the next succeeding November 15
shall be placed upon the tax roll for collection as other special municipal taxes.
120294
5:1
CHAPTER 4
Emergency Government
SEC. 5-4-1 JOINT ACTION EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT PLAN.
The City of Menasha hereby enacts the Emergency Operations Plan attached as exhibit A to
O-4-05.
120294
6:1
CHAPTER 1
Board of Public Works; Grades
SEC. 6-1-1 RULES BY BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS.
In addition to the rules and regulations contained in this Chapter for the construction, use and repair
of streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places, the Board of Public Works shall prepare, promulgate,
and enforce such other rules, regulations, and conditions not inconsistent with this Chapter as may
be deemed useful for the preservation of streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places.
SEC. 6-1-2 ESTABLISHMENT OF GRADES.
(a) GRADES TO BE ESTABLISHED. The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be
established by resolution by the Common Council and the same recorded by the Department
of Public Works. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the grade thereof is
established. In all cases where the grade of sidewalks shall not have been specifically set by
ordinance, the sidewalks shall be laid to the established grade of the street. All such grades
heretofore established are hereby confirmed. The standards will be based on width, and
right-of-way width, all in conformity with good and normal construction practices.
(b) NEW SIDEWALK GRADE. Whenever a street shall be improved for the first time or the
grade thereof changed and the street improved so as to conform to the new grade, the
grading of the sidewalk shall be considered a part of the improvement, shall be let by
contract with the other work of improving such street, and the expense thereof shall be
provided for and borne in all respects like that of improving the street, but the construction
shall be done by the owners of the abutting lots or parcels of land or at their expense as
hereinafter provided. Before such construction is commenced by the owners of the abutting
lots or parcels of land, the Director of Public Works shall, upon application by the respective
owners for a sidewalk grade, cause such sidewalk grade to be established.
State Law Reference: Section 62.14(7) and 62.16, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 6-1-3 ALTERATION OF GRADE PROHIBITED.
No person shall alter the grade of any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground or any part thereof in
the City of Menasha by any means whatsoever unless authorized or instructed to do so by the
Director of Public Works. All such alterations of grade shall be recorded in the office of the
Director of Public Works.
120294
6:2
SEC. 6-1-4 REGULATION AND GRADES OF UNDERGROUND UTILITIES.
(a) ELEVATION. The grade or elevation of all underground construction shall be three (3)
feet below the established grade of the street, alley, park, public property or easement. The
three (3) feet shall be measured between the top of the established grade and the top of the
underground construction.
(b) APPROVAL OF LOCATION. The location of any and all such underground construction
must have the approval of the Director of Public Works.
(c) FILING PLANS. Complete plans for any such construction must be filed with and be
approved by the Director of Public Works before construction can begin.
(d) INSPECTION. On request of the Director of Public Works, the utility company must
provide opportunity for him to check any construction before it may be covered.
(e) CONFLICT WITH OTHER UTILITIES. If the grade or elevation herein set for the
underground construction of utilities shall, in any instance, conflict with other existing
utilities, the utility shall be required to lower the elevation of its underground construction, or
of the storm sewer, at the election of the Director of Public Works and in accordance with
his directions and specifications.
(f) ESTABLISHMENT OF GRADE. At the request of the utility company, the Director of
Public Works shall, at the City's expense, give the utility company an established grade on
any streets, alleys, public parks or easements where it proposes to install underground
utilities.
(g) EMERGENCY. In case of an emergency, when immediate action is necessary in order to
protect life or property, the utility company may proceed with underground construction
subject to obtaining the approval of such work by the Director of Public Works as soon
thereafter as is reasonably possible.
(h) RESTORATION OF SURFACE. In the event of any such underground construction, the
utility company shall leave the surface of the ground, or road, in the same condition as before
said work was commenced, and in the event of its failure so to do the City may proceed to
place the surface of the ground or street in such condition at the utility company's expense.
Such work shall comply with the provisions of Sections 6-2-3 and 6-2-4.
(i) NON-RELIEF FROM OBLIGATIONS. Compliance with this Section does not relieve
the utility company from any responsibility of any kind whatsoever by reason of the
widening of the travel way, or any other improvements which may become necessary; nor
does it relieve it from any liability of any kind or nature whatsoever. Compliance with this
Section shall not relieve the utility company from the responsibility or obligation of
removing, relocating or moving any of its mains, pipes or property due to the opening,
widening or improving of streets, or due to any other changes which may occur by reason of
which such moving, relocation or removing may be necessary.
SEC. 6-1-5 PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS; BIDDERS PROOF OF
RESPONSIBILITY.
(a) BIDDERS PROOF OF RESPONSIBILITY REQUIRED. When public works contracts
are required by law, the Director of Public Works is required before delivering any form for
bid proposals to require any person, partnership or corporation so bidding to submit a full
and complete statement sworn to before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths of
financial ability, equipment, and experience in the work prescribed in said public contract
120294
6:3
and of such other matters as the City or Director of Public Works thereof may require for the
protection and welfare of the public in the performance of said contract. Such statement
shall be in writing on a standard form of questionnaire as adopted for such use by the Board
of Public Works and shall be filed in the manner and place designated by the Board of Public
Works not less than five (5) days prior to the time set for opening of bids. The contents of
said statements shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed except upon written order of
such person, partnership or corporation furnishing the same or in cases of actions against the
City of Menasha by the bidders.
(b) PROOF OF RESPONSIBILITY, CONDITION PRECEDENT. No bid shall be
received from any person who has not submitted the sworn statement as provided in the
preceding Subsection, provided, however, that any prospective bidder who has once
qualified to the satisfaction of the Board of Public Works and who wishes to become a
bidder upon subsequent public contracts under the jurisdiction of the same, to whose
satisfaction the prospective bidder has qualified, need not again pre-qualify if less than
twelve (12) months has transpired since his previous qualification. It is the intention of this
Section that the information required for pre-qualification need not be submitted more than
once in any twelve (12) month period.
SEC 6-1-6 PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION BY CITY WITHOUT BIDS. Asphalt
paving and other repairs of streets is designated a class of Public construction that may be done
directly by the City without submitting the construction for bids, in accordance with s. 62.15(1), Wis
Stats.
120294
6:1
CHAPTER 2
Streets and Sidewalks
SEC. 6-2-1 REMOVAL OF RUBBISH AND DIRT FROM SIDEWALKS.
No owner or occupant shall allow the sidewalk abutting on his premises to be littered with rubbish
or dirt. If such owner or occupant shall refuse or fail to remove any such rubbish or dirt when
notified to do so by the Director of Public Works, the Director may cause the same to be done and
report the cost thereof to the City Comptroller who shall spread the cost on the tax roll as a special
tax against the premises, pursuant to Sec. 66.60(16), Wis. Stats., or such cost may be recovered in
an action against the owner or occupant.
SEC. 6-2-2 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR.
(a) COST OF REPAIR, MAINTENANCE OR RECONSTRUCTION.
(1) It shall be the policy of the City of Menasha that all reconstruction, repair or
maintenance work on the existing sidewalks within the corporate limits of the City
of Menasha shall be borne from the general funds and shall not be assessed against
the property of the owner.
(2) Sidewalks shall be located in such places as designated by the Board of Public
Works. No person shall remove any sidewalk without the permission of the
Director of Public Works.
(b) CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR REGULATED. No person, whether owner, builder
or contractor, shall build any new sidewalk or repair or renew, or cause to be built, repaired
or renewed any existing sidewalk contrary to the provisions of this Chapter.
(c) STATE LAW APPLICABLE.
(1) The Board of Public Works is empowered and directed to proceed with the
construction and repair of concrete sidewalks without advertising for bids upon such
work. The Board shall advertise for bids upon all materials and supplies, the
estimated cost of which shall exceed Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00). Said
work shall not be done on any street until specifically ordered as required by law.
(2) In addition to the provisions of this Chapter, the provisions of Section 66.615, Wis.
Stats., so far as applicable to this City, shall govern the construction, improvement
and repair of sidewalks.
(d) SPECIFICATIONS. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications
for standard sidewalks adopted by the Board of Public Works and on file with the Director
of Public Works unless such ordinance or resolution establish different standard therefor.
The standard width of sidewalks on residential streets shall be four (4) feet unless otherwise
directed by the Board of Public Works. Sidewalks in commercial areas, or areas
surrounding schools and churches and other areas where large groups of people congregate,
shall have a minimum width of five (5) feet or as otherwise directed by the Board of Public
Works.
(e) FAULTY WORK CONDEMNED.
(1) Notice to Remove. Whenever any person, firm or corporation shall repair or cause
to be repaired an existing sidewalk contrary to the terms of this Chapter, or shall
construct or cause to be constructed a sidewalk of substantially different material
120294
6:2
than as herein provided, or in such other manner that the same cannot be made to
conform to the requirements of this Chapter or to any requirement of the Board of
Public Works without completely reconstructing such sidewalk or some part
thereof, or is defective, insufficient or dangerous to travel, the Board of Public
Works is empowered to and shall condemn such sidewalk or such part thereof and
shall give notice in writing to such person, firm or corporation of such action and
that within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice the concrete sidewalk or part
thereof shall be removed and rebuilt in accordance with the terms of this Chapter.
(2) City May Repair; Cost. In case such person, firm or corporation shall fail or neglect
for twenty (20) days after the service of such notice to comply with the same, the
Board of Public Works shall proceed in the manner provided by law to cause such
sidewalk or part thereof to be removed and a new concrete sidewalk to be built in
place thereof and the cost of such work shall be charged to the abutting property, if
the cost cannot be recovered from the contractor.
(3) Rebuilding Existing Sidewalks. Whenever any existing sidewalk being of other
material than concrete shall hereafter be condemned by the Board of Public Works,
the sidewalk shall be repaired or reconstructed of concrete in the manner hereinafter
prescribed in this Chapter.
(f) PERMITS FOR SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
(1) Permit Required; Application. No sidewalk shall be constructed by any person, firm
or corporation without an application in writing made and filed with the Board of
Public Works for permission to construct the same, to be signed by the owner of the
premises, his agent or contractor, stating the length of said proposed walk, any
openings to be left therein or thereunder and the means proposed to cover or protect
the same, and designating the premises in front of which it is proposed to construct
the walk, and the nature of the principal buildings thereof.
(2) Issuance of Permit.
a. Upon the filing of such application, the Board of Public Works shall
determine the width of the walk, the thickness of the several sections
thereof, and information relating to any openings in or under the walk and
the means of covering or protecting the same, and shall thereupon issue a
permit in writing for the construction of the walk.
b. On all streets improved with a permanent curb the said permit shall state the
distance from the curb to the inner line of the proposed walk and any
direction that the Director of Public Works may deem necessary to give
concerning the grade thereof. Upon all other streets the Director of Public
Works shall, upon the granting of the permit, determine the lines and grades
of such walk and cause proper stakes to be set to designate the same on an
offset line, and until such stakes are so set the construction of such walk,
except the excavation therefor, shall not be commenced.
(3) Lights and Barriers. Any person who shall construct or cause to be constructed any
concrete sidewalks, including all contractors performing or supervising such
construction, shall cause sufficient barriers to be erected and maintained during the
period of construction, and a red light at each end of the sidewalk to be placed and
kept burning during each night of such period to the satisfaction of the Board of
Public Works.
120294
6:3
(g) DAMAGE TO SIDEWALK.
(1) No person shall, without authority in writing from the Director of Public Works,
interfere with, alter the position or level of, remove or destroy any line or grade
stakes set by the Director of Public Works.
(2) No person shall injure or tear up any side or crosswalk or shall injure or dig any
holes, ditch, or drain in or across any street, highway, lane or alley without first
having obtained the consent of the Common Council. Violations shall be subject to
a forfeiture hereinafter set forth in this Code.
(3) No person shall pass over or upon any cement sidewalk or crossing while the same
is in the process of construction or until the same shall become thoroughly dry and
hardened. Barriers shall be placed around new sidewalks by workers constructing
the same to prevent persons from passing over or upon the sidewalk under
construction. It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to remove said
barriers except those having lawful authority so to do.
(4) It shall be unlawful for the owner as well as any other person or corporation to at
any time mark, mar, deface, injure, mutilate, destroy, print or paint any letters names
or characters whatsoever on any cement sidewalk or crossing now or hereafter to be
built and constructed in the City of Menasha.
(h) SIDEWALK POLICY – EXISTING DEVELOPMENT.
(1) Sidewalks shall be mandatory on both sides of all arterial and collector streets as
listed in the "State Mileage Certification Report." Installation shall take place at the
time the streets are constructed to urban sections (curb and gutter, storm sewer, etc.).
(2) Sidewalks shall be mandatory on streets where the total density (including dedicated
right-of-way) on the abutting properties is greater than 3.5 units per acre and average
daily traffic is greater than 500 vehicles per day.
(3) Sidewalks shall be mandatory on any side of an individual block when 50% or more
of the length of said block has sidewalk constructed thereon.
(4) The minimum vehicle volume warrant for installation of sidewalk shall be 500 cars
per day.
(5) Nothing in the above provisions providing for the installation of sidewalks in the
existing development shall prevent the Board of Public Works from requesting
sidewalk construction if traffic engineering or any combination of pedestrian counts
and traffic volumes demonstrate a hazardous condition which would warrant
sidewalk installation.
(i) SIDEWALK INSTALLATIONS IN THE NEWLY PLATTED SUBDIVISIONS
(1) Sidewalks shall be mandatory on both sides of the street on all plats submitted for
approval to the Plan Commission. Exceptions may be granted only in the following
instances:
a. Industrial and commercial subdivisions;
b. In residential cul-de-sac streets (less than 500 feet in length) and other streets
of limited continuity where the density of development is less than 6 units
per acre.
c. Neighborhood residential streets where topography, trees, insufficient rightof-
way, or other unique circumstances make placement of walks on one or
both sides of the street impractical and where the absence of such walks will
not substantially interrupt pedestrian flow within the block or to parks,
schools, or other major pedestrian attractors.
120294
6:4
d. Where there is a dedication of a pedestrian right-of-way or other alternate
means of pedestrian circulation.
e. On neighborhood residential streets, where proposed total density (including
dedicated right-of-way) is less than 3.5 units per acre and average daily
traffic would not be such to cause sidewalk installation based on traffic
engineering warrants.
f. Nothing in this ordinance prohibits the installation of sidewalks upon
request of the adjoining property owners.
(j) Except in subdivisions currently under construction, streets without sidewalks as of the
effective date of this ordinance shall not be required to have sidewalks
installed pursuant to the terms of sec. 6 – 2 – 2.
(k) ILLEGAL SIDEWALKS. No sidewalk which shall be constructed contrary to the
provisions of this Section shall be considered a legal sidewalk and the same may be ordered
to be replaced with a legal sidewalk and one which is in conformity with this Section, the
same as if no sidewalk whatever had been built or constructed in the place where any such
sidewalk is located.
State Law Reference: Section 66.615, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 6-2-3 EXCAVATIONS OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS AND
GROUNDS.
(a) PERMIT REQUIRED.
(1) No person, partnership or corporation, or their agents or employees or contractors,
shall make or cause to be made any opening or excavation in any public street,
public alley, public way, public ground, public sidewalk or City-owned easement
within the City of Menasha without a permit therefor from the City Department of
Public Works.
(2) A permit is required prior to performing any of the following work in the street
right-of-way:
a. Excavation
b. Barricading
c. Construction of all types
(3) Permits shall be obtained from the City Engineering Department. Such permits
shall be issued upon filing an approved plan or diagram or signed statement
detailing the location and nature of the street opening and the payment of a fee
hereinafter listed. For emergency work, the required permit shall be obtained the
next following business day.
(b) EXCEPTION. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to City excavation work
done, including work by City utilities, under the direction of the Director of Public Works.
(c) VALIDITY OF PERMIT. Permits shall be valid for a period of thirty (30) days from the
date of approval, except as provided herein for pavement replacement. No permit fees shall
be paid by an agency of the City.
(d) CITY STANDARDS; FEES.
(1) City Standards. All street work shall be performed in accordance with the current
standard specifications for street openings. Any damaged curb and gutter, sidewalk
120294
6:5
or grass-covered area shall be restored to the condition prior to damage.
(2) Fees. Fees for the permits described above shall be established by the Board of
Public Works.
(e) INSURANCE REQUIRED. A permit shall be issued only upon condition that the
applicant submit to the Director of Public Works satisfactory written evidence that applicant
has in force and will maintain during the time the permit is in effect public liability
insurance of not less than $500,000 per one (1) person, $500,000 for one (1) accident and
property damage coverage of not less than $500,000. The policy shall name the City of
Menasha as the third party insured.
(f) BOND.
(1) Before a permit for excavating or opening any street or public way may be issued,
the applicant must sign a statement that he will indemnify and save harmless the
City of Menasha and its officers from all liability for accidents and damage caused
by any of the work covered by his permit, and that he will fill up and place in good
and safe condition all excavations and openings made in the street, and will replace
and restore the pavement pursuant to Section 6-2-4 over any opening he may make
as near as can be to the state and condition in which he found it, and keep and
maintain the same in such condition, normal wear and tear excepted, to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works for a period of one (1) year, and that he
will pay all fines of forfeitures imposed upon him for any violation of any rule,
regulation or ordinance governing street openings or drain laying adopted by the
Common Council and will repair any damage done to existing improvements during
the progress of the excavation in accordance with the ordinances, rules and
regulations of the City. Such statement shall also guarantee that, if the City shall
elect to make the street repair, the person opening the street will pay all costs of
making such repair and of maintaining the same for one (1) year.
(2) Faulty work or materials shall be immediately replaced by the permittee upon notice
by the City. Failure to correct deficiencies shall result in a one (1) year revocation
of the right to obtain a street opening permit. The City shall repair the deficiencies
and bill the permittee for all labor, materials and equipment used plus twenty
percent (20%) for administration.
(3) a. The person who does such restoration shall be responsible therefor for one
(1) year from the date of the completion of the work.
b. Before permission shall be granted, the applicant shall deposit with the City
Treasurer to insure performance of restoring such streets and terraces to their
original conditions the sum to be determined as follows:
1. If the street in such excavation is surfaced with portland cement
concrete, the sum of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00).
2. Dirt or gravel, the sum of Fifty Dollars ($50.00).
3. All other roads, the sum of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).
4. Terraces, the sum of Thirty-five Dollars ($35.00).
c. In lieu and instead of the deposit required, any person may execute and file
with the City Clerk, and keep in effect a surety bond in the sum of Ten
Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00), with a corporation surety conditioned upon
the timely and faithful performance of all conditions prescribed by law and
all laws and ordinances applicable in respect to all permits issued such
person.
d. Public utilities under the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission
doing work in the streets and terraces of the City of Menasha shall be
120294
6:6
exempt from filing such surety bond but their contractors or subcontractors
shall not be excluded.
(4) Whenever the Director of Public Works shall find that any such work has become
defective within two (2) years of the date of completion, he shall give written notice
thereof to the contractor or to his surety stating the defect, the work to be done, the
cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the Director of Public Works to be
reasonably necessary to complete said work. After receipt of such notice, the
contractor or the surety must, within the time specified, repair the defect or
indemnify the City for the cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice.
(5) An annual bond may be given under this Section covering all excavation work done
by the principal for one (1) year beginning January 1, which shall be conditioned as
specified above and in the amount determined by the Common Council as necessary
to adequately protect the public and the City.
(g) (1) Any property owner may repair or replace his sidewalk or driveway approach
provided that the work is done under the supervision of the Department of Public
Works and that the provisions of Section 6-2-3 are complied with. Such owner
must obtain a permit, but need not furnish a bond and insurance. The deposit
provisions of 6-2-3(f)(3) will apply. Such deposit will be refunded upon final
inspection by the City Engineering Department.
(2) Any property owner may construct a new sidewalk or driveway approach provided
that the work is done under the supervision of the Department of Public Works and
that the provisions of Section 6-2-3 are complied with. Such owner must obtain a
permit, but need not furnish a bond and insurance. The deposit provisions of 6-2-
3(f)(3) will apply. Such deposit will be refunded upon final inspection by the City
Engineering Department.
SEC. 6-2-4 REGULATIONS GOVERNING EXCAVATIONS AND OPENINGS.
(a) FROZEN GROUND. No openings in the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public ways shall be
permitted when the ground is frozen except where it is determined by the Director of Public
Works to be an emergency excavation.
(b) NOTICES.
(1) Notices to Fire, Police and Sheriff's Departments. The contractor shall give notice
in writing to the Fire Department and Police Department at least three (3) days
before excavating in or obstructing traffic on any City street. If on County Trunk
Highways or State Trunk Highways, three (3) days written notice shall be given to
the County Sheriff, County Highway Commissioner and State Highway
Commissioner.
(2) Notice to Utilities, City Bureaus and Governmental Units. The contractor shall
notify all utilities, City bureaus and governmental units whose property may be
affected by the contractor's operations at least three (3) days before breaking ground.
The contractor shall not interfere with said property until the expiration of the time
specified in said notice and then only by permission of the Director of Public
Works, nor shall the contractor hinder or interfere with any person in the protection
of such work, or with the operation of buses, at any time except with the permission
of the Director of Public Works.
(c) PROTECTION OF EXISTING SURFACE. Conduits or pipes installed under
driveways, sidewalks, curbs or permanent pavements shall be augured or bored, except
120294
6:7
when permitted to do otherwise by the Director of Public Works or his authorized
representative.
(d) REMOVAL OF PAVING. In any opening or excavation all paving or ballasting materials
shall be removed with the least possible loss of or injury to surfacing materials and together
with the excavated materials from the opening shall be placed so as to cause the least
practicable inconvenience to the public and permit free flow of water along gutters.
(e) PROTECTION OF PUBLIC.
(1) The contractor shall furnish and erect neat and substantial fences or barricades
around roadway obstructions, shafts, trench crossings and other excavations as
prescribed by law and as may be further required for the protection of the public and
of the work. He shall supplement such protective fences or barricades by the use of
acceptable lights and flags, watchmen, signs and other measures that may be
necessary to afford proper and sufficient protection.
(2) Whenever the contractor shall have received a permit to work on any street, alley or
public right-of-way open to travel, he shall immediately upon commencing work on
such thoroughfare, furnish, erect and maintain substantial barricades across the
property affected and shall furnish, post and maintain construction warning signs
thereon. Detour signs, when required, shall also be posted and maintained at
immediately adjacent street and alley intersections for the convenience and guidance
of traffic. Flashing amber lights shall be mounted on all barricades placed within
the roadway that are present at night or when visibility is poor.
(3) All barricades used by the contractor shall conform to Part VI of the Wisconsin
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and shall have a readable name of the
contractor along with the telephone number at which he or his responsible
superintendent can be contacted.
(4) Any barricading or detouring for work performed in through streets shall be
approved by the Director of Public Works and Chief of Police prior to
commencement of work.
(5) Except by special permission from the Director of Public Works, no trench shall be
excavated more than two hundred fifty (250) feet in advance of pipe or conduit
laying nor left unfilled more than five hundred (500) feet from where pipe or
conduit has been laid.
(6) All necessary precautions shall be taken to guard the public effectively from
accidents or damage to persons or property through the period of the work. Each
person making such opening shall be held liable for all damages, including costs
incurred by the City in defending any action brought against it for damages, as well
as cost of any appeal, that may result from the neglect by such person or his
employees of any necessary precaution against injury or damage to persons, vehicles
or property of any kind.
(7) Unless otherwise approved, a minimum of one (1) lane of traffic in each direction
shall be provided. Every effort shall be made on the part of the permittee to provide
reasonable access to all properties adjacent to his project. In the event traffic is
limited to less than one (1) lane in each direction, a flagman or temporary traffic
control signal shall be provided so as to safely cycle traffic in each direction past the
work area.
(8) The permittee shall perform the work in such a manner so as not to disrupt the flow
of traffic in the area or endanger the safety of workers or passersby. It shall be the
responsibility of the permittee to prevent traffic backup during construction
operation.
120294
6:8
(f) SAFEGUARDING THE WORK AND THE WORK SITE. Whenever, in the
judgement of the City, the work and work site are not sufficiently safeguarded, the City may
order additional protection or in the event that there is not sufficient time for the contractor
to provide such safeguards, the City may have the work and work site safeguarded by others
and charge the cost to the contractor.
(g) REPLACING STREET SURFACE.
(1) In opening any public street, public alley, public sidewalk, public way, public
easement, or public ground, the paving materials, sand, gravel and earth or other
material moved or penetrated and all surface monuments or hubs must be removed
and replaced as nearly as possible in their original condition or position and the
same relation to the remainder as before. Any excavated material which in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works is not suitable for refilling shall be replaced
with approved backfill material. All rubbish shall be immediately removed.
(2) The Director of Public Works may order the permittee to remove and replace up to
one (1) full lane width of pavement along the patched or excavated area. Special
care shall be taken with concrete pavement to produce a vertical face on the existing
concrete at the point of the saw cut to insure a full depth of concrete at the joint.
(3) In refilling the opening, the earth must be puddled or laid in layers not more than six
(6) inches in depth and each layer rammed or tamped, or with the permission of the
Director of Public Works flushed, to prevent after-settling. All excavations in any
type roadway surface, sidewalk, apron or travel area shall be backfilled with
approved granular material. "Blow sand" is not acceptable, and will be ordered
removed at the contractor's expense.
(4) When performing trench construction, the permittee shall utilize trench protection
practices, including sheathing, shoring and bracing, in accordance with regulations
established by the Wisconsin Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations.
No timber, bracing, lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench.
At no time shall the street pavement be permitted to overhang the excavation.
(5) The City may elect to have the opening for any street or sidewalk repaired by the
City, in which case the cost of making such repair and of maintaining it for one (1)
year shall be charged to the person making the street opening.
(i) BACKFILLING STANDARDS.
(1) Jetted Backfill.
a. Trenches shall be settled by flooding with water after backfill has been
placed. The hose shall have a diameter of two (2) inches and a minimum
length of two-thirds (2/3) the depth of the trench to the top of the conduit.
The sewer trench shall be at least six (6) inches lower than the surrounding
terrain at the time of jetting. Insertions shall be made at five (5) foot
intervals along the trench and jetted until water ponds on the trench surface.
b. The nozzle shall be inserted as far as possible without damaging the pipe
foundation. Depression caused by settling shall be filled by the contractor at
his expense.
c. Water for jetting shall be furnished by the contractor at his expense.
(2) Tamped Backfill. Where tamping is required, backfill material shall be placed in
six (6) inch to twelve (12) inch layers from the top of the conduit and mechanically
tamped prior to adding more fill. All fill shall be uniformly compacted to a dry
density which is at least ninety percent (90%) of the maximum dry density for
material used, as determined by laboratory compaction test at optimum moisture
content. Compaction tests may be made in accordance with ASTMC-1557, Method
120294
6:9
D, at the expense of the City.
(3) Excavated Material Backfill.
a. Where excavated material is used for backfill, the contractor shall
mechanically tamp the excavated backfill material in six (6) inch to twelve
(12) inch layers or jet according to Subsection (i)(1) above.
b. Trenches backfilled with excavated material during winter months shall be
top dressed in spring after the frost has left the soil.
(j) BACKFILLING NOTICE. The Director of Public Works shall be notified at least four
(4) hours prior to backfilling and/or restoring the surface.
(k) VALIDITY OF PERMIT. Unless the work shall be commenced within thirty (30) days of
the issuance of the permit, the permit shall be void, and a new permit must be obtained and
an additional fee charged. The Director of Public Works may extend the time limitation for
good cause.
(l) EMERGENCY EXCAVATION. In the event of an emergency any person, firm or
corporation, owning or controlling any sewer, gas main, water main, conduit or other utility
in or under any public street, alley easement, way or ground and his agents and employees
may take immediate proper emergency measure to remedy dangerous conditions for the
protection of property, life, health, or safety without obtaining an excavation permit,
provided that such person, firm or corporation shall apply for an excavation permit not later
than the next business day, shall notify the City Police Department immediately and shall
not make any permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit.
(m) SURFACING MAINTENANCE. The permit holder shall be responsible for the
excavation, and shall have the temporary patch in place within five (5) working days from
the date of issuance of the permit, and in accordance with the requirements of Subsection
(n). In the event the permit holder fails to comply with these patching requirements, the
City will make one courtesy phone call to notify the permit holder of any deficiencies.
Failure to correct any deficiencies by noon the following day will result in the City
performing the necessary work and billing a rate pursuant to a schedule on file with the
Director of Public Works. No further permits will be issued to such permit holders until
such bills have been paid for. Normal maintenance of temporary patches will be done by
the City at no charge to the permit holders. Where excessive settlement occurs, the permit
holder will be notified to perform the necessary maintenance. If the repairs are not made in
the time specified above, the City will do all necessary work and charge the permit holder as
specified above.
(n) SURFACE REPAIR.
(1) Grass, Terraces and Boulevard Areas. The contractor shall be responsible for
permanent repair to all grass surface areas including reseeding or sodding.
(2) Pavements, Sidewalks, Aprons, Etc. The contractor at his expense shall cap the
trench areas with three (3) inches of asphalt cold patch material on top of
three-fourths (3/4) inch road stone which extends to the earth subgrade.
(o) SURFACE CUTTING.
(1) Concrete, Asphalt, Asphalt Over Concrete.
a. The extent of concrete removal within a given section of pavement is to be
determined by a field evaluation of existing conditions, i.e., joints,
structures, etc., thickness, reinforcing (if any), subsurface conditions and any
other factors pertinent to making a sound engineering evaluation. Such
evaluation shall be made by the Director of Public Works or his authorized
representative.
b. All excavations in concrete or asphalt pavements will be saw-cut before
120294
6:10
final patching is completed. When a pavement breaker is used to break the
pavement before excavation, the area must be outlined by holes drilled on
approximately six (6) inch centers. Saw cutting not done by the permit
holder will be done by the City when the final patch is made and included in
the bill. If the concrete base is disturbed under the pavement adjoining the
excavation, the City will remove asphalt surfacing to a solid base up to lines
forming a neat geometric patch.
(2) Graveled, Oiled and/or Road Mix Surfaces. Road surfacing cuts may be made by
air hammer or hoe, the same size as excavations, and shall be straight and
rectangular in shape.
(3) Driveways and Sidewalks.
a. In concrete driveways, a minimum width of three (3) feet shall be removed.
If the distance between the back of curb and the sidewalk is six (6) feet or
less, the entire driveway shall be removed. All cuts shall be made with a
concrete saw.
b. Driveway surfaces shall be restored to the original surface condition except
in case of concrete or hot asphalt driveways or sidewalks. Permanent
surfaces will be placed by the City and costs billed to the permit holder.
(p) CLEAN WORK SITE. All areas shall be neatly maintained and clean during and after
construction. Road surfaces shall be protected to prevent damage by construction
machinery. Should the contractor fail to maintain an acceptable site, the City may order the
necessary cleanup work to be done and bill the permit holder.
(q) COMPLETION NOTIFICATION. When the work has been completed and the
temporary patch is in place, the permit holder shall notify the Department of Public Works.
(r) PERMANENT SURFACE REPLACEMENT.
(1) All permanent surfaces of concrete or hot asphalt will be installed by the City.
Repairs will be made following one freeze-thaw cycle. The City will perform the
repair work under an annual contract bid for the specific purpose of repairing
various types of surface cuts, or with City forces.
(2) Costs of these repairs will be billed to the permit holders upon completion of the
repair.
(3) The contractor shall notify the Department of Public Works at which time a
representative of the Department will meet with the contractor to make and measure
the area disturbed for billing purposes.
(4) A bill will then be prepared using the cost plus fifteen percent (15%) and sent to the
contractor from the Finance Department. Payment of this bill shall relieve the
contractor of his responsibility in the event of excessive settlement.
(s) BACKFILL AND CARE OF TERRACES. When an excavation is made in a boulevard
or terrace of the public right-of-way, the permittee shall backfill and tamp in layers not
exceeding twelve (12) inches, and shall place a minimum of four (4) inches of good topsoil
on the surface. The area shall be leveled to coincide with adjacent turf and shall be seeded
with a mixture and at a rate meeting the approval of the Director of Public Works. The
terrace work shall be completed within two (2) weeks of the completion of the work except
that the Department of Public Works Inspector may waive this requirement during the
months of November through March. No further permit may be issued to anyone who has
not completed this work in accordance with this Section.
(t) EXCAVATION IN NEW STREETS LIMITED. Whenever the Common Council
determines to provide for the permanent improvement or repaving of any street, such
determination shall be made not less than thirty (30) days before the work of improvement
120294
6:11
or repaving shall begin. Immediately after such determination by the Common Council, the
Director of Public Works shall notify in writing each person, utility or other agency owning
or controlling any sewer, water main, conduit or other utility in or under said street or any
real property abutting said street, that all such excavation work in such street must be
completed within thirty (30) days. After such permanent improvement or repaving, no
permit shall be used to open or excavate said street for a period of five (5) years after the
date of improvement or repaving unless, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works,
conditions exist which make it absolutely essential that the permit be issued. Every effort
shall be made to place gas, electric, telephone and TV cable lines in street terraces.
SEC. 6-2-5 OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS.
(a) OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED. No person shall
encroach for a period in excess of five (5) minutes, upon or in any way obstruct or
encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public grounds, or land dedicated to public use, or any
part thereof, or permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any
public way adjoining the premises of which he is the owner or occupant, except as provided
in Subsections (b) and (c) or where a permit shall first be obtained from the Police
Department of the City. The Police shall designate the time and hour such obstruction can
take place.
(b) EXCEPTIONS. The prohibition of Subsection (a) shall not apply to the following:
(1) Public utility encroachments duly authorized by State Law or by the Common
Council.
(2) Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded which do not
obstruct the width of a sidewalk by more than three (3) feet on a sidewalk, provided
such goods, wares, etc., do not remain thereon for more than three (3) hours.
(3) Temporary encroachments or obstructions authorized by permit under Section 6-2-6
of this Section pursuant to Sec. 66.045, Wis. Stats.
(4) Building materials for the period authorized by Section 6-2-6(d).
(5) Excavations and openings permitted under Sections 6-2-3 and 6-2-4 of this Code.
(c) REMOVAL BY CITY. In addition to any other penalty imposed, if the owner or occupant
of the premises maintaining a prohibited obstruction or encroachment shall refuse or neglect
to remove such unlawful obstruction or encroachment after such notice from the Director of
Public Works or Police Department to do so, it shall be the duty of the Director of Public or
Police Department to remove such obstruction or encroachment and make return of the
costs and expenses thereof to the City Clerk who shall enter such cost on the next annual tax
roll as a special charge against the property abutting such obstructed sidewalk, and such
sum shall be levied and collected as other special taxes against real estate.
SEC. 6-2-6 STREET PRIVILEGE PERMIT.
(a) WHEN REQUIRED. Permits for the use of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public
ways or places of the City may be granted to applicants by the Director of Public Works for
the purpose of encumbering the street, alley, sidewalk or way with materials necessary in
and about the construction or demolition of any building or structure, provided such
applicant has complied with the other requirements of this Section and has obtained a
building permit if required by this Code of Ordinances. The Director of Public Works may
120294
6:12
request advisory recommendations from the Chief of Police and Building Inspector prior to
issuance of the permit. City officials may attach conditions to the permit.
(b) BOND. No street privilege permit shall be issued until the applicant shall execute and file
with the City Clerk proof of liability insurance coverage. The insurance coverage shall be
an amount of not less than $100,000 per occurrence and the policy shall specifically state
that it includes coverage for the fixtures located on the City sidewalks, streets or other
public ways. In addition, the City shall be identified as a third-party insured. The applicant
shall agree to indemnify and save harmless the City from all liability for accidents or
damage caused by reason of operations under said permit and will remove such
encumbrance upon termination of the operations and will leave the vacated premises in a
clean and sanitary condition and repair any and all damage to the streets, alleys, sidewalks
or public property of the City resulting from such building or moving operations.
(c) FEE. The fee for a street privilege permit shall be in the sum of Ten Dollars ($10.00), plus
any actual City costs.
(d) CONDITIONS OF OCCUPANCY. The permission to occupy or obstruct the streets,
alleys, sidewalks or public grounds is intended only for use in connection with the actual
erection, alteration, repair, removal or moving of buildings or structures and shall be given
upon the following terms and conditions and subject to revocation without notice by the
Director of Public Works for violation thereof:
(1) Such temporary obstruction shall cover not more than one-third (1/3) of any street or
alley.
(2) Obstructions shall be sufficiently lighted at night so as to be in full view of the
public from all directions.
(3) Sidewalk traffic shall not be interrupted, but temporary sidewalks of not less than
four (4) feet in width guarded by a closed fence at least four (4) feet high on both
sides may be maintained during the period of occupancy.
(4) The process of moving any building or structure shall be as continuous as
practicable until completed and, if ordered by the Chief of Police and Director of
Public Works, shall continue during all hours of the day and night.
(5) No building or structure shall be allowed to remain overnight on any street crossing
or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant.
(6) Buildings shall be moved only in accordance with the route prescribed by the
Director of Public Works and Chief of Police.
(7) Upon termination of the work necessitating such obstruction, all parts of the streets,
alleys, sidewalks or public grounds occupied under the permit shall be vacated,
cleaned of all rubbish and obstructions and placed in a safe condition for public
travel at the expense of the permittee.
(e) TERMINATION. All street privilege permits shall automatically terminate at the end of
three (3) months from the date of issuance unless an earlier termination date is specified
thereon at the direction of the Director of Public Works.
(f) REMOVAL BY CITY. In addition to any other penalty imposed, if the owner or occupant
of the premises adjoining any lawfully obstructed sidewalk shall remove or neglect to
remove such obstruction within twenty-four (24) hours after such notice from the Director
of Public Works to do so, it shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to remove
such obstruction and make return of the costs and expenses thereof to the City Clerk who
shall enter such cost on the next annual tax roll as a special charge against the property
abutting such obstructed sidewalk, and such sum shall be levied and collected as other
special taxes against real estate.
120294
6:13
State Law Reference: Section 66.045, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 6-2-7 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
(a) REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS. The owner, occupant, or person in charge of any
parcel or lot which fronts upon or adjoins any sidewalk shall keep said sidewalk clear of all
snow and ice. In the event of snow accumulating on said sidewalk due to natural means
and/or by any other means, said sidewalks shall be cleared of all accumulated snow and/or
ice within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the snow ceases to accumulate on said
sidewalk. Sidewalks are to be kept clear of snow and ice to a minimum of four (4) feet in
width. In the event that ice has formed on any sidewalk in such a manner that it cannot be
removed, the owner, occupant, or person in charge of the parcel or lot which fronts upon or
adjoins said sidewalk shall keep the sidewalk sprinkled with sand and/or salt to permit safe
travel by pedestrians.
(b) REMOVAL OF SNOW FROM SIDEWALKS. If the owner, occupant or person in
charge of any parcel or lot which fronts upon or adjoins any sidewalk shall fail to keep said
sidewalk clear of snow and ice as set forth in Subsection (a), the Director of Public Works
or designee shall take the following action:
(1) Hazardous Conditions. If the Director of Public Works or designee determines that
the failure to remove the snow and ice from the sidewalk creates an immediate
danger to the public health and/or safety, they shall cause the issuance of a written or
electronic notice on the first occasion per winter season (September 1 to August 31),
to said owner occupant, or person in charge of any parcel or lot directing that the
snow and ice be removed within two (2) hours from the delivery of the notice.
Subsequent violations will not require written or electronic notice. In the event the
property owner, occupant, or person in charge of said parcel or lot is unavailable to
receive a written notice, or has received at least one (1) notice during the winter
season, the Director of Public Works, or designee, shall immediately cause the
removal of the snow and/or ice. The Director of Public Works, or designee, shall
send a written or electronic notice to the property owner that a hazardous condition
existed which required immediately abatement.
(2) Non-Hazardous Conditions. If the owner, occupant, or person in charge of the
subject parcel or lot fails to remove the snow within the time period established in
Subsection (a), the Director of Public Works or designee shall cause the issuance of
a written or electronic notice on the first occasion per winter season (September 1 to
August 31) to said owner, occupant, or person in charge of the subject parcel or lot
directing the responsible person (as defined) to remove said snow and ice no later
than twenty-four (24) hours following the issuance of said notice. The notice shall
be hand delivered when possible or mailed or emailed to the owner of the subject
property as identified on the records in the City Assessor’s office. The Director of
Public Works, or designee, shall cause the removal of the snow and/or ice.
Subsequent violations will not require written or electronic notice.
(3) Snow and Ice Not to Encroach. No person shall push, shove, or in any way deposit
any snow or ice onto any public streets, alley, sidewalk, or public lands dedicated to
public use except for parcel or lots located where existing buildings are constructed
within five (5) feet of the street right-of-way and the sidewalks exist from the City
right-of-way to the curb line. In such instances, the owners, occupants, and/or
employees of parcels or lots shall be permitted to deposit snow and ice from their
120294
6:14
sidewalks onto the public streets.
(c) ENFORCEMENT. The Director of Public Works, designee, and all sworn police officers
are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Section.
(d) CONTINUED VIOLATIONS. Each twenty-four (24) hour period where a violation
occurs shall constitute a separate offense under this section for enforcement purposes.
Repeated violations or subsequent additional accumulations of snow and/or ice shall not
nullify any pending notice issued under this Section.
(e) ABATEMENT AFTER NOTICE. Failure of the owner, occupant, or person in charge of
any parcel or lot to cause the removal of snow and/or ice within the time established under
this section shall result in the Director of Public Works or designee causing the removal of
said snow and/or ice.
(f) EXPENSE. An account of the expenses incurred by the City, including costs incurred by
private contractors, to abate the snow and/or ice hazard shall be kept and such expenses
shall be charged to and paid by the parcel or lot owner. Notice of the bill for the removal of
snow and/or ice shall be mailed or emailed to the owner of the parcel or lot and shall be
payable within thirty (30) calendar days from the receipt thereof. Within sixty (60) days
after such costs and expenses are incurred and remain unpaid, the City Comptroller shall
enter those charges onto the tax roll as a special tax as provided by Section 66.0627(2), Wis.
Stats.
(g) PENALTY. In addition to the provisions set forth in this Section, any person, firm, or
corporation which violates the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in Section 1-1-7 of this Code of Ordinances.
State Law Reference: Sections 66.0627(2), 66.0707, 66.0907(5) and 74.01(4)Wis. Stats.
SEC. 6-2-8 VAULTS.
All new vaults shall be prohibited and existing vaults shall be maintained in conformance with this
Section. All vaults under sidewalks in the City shall be constructed of brick, concrete block, or
poured concrete. The surface opening into the street shall be within three (3) feet of the outer edge
of the sidewalk, or the curb. The slab over such vault shall be able to withstand a load of two
hundred fifty (250) pounds per square foot of slab area. The owner of any lot or parcel of land
adjoining such vault shall maintain such vault and slab over in a safe condition and at his own
expense.
SEC. 6-2-9 BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS HOME RULE PROVISIONS.
The City of Menasha hereby elects pursuant to Chapter 66 of the Statutes of Wisconsin to provide
that the actions of the Board of Public Works shall be subject to Council approval and mayoral
veto.
SEC. 6-2-10 PLACING OF NUMBERS ON RESIDENCES AND PLACES OF
BUSINESS.
(a) Each house or place of business shall be assigned a numerical number.
(b) It shall be the duty of the property owner to place such assigned number on each residence
and place of business in the City, observable and readable with the naked eye from the street
120294
6:15
right-of-way.
(c) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit numbers to be in script form in addition to the
numerical numbers if the property owner desires.
(d) Upon certification to the City Clerk by the proper officials that residences and places of
business are unnumbered, the City Clerk shall notify each property owner of the contents of
this Section.
120294
6:1
CHAPTER 3
Driveways
SEC. 6-3-1 DRIVEWAYS.
(a) PERMIT REQUIRED.
(1) Purpose. For the safety of the general public, the City of Menasha shall determine
the location, size, construction and number of access points to public roadways
within the City limits, through the administration of this Section by the Director of
Public Works. It is the City's intent to provide safe access to properties abutting
public roadways suitable for the property to be developed to its highest and best use,
provided that access is not deficient or dangerous to the general public.
(2) Permit Requirements. Unless otherwise permitted by resolution of the Common
Council, upon written application giving the reason therefor, no person shall
construct, repair or reconstruct any driveway across or through any sidewalk or
curbing without having first obtained a permit from the Building Inspector. The
permit fee shall be recommended by the Director of Public Works to the Common
Council. If the same is not amended by the Common Council, said fee shall stand.
Recertification to the Common Council is not necessary in the following years and
the fees remain unchanged. The original recommendation shall be to the
Administration Committee.
(b) INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
(1) Street Openings. Openings for vehicular ingress and egress for residential properties
shall be at least ten (10) feet wide at the property line but shall not exceed thirty-six
(36) feet at the curb opening, unless such opening previously existed greater than
thirty-six (36) feet, unless the Director of Public Works or his/her designee
determines that it is appropriate for the driveway opening to be of a greater width.
(2) Openings for vehicular ingress and egress for all nonresidential properties shall be at
least sixteen (16) feet wide at the property line but shall not exceed thirty-six (36)
feet at the curb opening, unless such opening previously existed greater than thirtysix
(36) feet.
(3) Exceptions.
a. Residential Properties. Requests for exceptions to Section 6-3-1(b)(1) shall
be considered pursuant to Section 13-1-53.
b. Non-residential Properties. Requests for exceptions to Section 6-3-1(b)(2)
shall be made in writing to the Director of Public Works. Any decision of the
Director of Public Works may be appealed pursuant to Section 13-1-53.
(4) Location. No driveway shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to the extended street
line at an intersection or at a crosswalk. At street intersections, a driveway shall not
provide direct ingress or egress to or from the street intersection area and shall not
occupy areas of the roadway deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works for
effective traffic control or for highway signs or signals. The location of driveway
openings on adjacent parcels or lots shall be such that an unbroken space of curb of
not less than four (4) feet is maintained between openings.
(5) Drainage. No driveway apron shall extend out into the street farther than the facing
of the curb and under no circumstances shall such driveway apron extend into any
gutter area. All driveway entrances and approaches shall be so constructed as not to
120294
6:2
interfere with the drainage of streets, side ditches or roadside areas or with any
existing structure on the right-of-way.
(6) Gutter Reconstruction. When a curb opening is to be made, the property owner shall
remove the entire curb and gutter and construct a new gutter, unless the Director of
Public Works or his/her designee determines reconstruction is unnecessary.
(c) PERMIT APPLICATIONS. Permit applications shall be made at least twenty-four (24)
hours in advance of intended installation but this shall not be deemed to be a limitation of
time within which a permit must be granted, and the Building Inspector shall have such time
as reasonably necessary for examination and consideration of any application before
granting the permit.
SEC. 6-3-2 PERMITTEE LIABLE FOR DAMAGE OR INJURY.
The permittee shall assume all responsibility for any injury or damage to persons or property
resulting directly or indirectly during construction or repair of driveway approaches or entrances.
When curb or gutter is removed, the new construction shall be of equivalent acceptable material and
curb returns provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike manner. Driveway surfaces shall connect
with the street pavement and sidewalk in a neat, workmanlike manner.
120294
6:1
CHAPTER 4
Trees and Shrubs
SEC. 6-4-1 STATEMENT OF POLICY AND APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.
(a) INTENT AND PURPOSE. It is the policy of the City to regulate and establish policy for
the control of planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in or upon
all public areas and terrace areas of the City to eliminate and guard against dangerous
conditions which may result in injury to persons using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public areas; to promote and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the City; to prohibit
the undesirable and unsafe planting, removal, treatment and maintenance of trees and shrubs
located in public areas; and to guard all trees and shrubs both public and private within the
City against the spread of disease, insects or pests.
(b) APPLICATION. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to trees and shrubs growing or
hereafter planted in or upon public areas and terrace areas and also to all trees and shrubs
growing or to be planted in or upon any private premises which shall threaten the life, health,
safety or welfare of the public or of any public areas.
SEC. 6-4-2 DEFINITIONS.
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Chapter, they shall be construed to have the
following meanings:
(a) PERSON. "Person" shall mean person, firm, association or corporation.
(b) PUBLIC AREAS. "Public Areas" shall include all public parks, trails, bike paths, and other
lands owned, controlled or leased by the city except terrace areas.
(c) PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS. "Public Trees and Shrubs" means all trees and shrubs
located or to be planted in or upon public areas.
(d) PUBLIC NUISANCE. "Public Nuisance" means any tree or shrub or part thereof which,
by reason of its condition, interferes with the use of any public area; infected with a plant
disease; infested with injurious insects or pests; injurious to public improvements or
endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of persons or property.
(e) BOULEVARD OR TERRACE AREAS. "Boulevard or Terrace Areas" means the land
between the normal location of the street curbing and sidewalk. Where there is no sidewalk,
the area four (4) feet from the curb line shall be deemed to be a boulevard for the purpose of
this Chapter. "Boulevard" shall have the same meaning as "terrace." Where there are only
sidewalks, the area four (4) feet from the curb shall be deemed boulevard areas under this
Chapter.
(f) MAJOR ALTERATION. Trimming a tree beyond necessary trimming to comply with this
Chapter.
(g) SHRUBS. "Shrubs" shall mean any woody vegetation or woody plant having multiple
stems and bearing foliage from the ground up.
(h) TREE. "Tree" shall mean any woody plant, normally having one stem or trunk bearing its
foliage or crown well above ground level to heights of sixteen feet or more.
(i) EVERGREEN TREE. "Evergreen Tree" shall mean any woody plant normally having one
stem or trunk and bearing foliage in the form of needles and crowns which extend from
120294
6:2
ground level throughout its entire height.
(j) FORESTER. Person designated by the Common Council as authorized to carry out
provisions of this Chapter.
(k) CITY. City of Menasha, Wisconsin.
SEC. 6-4-3 AUTHORITY OF CITY FORESTER TO ENTER PRIVATE
PREMISES.
The Superintendent of Parks, Forestry and Cemeteries shall serve as City Forester and shall carry out
the provisions of this Chapter under the direction of the Parks and Recreation Board.
(a) He/she may designate a municipal employee to perform the duties of Forester under Chapter
27, Wis. Stats., and may authorize such Forester to perform the duties and exercise the
powers imposed on the Common Council by this Chapter.
(b) The City Forester or his/her authorized representative may enter upon private premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of examining any tree or shrub located upon or over such
premises and carrying out any of the provisions of this Chapter.
SEC. 6-4-4 INTERFERENCE WITH THE CITY FORESTER PROHIBITED.
No person shall interfere with the City Forester or his authorized representative while they are
engaged in carrying out any work or activities authorized by this Chapter.
SEC. 6-4-5 ABATEMENT OF TREE DISEASE NUISANCES.
(a) DUTCH ELM AND OTHER TREE DISEASES A PUBLIC NUISANCE. Whereas the
Common Council has determined that there are many trees growing on public and private
premises within the City, the loss of which would substantially depreciate the value of public
and private property, impair the use and enjoyment of public and private premises and erode
the tax base of the City, and that the health and life of such trees is threatened by fatal
diseases such as Dutch Elm Disease, which is spread by the elm bark beetles Scolytus
multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.), the Common Council hereby
declares its intention to control and prevent the spread of tree diseases and the insect pests
and vectors which carry such diseases. Contagious tree diseases are declared to be public
nuisances.
(b) DEFINITIONS. As used in this Section, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context:
(1) "Public Nuisance" in this Chapter means:
a. Fatal or deleterious tree diseases.
b. Elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes
(Marsh.); Dutch Elm Disease.
c. Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected with the Dutch Elm
Disease fungus or in a weakened condition which harbors any of the elm
bark beetles, Scolytus multistriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.)
d. Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood
or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and burned
or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle destroying concentrate.
e. Any tree or part thereof which by reason of its condition and location is
120294
6:3
hazardous or dangerous to persons and property using or upon any public
street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public or private place, including the
terrace strip between curb and lot line.
f. Any tree or part thereof which is infested by the eastern tent caterpillar or
other defoliating larvae.
(2) "Public property" means owned or controlled by the City, including without
limitation because of enumeration, public sites, parks, playgrounds, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, boulevards, and the terrace strip between the lot line and the curb or
improved portion of any public way.
(3) "Person" means person, firm or corporation.
(c) INSPECTION.
(1) The City Forester shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises and places
within the City to determine whether any public nuisance exists thereon. He shall
also inspect or cause the inspection of any elm tree reported or suspected to be
infested with the Dutch Elm Disease or any elm bark bearing materials reported or
suspected to be infested with elm bark beetles.
(2) Whenever necessary to determine the existence of Dutch Elm Disease or elm bark
beetles in any tree, the person inspecting such tree shall remove or cut specimens
from the tree in such manner as to avoid fatal injury thereto and deliver such
specimens to the Forester who shall forward them to the Wisconsin Department of
Agriculture at Madison for analysis to determine the presence of such nuisances.
(3) The Forester and his agents or employees shall have authority to enter upon private
premises at reasonable times for the purpose of carrying out any of the provisions of
this Section.
(d) ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES; DUTY OF FORESTER.
(1) The Forester shall order, direct, supervise and control the abatement of public
nuisances as defined in this Section by spraying, removal, burning or by other means
which he determines to be necessary to prevent as fully as possible the spread of
Dutch Elm Disease fungus, other deleterious tree diseases or the insect pests or
vectors known to carry such diseases.
(2) Whenever the Forester after inspection or examination shall determine that a public
nuisance as herein defined exists on public property in the City, he shall immediately
abate or cause the abatement of such nuisance in such manner as to destroy or
prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch Elm Disease, other deleterious tree
diseases, or the insect pests or vectors known to carry such disease fungus.
(3) a. When the Forester shall determine with reasonable certainty that a public
nuisance exists upon private premises, he shall immediately serve or cause to
be served personally or by registered mail upon the owner of such property,
if he can be found, or upon the occupant thereof, a written notice of the
existence of such nuisance and of a time and place for a hearing, not less than
fourteen (14) days after service of such notice, on the abatement action to be
taken. Such notice shall describe the nuisance and recommend procedures
for its abatement, and shall further state that unless the owner shall abate the
nuisance in the manner specified in the notice, or shall appear at the hearing
to show that such nuisance does not exist or does not endanger the health of
trees in the City, the Forester shall cause the abatement thereof at the expense
of the property served. If the owner cannot be found, such notice shall be
given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
b. If, after hearing held pursuant to this Subsection, it shall be determined by the
120294
6:4
Common Council that a public nuisance exists, it shall forthwith order the
immediate abatement thereof. Unless the property owner abates the nuisance
as directed within five (5) days after such hearing, the Forester shall proceed
to abate the nuisance and cause the cost thereof to be assessed against the
property in accordance with the procedures provided in this Section. The
Forester may extend the time allowed the property owner for abatement work
but not to exceed ten (10) additional days.
(e) SPRAYING.
(1) Whenever the Forester shall determine that any tree or part thereof is infected with a
deleterious or fatal tree disease or is in a weakened condition or harbors elm bark
beetles, he may cause all trees within a one thousand (1,000) foot radius thereto to be
sprayed with an effective disease destroying concentrate or other insecticide.
(2) In order to facilitate the work and minimize the inconvenience to the public of any
spraying operations conducted under this Section, the Forester shall cause to be
given advance public notice of such operations by newspaper, radio, television,
public service announcements or other effective means and shall also cause the
posting of appropriate warning notices in the areas and along the streets where trees
are to be sprayed at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of spraying. When any
residue or concentrate from municipal spraying operations can be expected to be
deposited on any public street, the Forester shall also notify the Chief of Police, who
shall take all necessary steps to make and enforce temporary parking and traffic
regulations on such streets as conditions require. Temporary "no parking" notices
shall be posted in each block of any affected street at least twenty-four (24) hours in
advance of spraying operations.
(3) When appropriate warning notices and temporary "no parking" notices have been
given and posted in accordance with Subsection (b) of this Section, the City shall not
allow any claim for damages to any vehicle caused by such spraying operations.
(4) When trees on private property are to be sprayed, the Forester shall notify the owner
of such property and proceed in accordance with the requirements of Subsection
(d)(3).
SEC. 6-4-6 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS OF ABATEMENT.
(a) The entire cost of abating any public nuisance, spraying trees or trimming trees located on
public property shall be borne by the City.
(b) The cost of abating a public nuisance or spraying elm trees or elm wood located on private
premises when done at the direction and under the supervision of the Forester shall be
assessed to the property on which such nuisance, tree or wood is located as follows:
(1) The Forester shall keep a strict account of the cost of such work or spraying and the
amount chargeable to each lot or parcel and shall report such work, charges,
description of lands to which charged and names and addresses of the owners of such
lands to the Common Council on or before October 15 of each year.
(2) Upon receiving the Forester's report, the Council shall hold a public hearing on such
proposed charges, giving at least fourteen (14) days' advance notice of the time, place
and purpose of such hearing to interested persons by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality and by mail to the owner of each property
proposed to be charged. Each property owner shall be notified of the amount
proposed to be assessed against his premises and the work for which such charge is
120294
6:5
being made.
(3) After such hearing, the Common Council, upon the recommendation of the Parks
and Recreation Board, shall affirm, modify and affirm or disapprove such
assessments by resolution and shall cause a copy thereof to be published. Upon
adoption and publication of such resolution, assessments made thereby shall be
deemed final.
(4) The City Comptroller shall mail notice of the amount of such final assessment to
each owner of property assessed at his last-known address, stating that, unless paid
within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, such assessment will be entered on
the tax roll as a tax against the property, and all proceedings in relation to the
collection, return and sale of property for delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to
such assessment.
(5) The City hereby declares that, in making assessments under this Section, it is acting
under its police power, and no damages shall be awarded to any owner for the
destruction of any diseased or infested tree or wood or part thereof.
SEC. 6-4-7 PERMIT FOR PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF
TREES AND SHRUBS.
(a) PERMIT REQUIRED. No person, except upon order of the City Forester, shall plant or
remove, or perform major alterations as determined by the Forester on a tree or shrub in the
public right-of-way terrace area or cause such act to be done by others without first obtaining
a written permit for such work from the City Forester as herein provided. Such planting
permit must be obtained from the City Forest at least five (5) days prior to the planting. The
applicant shall comply with the planting standards of Sec. 6-4-8.
(b) PERMIT EXEMPTIONS. No permit shall be required to cultivate, fertilize or water trees
or shrubs or for work by City personnel on park properties. No permit is necessary to plant
trees inside the property line.
(c) PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS. If the City Forester determines that
the proposed work or planting described in an application for a permit is necessary and in
accord with the purposes of this Chapter, taking into account the safety, health and welfare
of the public, location of utilities, public sidewalk, driveways and street lights, general
character of the area in which the tree or shrub is located or proposed to be located, type of
soil, characteristics and physiological need of the genus, species and variety of tree and
shrub, he shall have the Forester issue a permit to the applicant. The applicant must contact
Digger's Hotline for location of all utilities prior to planting.
(d) PERMIT FORM; EXPIRATION; INSPECTION. Every permit shall be issued by the
City Forester on a standard form and shall include a description of the work to be done and
shall specify the genus, species and variety, size and location of trees or shrubs to be planted,
if any. Any work under such permit must be performed in strict accordance with the terms
thereof and the provisions of this Chapter. Permits issued under this Section shall expire six
(6) months after date of issuance. There will be no charge for this permit.
(e) PERMITS TO PUBLIC UTILITIES.
(1) Whenever a permit is issued under this Section to a public utility to remove, trim,
prune, cut, disturb, alter or perform surgery on any public tree or shrub, the City
Forester or his/her designee shall limit any such work in his/her discretion.
(2) A public utility may secure an annual working agreement with the City Forester's
office which gives the City Forester the authorization to supervise and direct work
120294
6:6
associated with trees and shrubs.
SEC. 6-4-8 PLANTING OF TREES AND SHRUBS.
(a) PURPOSE. The Common Council hereby states its determination that the planting, care
and protection of the trees within the City is desirable for the purposes of beauty, shade,
comfort, noise abatement and economic betterment, and hereby encourages all persons to
assist in a program of tree planting, care and protection.
(b) TREE PLANTING PROGRAM. The City Forester shall recommend to the Common
Council a program for tree planting, care and protection for public parks. The Council shall
also encourage the planting, care and protection of trees and shrubs on private premises
within the City.
(c) PLANTING.
(1) The size and genus, species and variety of trees and shrubs to be planted in public
areas and boulevards and the manner of planting shall be submitted to the City
Forester for approval before commencement of such work. The permit application
process is required in Section 6-4-7.
(2) There shall be a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet and a recommended distance of
thirty-five (35) to fifty (50) feet between terrace area trees depending upon the size of
tree and other factors. Terrace trees shall be planted equal distance between the
sidewalk or proposed sidewalk and back of the curb or proposed back of curb. In
terrace areas less than three (3) feet wide, planting will not be permitted. Terrace
area trees shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from an intersection.
(3) Evergreen trees shall not be planted in a terrace area.
(4) It shall be unlawful to plant or maintain shrubbery, ground cover or other plants not
considered to be a deciduous leaf tree within terrace areas whose growth is in excess
of eight (8) inches in height above the top of the nearest curb. If deemed appropriate,
the City Forester may waive this requirement.
(5) Tree grates shall be provided for terrace trees surrounded by concrete by the adjacent
property owner and shall be level with adjacent concrete.
(d) UNLAWFULLY PLANTED TREES. Trees, plants or shrubs planted within any terrace
or planting easement without the authorization and approval of the Forester may be removed.
The Forester shall notify the abutting owner in writing, listing the unlawfully planted trees,
plants or shrubs, order their removal, and establishing a reasonable time within which such
removal shall be accomplished. In the event that removal is not to be accomplished within
the time specified, the City may remove such trees, plants or shrubs and assess the costs
thereof to the owner.
(e) FRAMES. Any person, adjacent to whose land any shade or ornamental tree or shrub is
growing in any street, may, for the purpose of protecting such tree or shrub, surround the
same with a suitable box or frame for protection, but all such work shall be performed under
the supervision and direction of the City Forester.
SEC. 6-4-9 TRIMMING.
(a) Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any boulevard, public area or upon any private
premises adjacent to any public right-of-way or public areas shall be kept trimmed so that the
lowest branches projecting over the public street or alley provide a clearance of not less than
120294
6:7
fourteen (14) feet. Such trimming may only be done by City employees or authorized
persons under contract with the City. The City Forester may waive the provisions of this
Section for newly planted trees if he determines that they do not interfere with public travel,
obstruct the light of any street light or endanger public safety.
(b) The necessity of the pruning may be determined by the City Forester.
(c) Clearance from sidewalk to lower branches shall not be less than eight (8) feet. All trees
standing upon private property in the City, the branches of which extend over the line of the
street, shall be trimmed so that no branch shall grow or hang over the line of the sidewalk
lower than eight (8) feet above the level of the sidewalk. No tree shall be permitted to grow
in such a manner as to obstruct the proper diffusion of light from any public lamp. All
private trees must maintain a minimum clearance of fourteen feet above any public street or
any private road serviced by any municipal vehicles. Low growing trees, such as crabapples,
shall be trimmed within the confines of the terrace.
SEC. 6-4-10 TREES AND SHRUBBERY OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT
INTERSECTION OR VIEW OF TRAFFIC SIGNS.
(a) OBSTRUCTION BY TREES, SHRUBS, FENCES, WALLS, SIGNS OR OTHER
STRUCTURES.
(1) Prohibited Obstructions. No person shall maintain trees, shrubs, fences, walls, signs,
or other structures in the vision control area which obstruct the necessary view of the
driver of a motor vehicle on a public street or private driveway or which interfere
with the driver’s control. The vision control area is defined as the minimum sight
triangle for the appropriate intersection/driveway set of conditions, as established by
the current effective AASHTO sign distance references. In said vision control area,
fences, walls, signs, or other structures shall not exceed three (3) feet in height and
shall be two-thirds (2/3) open to vision equally distributed throughout the vision
control area. In the vision control area, trees and shrubs shall be maintained to
provide unobstructed vision from two and one-half (2-1/2) feet above the centerline
of the abutting pavement to ten (10) feet above the said centerline elevation.
(2) Duties of the Director of Public Works. It shall be the duty of the Director of Public
Works or his representative to enforce this Section by appropriate order giving the
offending party thirty (30) days to remove or correct the situation. Said order shall
be served by certified mail. Where the home is in joint tenancy, service on one (1) of
the homeowners shall be presumed service on the other.
(3) Appeals of Orders of the Director of Public Works. All appeals of orders issued by
the Director of Public Works shall be made within fifteen (15) days of the service of
the order and shall be addressed to the City Clerk and the matter heard by the Board
of Public Works.
(b) OTHER OBSTRUCTIONS. It is unlawful for any person to plant, cause to grow, allow to
grow or maintain any trees, bushes, shrubbery or vegetation of any kind which is an
obstruction to the clear and complete vision of any traffic sign or driveway approach to a
street in the City.
(c) Any shrub, tree or other plant which obstructs the view at an intersection or the view of a
traffic sign shall be deemed to be dangerous to public travel and the City Forester may order,
by written notice, the owner or occupant of any private place or premises on which there
stands a tree or shrub which unreasonably interferes with or encroaches upon the street or
sidewalk, to take such steps as are necessary to remove such interference. If such owner or
120294
6:8
occupant fails, within ten (10) days of receipt of notice, to take such necessary steps, the
Director of Public Works shall order the City employees to remove the interference. The
cost of removing the interference shall be levied and collected as a special tax upon the
property upon which or in front of which such tree or shrub stands.
(d) Any person who is an owner or occupant or firm or corporation failing to obey the written
notice of the Director of Public Works as specified in Subsection (c) above shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture as established in Section 1-1-7 of this Code of
Ordinances.
SEC. 6-4-11 PROHIBITED ACTS.
(a) DAMAGE TO PUBLIC TREES. No person shall, without the consent of the owner in the
case of a private tree or shrub, or without written permits from the City Forester in the case
of a terrace-area tree, public tree or shrub, perform or cause to be performed by others any of
the following acts:
(1) Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire sign, unprotected electrical installation or other
device or material to, around or through a tree or shrub.
(2) Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub or permit any fire to
burn where it will injure any tree or shrub.
(3) Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil or other injurious substance to seep, drain
or be emptied upon or about any tree or shrub or place cement or other solid
substance around the base of the same.
(4) Remove any guard, stake or other device or material intended for the protection of a
public tree or shrub, or close or obstruct any open space about the base of a public
tree or shrub designed to permit access of air, water and fertilizer.
(5) Attach any sign, poster, notice or other object on any tree, or fasten any guy wire,
cable, rope, nails, screws or other device to any tree; except that the City may tie
temporary "no parking" signs to trees when necessary in conjunction with street
improvement work, tree maintenance work or parades.
(6) Cause or encourage any fire or burning near or around any tree.
(b) EXCAVATIONS. All trees on any parkway or other publicly owned property near any
excavation or construction of any building structure or street work shall be sufficiently
guarded and protected by those responsible for such work as to prevent any injury to said
trees. No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches, or install pavement within a
radius of ten (10) feet from any public tree without a permit from the City Forester.
(c) REFUSAL TO ABATE NUISANCE. Permits any public nuisance to remain on any
premises owned or controlled by him when ordered by the Forester to abate such nuisance.
SEC. 6-4-12 APPEAL FROM DETERMINATIONS OR ORDERS.
Except as provided in Section 6-4-10, any person who receives a determination or order under this
Chapter from the City Forester and objects to all or any part thereof shall have the right to appeal
such determination or order, pursuant to the provisions of Title 4 of this Code of Ordinances and
Chapter 68, Wis. Stats., to the Common Council within seven (7) days of receipt of the order and the
Common Council shall hear such appeal within thirty (30) days of receipt of written notice of the
appeal. After such hearing, the Common Council may reverse, affirm or modify the order or
determination appealed from and the grounds for its decision shall be stated in writing. The
120294
6:9
Common Council shall, by letter, notify the party appealing the order or determination of its decision
within ten (10) days after the hearing has been concluded. The Council shall file its written decision
with the City Clerk.
SEC. 6-4-13 ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES.
Sections 27.09 and 86.03, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
State Law Reference: Sections 27.09 and 86.03, Wis. Stats.
120194
11:1
CHAPTER 5
City of Menasha Official Map
SEC. 6-5-1 CITY OF MENASHA OFFICIAL MAP
(a) AUTHORITY. In accordance with the authority granted by Section 62.23(b) of the
Wisconsin Statutes, the Common Council hereby establishes an official map. Such map
shall bear the title "City of Menasha Official Map" and a certified copy shall be kept on file
in the City Clerk's office.
(b) INTENT. The official map is declared to be established to conserve and promote the public
health, safety, convenience, or general welfare.
(c) JURISDICTION. The official map shall apply to all areas within the City of Menasha and
within extraterritorial areas as authorized by Section 62.23(b)(e) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(d) COMPLIANCE.
(1) Plat and Certified Survey Map Approval. No subdivision plat or certified survey
map shall be approved unless such plat or CSM conforms to the official map.
(2) Public Utilities and Improvements. No public sewer or other municipal street utility
or improvement shall be constructed in any street, highway or parkway until such
street, highway, or parkway is duly placed on the official map. Where the
enforcement of the provisions in this section would entail practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, and where the circumstances of the case do not require the
structure to be related to existing or proposed streets, highways, or parkways, the
applicant for such a permit may appeal from the decision of the Community
Development Director to the Board of Appeals using the procedures established
under Sec.6-5-1(d)(3)(a)(2). The board may in passing on such appeal make any
reasonable exception, and issue the permit subject to conditions that will protect any
future street, highway, or parkway layout.
(3) Permit Required for Construction of Buildings. Any person desiring to construct or
enlarge a building within the limits of a street, highway, railroad right-of-way, public
transit facility, or parkway so shown within the corporate limits of the city or within
the extraterritorial jurisdiction as provided in Section 236.10(1)(b)2 of the Wisconsin
Statutes may apply to the City of Menasha Community Development Director for a
building permit. Unless an application is made, and the building permit granted or
not denied within 30 days, the person is not entitled to compensation for damage to
the building in the course of construction of the street, highway, railroad right-ofway,
public transit facility, or parkway shown on the official map. Unless an
application is made, and the building permit granted or not denied with 30 days, the
person is not entitled to compensation for damage to the building in the course of
construction or alteration of the waterway shown on the official map within the
incorporated limits of the municipality.
a. Appeal.
1. If the land within the mapped street, highway, waterway, railroad right-ofway,
public transit facility, or parkway is not yielding a fair return,
the Zoning Board of Appeals may, by the vote of a majority of its
members, grant a permit for a building or addition in the path of the
street, highway, waterway, railroad right-of-way, public transit
facility, or parkway which will as little as practicable increase the
120194
11:2
cost of opening the street, highway, waterway, railroad right-of-way,
public transit facility, or parkway or tend to cause a change of the
official map. The board may impose reasonable requirements as a
condition of granting the permit to promote the health, convenience,
safety, or general welfare of the community. The board shall refuse a
permit where the applicant will not be substantially affected by not
constructing the addition or by placing the building outside the
mapped street, highway, waterway, railroad right-of-way, public
transit facility, or parkway.
2. Before taking any action authorized in this subsection, the Board of
Appeals shall hold a hearing at which parties in interest and others
shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least 15 days before the
hearing, notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published
as class 1 notice, under ch. 985. Any such decision shall be subject to
review by certiorari issued by a court of record in the same manner
and pursuant to the same provisions as in appeals from the decisions
of a board of appeals upon zoning regulations.
(e) CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS. The Common Council may, whenever and as often
as it may deem necessary for the public interest and after a public hearing as provided in
Section 62.23(b)(c) of the Wisconsin Statutes, change or add to the official map of the city so
as to establish the exterior line of planned new streets, highways, and parkways, or to widen,
narrow, extend, or close existing streets, highways, and parkways.
(f) REGISTRATION. The City Clerk shall file with the register of deeds of Winnebago
County and Calumet County certificates showing that the city has established an official
map, and shall do likewise as to any changes or additions.
1 updated 4/19/2016
CHAPTER 6
CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL
SEC. 6-6-1 AUTHORITY.
(1) This ordinance is adopted under the authority granted by s. 62.234, Wis. Stats. for cities.
This ordinance supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously enacted under s. 62.23,
Wis. Stats., that relate to construction site erosion control. Except as otherwise specified in s.
62.234 Wis. Stats., s. 62.23, Wis. Stats. applies to this ordinance and to any amendments to
this ordinance.
(2) The provisions of this ordinance are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers
of the same governing body.
(3) The Common Council of the City of Menasha hereby designates the Public Works
Department to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(4) The requirements of this ordinance do not pre-empt more stringent erosion and sediment
control requirements that may be imposed by any of the following:
(a) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits or
approvals including those authorized under ss. 281.16 and 283.33, Wis. Stats.
(b) Targeted performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources under s. NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
SEC. 6-6-2 FINDINGS OF FACT.
The Common Council finds that runoff from land disturbing construction activity carries a significant
amount of sediment and other pollutants to the waters of the state in the City of Menasha.
SEC. 6-6-3 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent
and control water pollution; prevent and control soil erosion; protect spawning grounds, fish and
aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve ground cover and
scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth by minimizing the amount of sediment and other
pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from land disturbing construction activity to waters of the
state in the City of Menasha.
SEC. 6-6-4 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
(1) APPLICABILITY.
(a) Where not otherwise limited by law, this ordinance applies to all construction sites,
unless the site is otherwise exempt under Sec. 6-6-4(1)(b) or (c):
1. A permit is required for a construction site with 4,000 square feet or greater
of land disturbing construction activity. The responsible party shall comply
with all applicable provisions of this ordinance for a permitted site, including
the Sec. 6-6-7(2) performance standards, Sec. 6-6-8 permit requirements, and
Sec. 6-6-9 plan requirements.
2. A permit is not required for a construction site with less than 4,000 square
feet of land disturbing construction activity. The responsible party shall
2 updated 4/19/2016
comply with all applicable provisions of this ordinance for a non-permitted
site, including the Sec. 6-6-7(1) performance standards.
3. Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Sec. 6-6-4(1)(a)1 and 2, a
permit is required for a construction site with less than 4,000 square feet of
land disturbing construction activity if the Public Works Department
determines that permit coverage is needed in order to improve ordinance
compliance, meet targeted performance standards, or protect waters of the
state. If a permit is required, the responsible party shall comply with all
applicable provisions of this ordinance for a permitted site, including the Sec.
6-6-7(2) performance standards, Sec. 6-6-8 permit requirements, and Sec. 6-
6-9 plan requirements.
(b) This ordinance does not apply to the following:
1. Land disturbing construction activity that includes the construction of 1- and
2-family residential dwellings that are not part of a larger common plan of
development or sale and that result in less than 1 acre of disturbance. These
construction sites are regulated by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services under s. SPS 321.125 Wis. Adm. Code and must adhere
to the provisions of Title 15, Chapter 2 of the Menasha Code of Ordinances;
2. Nonpoint discharges from agricultural activity areas; and
3. Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities.
(c) A construction site exempted by federal statutes or regulations from the requirement
to have a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued under 40 CFR
122, for land disturbing construction activity, shall comply with Sec. 6-6-7(1)
performance standards if less than 1 acre of land disturbing construction activity. The
Sec. 6-6-7(2) performance standards, Sec. 6-6-8 permit requirements, and Sec. 6-6-9
plan requirements are not applicable.
(2) JURISDICTION. This ordinance applies to land disturbing construction activity on
construction sites located within the boundaries and jurisdiction of the City of Menasha.
(3) EXCLUSIONS. This ordinance is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency,
as defined under s. 227.01 (1), Wis. Stats., but also including the office of district attorney,
which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered
into under s. 281.33 (2), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 6-6-5 DEFINITIONS.
(1) “Administering authority” means a governmental employee, or a regional planning
commission empowered under s. 62.234, Wis. Stats., that is designated by the Common
Council to administer this ordinance.
(2) “Agricultural activity area” means the part of the farm where there is planting, growing,
cultivating, and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption and pasturing or
outside yarding of livestock, including sod farms and silviculture. Practices in this area may
include waterways, drainage ditches, diversions, terraces, farm lanes, excavation, filling, and
similar practices. The agricultural activity area does not include the agricultural production
area.
(3) “Agricultural production area” means the part of the farm where there is concentrated
3 updated 4/19/2016
production activity or impervious surfaces. Agricultural production areas include buildings,
driveways, parking areas, feed storage structures, manure storage structures, and other
impervious surfaces. The agricultural production area does not include the agricultural
activity area.
(4) “Atlas 14” means the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Volume 8 (Midwestern States), published
in 2013.
(5) "Best management practice” (BMP) means structural or non-structural measures, practices,
techniques or devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment, or pollutants carried in
runoff to waters of the state.
(6) “Business day” means a day the office of the Public Works Department is routinely and
customarily open for business.
(7) “Cease and desist order” means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction
activity that is being conducted without the required permit.
(8) “Common plan of development or sale” means a development or sale where multiple
separate and distinct land disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different
times on different schedules but under one plan. A common plan of development or sale
includes, but is not limited to, subdivision plats, certified survey maps, and other
developments.
(9) “Construction site” means an area upon which one or more land disturbing construction
activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger common plan of development.
(10) “Design storm” means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration,
temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency, and total depth of rainfall. The TP-
40, Type II, 24-hour design storms for City of Menasha are: 1-year, 2.2 inches; 2-year, 2.5
inches; 5-year, 3.3 inches; 10-year, 3.8 inches; 25-year, 4.4 inches; and 100-year, 5.3
inches. The Atlas 14, MSE4, 24-hour design storms for the City of Menasha are: 1-year,
2.19 inches; 2-year, 2.51 inches; 5-year, 3.09 inches; 10-year, 3.62 inches; 25-year, 4.42
inches; and 100-year, 5.83 inches.
(11) “Development” means residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, or other land uses and
associated roads.
(12) “Division of land” means the creation from one or more parcels or building sites of additional
parcels or building sites where such creation occurs at one time or through the successive
partition within a 5 year period.
(13) “Erosion” means the process by which the land’s surface is worn away by the action of
wind, water, ice, or gravity.
(14) “Erosion and sediment control plan” (plan) means a comprehensive plan developed to
address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of soil particles or rock fragments
during construction.
(15) “Extraterritorial” means the unincorporated area within 3 miles of the corporate limits of a
first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village.
(16) “Final stabilization” means all land disturbing construction activities at the construction site
have been completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established, with a
density of at least 70 percent of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by
4 updated 4/19/2016
permanent structures, or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization measures.
(17) “Governing body” means the city council, which is the City of Menasha Common Council.
(18) “Land disturbing construction activity” (disturbance) means any man-made alteration of the
land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative
soil cover, which may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement
of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer or waters of the state. Land disturbing
construction activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench
dewatering, filling and grading activities, and soil stockpiling.
(19) “Maximum extent practicable” (MEP) means the highest level of performance that is
achievable but is not equivalent to a performance standard identified within this ordinance.
MEP applies when the permit applicant demonstrates to the Public Works Department’s
satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable and that a lower level of
performance is appropriate. In making the assertion that a performance standard is not
achievable and a level of performance different from the performance standard is the MEP,
the permit applicant shall take into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness,
geographic features, and other competing interests such as protection of public safety and
welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of historic
properties.
(20) “MSE3 or MSE4 distribution” means a specific precipitation distribution developed by the
USDA, NRCS, using precipitation data from Atlas 14.
(21) “Performance standard” means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum
acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
(22) “Permit” means a written authorization made by the Public Works Department to the
applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction
runoff to waters of the state.
(23) “Pollutant” has the meaning given in s. 283.01 (13), Wis. Stats.
(24) “Pollution” has the meaning given in s. 281.01 (14), Wis. Stats.
(25) “Protective area” has the meaning given in the City of Menasha Post-Construction Storm
Water Management Ordinance sec. 6-6-7 (3) (d) (1).
(26) “Responsible party” means any entity holding fee title to the property or performing services
to meet the performance standards of this ordinance through a contract or other agreement.
(27) “Runoff” means storm water or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt, or similar
water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
(28) “Sediment” means solid material which can settle that is transported by runoff, suspended
within runoff, or deposited by runoff away from its original location.
(29) “Separate storm sewer” means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with
drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels, or storm
drains, which meets all of the following criteria:
(a) Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff,
(b) Is not part of a combined sewer system,
5 updated 4/19/2016
(c) Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary
or more stringent treatment, and
(d) Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
(30) “Silviculture activities” means activities including tree nursery operations, tree harvesting
operations, reforestation, tree thinning, prescribed burning, and pest and fire control.
Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction site is not a silviculture activity.
(31) “Site” means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land
disturbing construction activity is proposed in the permit application.
(32) “Stop work order” means an order issued by the Public Works Department which requires all
construction activity on the site be stopped.
(33) “Targeted performance standard” means a performance standard that will apply in a specific
area, where additional practices beyond those contained in this ordinance, are necessary to
meet water quality standards. A total maximum daily load is an example of a targeted
performance standard.
(34) "Technical standard" means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and
operation, and maintenance specifications for a BMP, material, device, or method.
(35) “Total maximum daily load” (TMDL) means the amount of pollutants specified as a function
of one or more water quality parameters that can be discharged per day into a water quality
limited segment and still ensure attainment of the applicable water quality standard.
(36) “TP-40” means the Technical Paper No. 40, Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the United States,
published in 1961.
(37) “TR-55” means the United States department of agriculture, natural resource conservation
service (previously soil conservation service), Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,
Second Edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986, which is incorporated by reference for this
ordinance.
(38) “Type II distribution” means a rainfall type curve as established in the “United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical Paper 149, published
1973,” which is incorporated by reference for this ordinance. The Type II curve is applicable
to all of Wisconsin and represents the most intense storm pattern.
(39) “Waters of the state” has the meaning given in s. 283.01 (20), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 6-6-6 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
(1) DESIGN CRITERIA, STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS. All BMPs required to
comply with this ordinance shall meet the design criteria, standards and specifications based
on any of the following:
(a) Design guidance and technical standards identified or developed by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources under subchapter V of chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(b) Technical standards and other guidance identified within the City of Menasha Storm
Water Reference Guide.
(c) Soil loss prediction tools such as the Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation 2
(RUSLE2) that estimate the sediment load leaving the site under varying land and
6 updated 4/19/2016
management conditions may be used to show compliance with the sediment
performance standards contained in Sec. 6-6-7(2).
(d) For this ordinance, average annual basis is calculated using the appropriate annual
rainfall or runoff factor, also referred to as the R factor, or an equivalent design storm
using a MSE3 or Type II distribution, with consideration given to the geographic
location of the site and the period of disturbance.
(2) OTHER STANDARDS. Other technical standards not identified in Sec. 6-6-6 may be used
provided that the methods have been approved by the Public Works Department.
SEC. 6-6-7 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
(1) NON-PERMITTED SITES.
(a) RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The landowner of the construction site or other person
contracted or obligated by other agreement with the landowner to implement and
maintain construction site BMPs is a responsible party and shall comply with this
ordinance.
(b) REQUIREMENTS. At each site where land disturbing construction activity is to
occur, BMPs shall be used to prevent or reduce all of the following:
1. The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles;
2. The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into storm water inlets;
3. The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters of the
state;
4. The discharge of sediment from drainage ways that flow off the site;
5. The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities;
6. The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for more than
7 days; and
7. The discharge of onsite chemicals, cement and other building compounds,
and materials into waters of the state or offsite separate storm sewers during
the construction period. However, projects that require the placement of these
materials in waters of the state, such as constructing bridge footings or BMP
installations, are not prohibited by this ordinance.
(c) LOCATION. BMPs shall be located so that treatment occurs before runoff enters
waters of the state and offsite separate storm sewers. However, projects that require
BMP placement in waters of the state, such as a turbidity barrier, are not prohibited
by this ordinance.
(d) IMPLEMENTATION. The BMPs used to comply with this section shall be
implemented as follows:
1. Erosion and sediment control practices shall be constructed or installed before
land disturbing construction activities begin;
2. Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained until final
stabilization;
7 updated 4/19/2016
3. Final stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities
cease and final grade has been reached on any portion of the site;
4. Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing
activities have temporarily ceased and will not resume for a period exceeding
14 calendar days;
5. BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment control shall be
removed by the responsible party.
(e) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The Public Works Department may establish
erosion and sediment control requirements more stringent than those set forth in this
ordinance if the Public Works Department determines that an added level of
protection is needed to protect resources.
(2) PERMITTED SITES.
(a) RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The landowner or other person performing services to
meet the performance standards of this ordinance, through a contract or other
agreement with the landowner, is a responsible party and shall comply with this
ordinance.
(b) PLAN. A written erosion and sediment control plan shall be developed and
implemented by the responsible party in accordance with Sec. 6-6-9. The erosion and
sediment control plan shall meet all of the applicable requirements contained in this
ordinance.
(c) REQUIREMENTS. The erosion and sediment control plan shall meet all of the
following requirements and standards.
1. The plan shall use BMPs to prevent or reduce all of the following:
a. The deposition of soil from being tracked onto streets by vehicles;
b. The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into storm water
inlets;
c. The discharge of sediment from disturbed areas into adjacent waters
of the state;
d. The discharge of sediment from drainage ways that flow off the site;
e. The discharge of sediment by dewatering activities;
f. The discharge of sediment eroding from soil stockpiles existing for
more than 7 days;
g. The discharge of sediment from erosive flows at outlets and in
downstream channels;
h. The discharge of onsite chemicals, cement, and other building
compounds and materials into waters of the state or offsite separate
storm sewers during the construction period. However, projects that
require the placement of these materials in waters of the state, such as
constructing bridge footings or BMP installations, are not prohibited
by this ordinance; and
8 updated 4/19/2016
i. The discharge of untreated wash water from vehicle and wheel
washing into waters of the state or offsite separate storm sewers.
2. For sites with 1 acre or more of land disturbing construction activity the plan
shall meet the following sediment performance standards:
a. BMPs that, by design, discharge no more than 5 tons per acre per
year, or to the MEP, of the sediment load carried in runoff from initial
grading to final stabilization;
b. Except as provided in Sec. 6-6-7(2)(f), the Public Works Department
may not require any person to employ more BMPs than are needed to
meet the 5 tons per acre per year sediment performance standard in
order to comply with MEP. Erosion and sediment control BMPs may
be combined to meet the sediment performance standard. The Public
Works Department may give credit toward meeting the sediment
performance standard for limiting the duration, area, or both of land
disturbing construction activity or for other appropriate mechanisms;
and
c. Notwithstanding Sec. 6-6-7(2)(c)2(a) and (b), if BMPs cannot be
designed and implemented to meet the 5 tons per acre per year
sediment performance standard, the plan shall include a written, sitespecific
explanation of why the sediment performance standard
cannot be met and how the sediment load will be reduced to the MEP.
3. The plan shall incorporate all of the following preventative measures:
a. Maintenance of existing vegetation, especially adjacent to surface
waters whenever possible;
b. Minimization of soil compaction and preservation of topsoil;
c. Minimization of land disturbing construction activity on slopes of
20% or more; and
d. Development of spill prevention and response procedures.
(d) LOCATION. BMPs shall be located so that treatment occurs before runoff enters
waters of the state and offsite separate storm sewers. However, projects that require
BMP placement in waters of the state, such as a turbidity barrier, are not prohibited
by this ordinance.
(e) IMPLEMENTATION. The BMPs used to comply with this ordinance shall be
implemented as follows:
1. In accordance with the plan developed pursuant to Sec. 6-6-9, the erosion and
sediment control practices shall be constructed or installed before land
disturbing construction activities begin;
2. Erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained until final
stabilization;
3. Final stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing activities
cease and final grade has been reached on any portion of the site;
9 updated 4/19/2016
4. Temporary stabilization activity shall commence when land disturbing
activities have temporarily ceased and will not resume for a period exceeding
14 calendar days; and
5. BMPs that are no longer necessary for erosion and sediment control shall be
removed by the responsible party.
(f) TARGETED PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. The Public Works Department
may establish numeric water quality requirements that are more stringent than those
set forth in Sec. 6-6-7(2)(c) in order to meet targeted performance standards, total
maximum daily loads, and/or water quality standards for a specific water body or
area. The numeric water quality requirements may be applicable to any permitted
site, regardless of the size of land disturbing construction activity.
(g) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The Public Works Department may establish
erosion and sediment control requirements more stringent than those set forth in this
section if the Public Works Department determines that an added level of protection
is needed to protect resources. Also, the Public Works Department may establish
erosion and sediment control requirements less stringent than those set forth in this
section if the Public Works Department determines that less protection is needed to
protect resources. However, the alternative requirements shall not be less stringent
than those requirements promulgated in rules by Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources under NR 151 Wisconsin Administrative Code.
SEC. 6-6-8 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES, AND FEES.
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. When a permit is required, no responsible party may commence a
land disturbing construction activity subject to this ordinance without receiving prior
approval of an erosion and sediment control plan for the site and a permit from the Public
Works Department.
(2) PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEES. When a permit is required, at least one responsible
party desiring to undertake a land disturbing construction activity subject to this ordinance
shall submit an application for a permit and an erosion and sediment control plan that meets
the requirements of Sec. 6-6-9 and shall pay an application fee as established by the City’s
Common Council. By submitting an application, the applicant is authorizing the Public
Works Department to enter the site to obtain information required for the review of the
erosion and sediment control plan.
(3) REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PERMIT APPLICATION. The Public Works
Department shall review any permit application submitted with an erosion and sediment
control plan and the required fee. The following approval procedure shall be used.
(a) Within 20 business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, as required
by Sec. 6-6-8(2), the Public Works Department shall inform the applicant whether the
application and plan are approved or disapproved based on the requirements of this
ordinance.
(b) If the permit application and plan are approved, the Public Works Department shall
issue the permit.
(c) If the permit application or plan is disapproved, the Public Works Department shall
state in writing the reasons for disapproval.
10 updated 4/19/2016
(d) The Public Works Department may request additional information from the applicant.
If additional information is submitted, the Public Works Department shall have 20
business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the
applicant that the plan is either approved or disapproved.
(e) Failure by the Public Works Department to inform the permit applicant of a decision
within 20 business days of a required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of
the submittal and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued.
(4) FINANCIAL GUARANTEE. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the
Public Works Department may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond, cash escrow, or
irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution of the approved erosion and
sediment control plan and any permit conditions.
(5) PERMIT REQUIREMENTS. All permits issued under this ordinance shall be subject to
the following conditions and holders of permits issued under this ordinance shall be deemed
to have accepted these conditions. The Public Works Department may suspend or revoke a
permit for violation of a permit condition, following written notification of the responsible
party. An action by the Public Works Department to suspend or revoke this permit may be
appealed in accordance with Sec. 6-6-13.
(a) Notify the Public Works Department within 48 hours of commencing any land
disturbing construction activity.
(b) Notify the Public Works Department of completion of any BMPs within 10 business
days after their installation.
(c) Obtain permission in writing from the Public Works Department prior to any
modification pursuant to Sec. 6-6-9(2) of the erosion and sediment control plan.
(d) Install all BMPs as identified in the approved erosion and sediment control plan.
(e) Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, BMPs and other
facilities identified in the erosion and sediment control plan.
(f) Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and drainage ways
resulting from land disturbing construction activities and document repairs in weekly
inspection reports.
(g) Conduct construction site inspections at least once per week and within 24 hours after
a precipitation event of 0.5 inches or greater. Repair or replace erosion and sediment
control BMPs as necessary within 24 hours of an inspection or notification that repair
or replacement is needed. Maintain weekly written reports of all inspections at the
construction site. Weekly inspection reports shall include all of the following: date,
time, and location of the construction site inspection; the name of individual who
performed the inspection; an assessment of the condition of erosion and sediment
controls; a description of any erosion and sediment control BMP implementation and
maintenance performed; and a description of the present phase of land disturbing
construction activity at the construction site.
(h) Allow the Public Works Department to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting
compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan or for performing any work
necessary to bring the site into compliance with the control plan. Keep a copy of the
erosion and sediment control plan, storm water management plan, amendments,
11 updated 4/19/2016
weekly inspection reports, and permit at the construction site until permit coverage is
terminated.
(i) The permit applicant shall post the “Certificate of Permit Coverage” in a conspicuous
location at the construction site.
(6) PERMIT CONDITIONS. Permits issued under this section may include conditions
established by Public Works Department in addition to the requirements set forth in Sec. 6-6-
8(5), where needed to assure compliance with the performance standards in Sec. 6-6-7.
(7) PERMIT DURATION. Permits issued under this section shall be valid for a period of 180
days, or the length of the building permit or other construction authorizations, whichever is
longer, from the date of issuance. The Public Works Department may extend the period one
or more times for up to an additional 180 days. The Public Works Department may require
additional BMPs as a condition of the extension if they are necessary to meet the
requirements of this ordinance.
(8) MAINTENANCE. The responsible party throughout the duration of the construction
activities shall maintain all BMPs necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance until
the site has undergone final stabilization.
(9) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The Public Works Department may prescribe
requirements less stringent for applicants seeking a permit for a construction site with less
than 1 acre of land disturbing construction activity.
SEC. 6-6-9 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN.
(1) PLAN REQUIREMENTS. The erosion and sediment control plan required under Sec. 6-6-
7(2) shall comply with the City of Menasha Storm Water Reference Guide and contain at a
minimum the following information.
(a) Name, address, and telephone number of the landowner and responsible parties.
(b) A legal description of the property proposed to be developed.
(c) A site map with property lines, disturbed limits, and drainage patterns.
(d) Total area of the site and total area of the construction site that is expected to be
disturbed by construction activities.
(e) Performance standards applicable to site.
(f) Proposed best management practices.
(g) Erosion and sediment control plan narrative.
(h) Construction sequence and construction schedule.
(2) AMENDMENTS. The applicant shall amend the plan if any of the following occur:
(a) There is a change in design, construction, operation, maintenance, or schedule at the
site which has the reasonable potential for the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
state or separate storm sewers, and which has not otherwise been addressed in the
plan;
(b) The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of pollutants carried by
construction site runoff; or
(c) The Public Works Department notifies the applicant of changes needed in the plan.
12 updated 4/19/2016
(3) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The Public Works Department may prescribe
requirements less stringent for applicants seeking a permit for a construction site with less
than 1 acre of disturbance.
SEC. 6-6-10 FEE SCHEDULE.
The fees referred to in other sections of this ordinance shall be established by the Common Council
of the City of Menasha and may from time to time be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees
established by the Common Council shall be available for review in City Hall.
SEC. 6-6-11 INSPECTION.
Whenever land disturbing construction activities are being carried out, the Public Works Department
may enter the land pursuant to the provisions of ss. 66.0119(1), (2), and (3), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 6-6-12 ENFORCEMENT.
(1) The Public Works Department may post a stop-work order if any of the following occurs:
(a) Any land disturbing construction activity is being undertaken without a permit and,
pursuant to Sec. 6-6-4(1) of this ordinance, a permit is required for the construction
site;
(b) The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in a good faith
manner;
(c) The conditions of the permit are not being met; or
(d) Any land disturbing construction activity is in violation of the ordinance.
(2) If the responsible party does not cease activity as required in a stop-work order posted under
this section or fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan or permit
conditions, the Public Works Department may revoke the permit.
(3) If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued, does not cease the activity after
being notified by the Public Works Department, or if a responsible party violates a stop-work
order posted under Sec. 6-6-12(1), the Public Works Department may request the City
Attorney to obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
(4) The Board of Public Works may retract the stop-work order issued under Sec. 6-6-12(1) or
the permit revocation under Sec. 6-6-12(2).
(5) After posting a stop-work order under Sec. 6-6-12(1), the Public Works Department may
issue a notice of intent to the responsible party of its intent to perform work necessary to
comply with this ordinance. The Public Works Department may go on the land and
commence the work after issuing the notice of intent. The costs of the work performed under
this ordinance by the Public Works Department, plus interest at the rate authorized by the
Common Council shall be billed to the responsible party or recovered from the surety bond,
cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit. In the event a responsible party fails to pay the
amount due, the clerk shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as a special
assessment against the property pursuant to such. VII of ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
(6) Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture in
accordance with Sec. 1-1-7 and the costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
13 updated 4/19/2016
(7) Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance may also be enforced by injunction in any
court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and
desist order before resorting to injunction proceedings.
SEC. 6-6-13 APPEALS.
(1) BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Board of Public Works created pursuant to Sec. 2-2-
5 of the City's ordinance pursuant to 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats.:
(a) Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order,
decision, or determination made by the Public Works Department in administering
this ordinance except for cease and desist orders obtained under Sec. 6-6-12(3);
(b) Upon appeal, may authorize variances from the provisions of this ordinance which
are not contrary to the public interest and where owing to special conditions a literal
enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship;
and
(c) Shall use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing
and deciding appeals and authorizing variances.
(2) WHO MAY APPEAL. Appeals to the Board of Public Works may be taken by any
aggrieved person or by any office, department, board, or bureau of the City of Menasha
affected by any decision of the Public Works Department. Such appeal shall be filed within
10 days of the alleged grievance
SEC. 6-6-14 SEVERABILITY.
If a court of competent jurisdiction judges any section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance
unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be affected
by such judgment.
1 updated on 4/19/2016
CHAPTER 7
POST CONSTRUCTION WATER MANAGEMENT
SEC. 6-7-1 AUTHORITY.
(1) This ordinance is adopted by the Common Council under the authority granted by s. 62.234,
for cities, Wis. Stats. This ordinance supersedes all provisions of an ordinance previously
enacted under s. 62.23, Wis. Stats., that relate to storm water management regulations.
Except as otherwise specified in s. 62.234, Wis. Stats., s. 62.23, Wis. Stats., applies to this
ordinance and to any amendments to this ordinance.
(2) The provisions of this ordinance are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory powers
of the Common Council.
(3) The Common Council hereby designates the Director of Public Works and/or designees to
administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(4) The requirements of this ordinance do not pre-empt more stringent storm water management
requirements that may be imposed by any of the following:
(a) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits, or
approvals including those authorized under ss. 281.16 and 283.33, Wis. Stats. or
(b) Targeted performance standards promulgated in rules by the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources under s. NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
SEC. 6-7-2 FINDINGS OF FACT.
The Common Council finds that uncontrolled, post-construction runoff has a significant impact upon
water resources and the health, safety, and general welfare of the community and diminishes the
public enjoyment and use of natural resources. Specifically, uncontrolled post-construction runoff
can:
(1) Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing streambed
scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing stream base flows, and increasing
stream temperature;
(2) Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, and recreational and
water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients,
heavy metals, bacteria, pathogens, and other urban pollutants;
(3) Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and by increasing pollutant
loads;
(4) Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant loading;
(5) Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare by overtaxing storm sewers,
drainage ways, and other minor drainage facilities;
(6) Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare by increasing major flood peaks
and volumes; and/or
(7) Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and levels of flooding.
SEC. 6-7-3 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
(1) PURPOSE. The general purpose of this ordinance is to establish long-term, postconstruction
runoff management requirements that will diminish the threats to public health,
safety, welfare, and the aquatic environment. Specific purposes are to:
2 updated on 4/19/2016
(a) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions;
(b) Prevent and control the adverse effects of storm water; prevent and control soil
erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish, and
aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; preserve
ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic growth; and
(c) Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and receiving
water bodies; prevent undue channel erosion; control increases in the scouring and
transportation of particulate matter; and prevent conditions that endanger downstream
property.
(2) INTENT. It is the intent of the Common Council that this ordinance regulates postconstruction
storm water discharges to waters of the state. This ordinance may be applied on
a site-by-site basis. The Common Council recognizes, however, that the preferred method of
achieving the storm water performance standards set forth in this ordinance is through the
preparation and implementation of comprehensive, systems-level storm water management
plans that cover hydrologic units, such as watersheds, on a municipal and regional scale.
Such plans may prescribe regional storm water devices, practices, or systems, any of which
may be designed to treat runoff from more than one site prior to discharge to waters of the
state. Where such plans are in conformance with the performance standards developed under
s. 281.16, Wis. Stats., for regional storm water management measures and have been
approved by the Common Council, it is the intent of this ordinance that the approved plan be
used to identify post-construction management measures acceptable for the community.
SEC. 6-7-4 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
(1) APPLICABILITY.
(a) Where not otherwise limited by law, this ordinance applies to all post-construction
sites, unless the site is otherwise exempt under Sec. 6-7-4(1)(b).
(b) A post-construction site that meets any of the following criteria is exempt from the
requirements of this ordinance.
1. 1- and 2-family residential dwellings that are not part of a larger common
plan of development or sale and that result in less than 1 acre of disturbance.
2. Non-point discharges from agricultural activity areas.
3. Non-point discharges from silviculture activities.
4. Mill and crush operations.
(c) Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Sec. 6-7-4(1) (a), this ordinance
applies to post-construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of the Public Works
Department, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing
drainage facilities or receiving body of water, causes undue channel erosion,
increases water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter, or
endangers property or public safety.
(2) JURISDICTION. This ordinance applies to post-construction sites within the boundaries
and jurisdiction of the City of Menasha.
(3) EXCLUSIONS. This ordinance is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency,
as defined under s. 227.01 (1), Wis. Stats., but also including the office of district attorney,
which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a memorandum of understanding entered
into under s. 281.33 (2), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 6-7-5 DEFINITIONS.
3 updated on 4/19/2016
(1) “Adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover” means maintenance of sufficient
vegetation types and densities such that the physical integrity of the streambank or lakeshore
is preserved. Self-sustaining vegetative cover includes grasses, forbs, sedges, and duff layers
of fallen leaves and woody debris.
(2) “Administering authority” means a governmental employee, or a regional planning
commission empowered under s. 62.234, Wis. Stats., that is designated by the Common
Council to administer this ordinance.
(3) “Agricultural activity area” means the part of the farm where there is planting, growing,
cultivating, and harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption and pasturing or
outside yarding of livestock, including sod farms and silviculture. Practices in this area may
include waterways, drainage ditches, diversions, terraces, farm lanes, excavation, filling, and
similar practices. The agricultural activity area does not include the agricultural production
area.
(4) “Agricultural production area” means the part of the farm where there is concentrated
production activity or impervious surfaces. Agricultural production areas include buildings,
driveways, parking areas, feed storage structures, manure storage structures, and other
impervious surfaces. The agricultural production area does not include the agricultural
activity area.
(5) “Atlas 14” means the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Volume 8 (Midwestern States), published
in 2013.
(6) “Average annual rainfall” means a typical calendar year of precipitation as determined by the
Wisconsin DNR for users of models such as SLAMM, P8, or equivalent methodology. The
average annual rainfall is chosen from a Wisconsin DNR publication for the location closest
to the City of Menasha.
(7) “Best management practice” (BMP) means structural or non-structural measures, practices,
techniques, or devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment, or pollutants carried in
runoff to waters of the state.
(8) “Business day” means a day the office of the Public Works Department is routinely and
customarily open for business.
(9) “Cease and desist order” means a court-issued order to halt land disturbing construction
activity being conducted without the required permit.
(10) “Combined sewer system” means a system for conveying both sanitary sewage and storm
water runoff.
(11) “Common plan of development or sale” means a development or sale where multiple
separate and distinct land disturbing construction activities may be taking place at different
times on different schedules but under one plan. A common plan of development or sale
includes, but is not limited to, subdivision plats, certified survey maps, and other
developments.
(12) “Connected imperviousness" means an impervious surface connected to the waters of the
state via a separate storm sewer, an impervious flow path, or a minimally pervious flow path.
(13) “Construction site” means an area upon which one or more land disturbing construction
activities occur, including areas that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale.
(14) “Design storm” means a hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized by a specific duration,
temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return frequency, and total depth of rainfall. The -
TP-40, Type II, 24-hour design storms for City of Menasha are: 1-year, 2.2 inches; 2-year,
2.5 inches; 5-year, 3.3 inches; 10-year, 3.8 inches; 25-year, 4.4 inches; and 100-year, 5.3
4 updated on 4/19/2016
inches. The Atlas 14, MSE4, 24-hour design storms for the City of Menasha are: 1-year,
2.19 inches; 2-year, 2.51 inches; 5-year, 3.09 inches; 10-year, 3.62 inches; 25-year, 4.42
inches; and 100-year, 5.83 inches.
(15) “Development” means residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, or other land uses and
associated roads.
(16) “Direct conduits to groundwater” means wells, sinkholes, swallet, fractured bedrock at the
surface, mine shafts, nonmetallic mines, tile inlets discharging to groundwater, quarries, or
depressed groundwater recharge areas over shallow fractured bedrock.
(17) “Division of land” means the creation from one or more parcels or building sites of additional
parcels or building sites where such creation occurs at one time or through the successive
partition within a 5 year period.
(18) “Effective infiltration area” means the area of the infiltration system that is used to infiltrate
runoff and does not include the area used for site access, berms, or pretreatment.
(19) “Erosion” means the process by which the land’s surface is worn away by the action of wind,
water, ice, or gravity.
(20) "Exceptional resource waters" means waters listed in s. NR 102.11, Wis. Adm. Code.
(21) “Existing development” means development in existence on October 1, 2004 or development
for which a storm water permit in accordance with subch. III of Ch. NR 216, Wis. Adm.
Code, was received on or before October 1, 2004.
(22) “Extraterritorial” means the unincorporated area within 3 miles of the corporate limits of a
first, second, or third class city, or within 1.5 miles of a fourth class city or village.
(23) “Filtering layer” means soil that has at least a 3-foot deep layer with at least 20 percent fines,
a 5-foot deep layer with at least 10 percent fines, or an engineered soil with an equivalent
level of protection as determined by the Public Works Department for the site.
(24) "Final stabilization" means that all land disturbing construction activities at the construction
site have been completed and that a uniform, perennial, vegetative cover has been
established, with a density of at least 70% of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not
covered by permanent structures, or that employ equivalent permanent stabilization
measures.
(25) “Financial guarantee” means a performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond,
irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantee is submitted to the Public Works Department
by the responsible party to assure that requirements of the ordinance are carried out in
compliance with the storm water management plan.
(26) “Governing body” means city council, which is the City of Menasha Common Council.
(27) “Highway” has the meaning given in s. 340.01 (22), Wis. Stats.
(28) “Highway reconditioning” has the meaning given in s. 84.013 (1) (b), Wis. Stats.
(29) “Highway reconstruction” has the meaning given in s. 84.013(1) (c), Wis. Stats.
(30) “Highway resurfacing” has the meaning given in s. 84.013(1) (d), Wis. Stats.
(31) “Impervious surface” means an area that releases as runoff all or a large portion of the
precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, parking
lots, and streets are examples of surfaces that are typically impervious. Gravel surfaces are
considered impervious unless specifically designed to encourage infiltration.
(32) “In-fill” means an undeveloped area of land or new development area located within an
existing urban sewer service area surrounded by natural or man-made features where
development cannot occur. In-fill does not include any undeveloped area that was part of a
5 updated on 4/19/2016
larger new development for which a storm water permit in accordance with subch. III of ch.
NR 216, Wis. Adm. Code, was required to be submitted after October 1, 2004 to the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services (formerly Department of Commerce).
(33) “Infiltration” means the entry and movement of precipitation or runoff into or through soil.
(34) “Infiltration system” means a device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden, or swale
designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but that does not include natural infiltration in
pervious surfaces such as lawns, redirecting of rooftop downspouts onto lawns, or minimal
infiltration from practices, such as swales or road side channels designed for conveyance and
pollutant removal only.
(35) “Land disturbing construction activity” (disturbance) means any man-made alteration of the
land surface resulting in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative
soil cover that may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of
pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer or waters of the state. Disturbance
includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and
grading activities, and soil stockpiling.
(36) “Maintenance agreement” means a legal document that provides for long-term maintenance
of storm water management and BMP.
(37) “Maximum extent practicable” (MEP) means the highest level of performance that is
achievable but is not equivalent to a performance standard identified within this ordinance.
Maximum extent practicable applies when the permit applicant demonstrates to the Public
Works Department’s satisfaction that a performance standard is not achievable and that a
lower level of performance is appropriate. In making the assertion that a performance
standard is not achievable and that a level of performance different from the performance
standard is the MEP, the permit applicant shall take into account the best available
technology, cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing interests such as
protection of public safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources,
and preservation of historic properties.
(38) “Minor reconstruction of a highway” means reconstruction of a highway that is limited to 1.5
miles in continuous or aggregate total length of realignment, does not exceed 100 feet in
width of roadbed widening, and does not include replacement of a vegetated drainage system
with a non-vegetated drainage system except where necessary to convey runoff under a
highway, private road, or driveway.
(39) “MSE3 or MSE4 distribution” means a specific precipitation distribution developed by the
USDA, NRCS, using precipitation data from Atlas 14.
(40) “Navigable waters” and “navigable waterway” has the meaning given in s. 30.01(4m), Wis.
Stats.
(41) “New development” means that portion of a post-construction site where impervious surfaces
are being created or expanded. Any disturbance where the amount of impervious area for the
post-development condition is greater than the pre-development condition is classified as
new development. For purposes of this ordinance, a post-construction site is classified as
new development, redevelopment, routine maintenance, or some combination of these three
classifications as appropriate.
(42) “Off-site” means located outside the property boundary described in the permit application.
6 updated on 4/19/2016
(43) “On-site” means located within the property boundary described in the permit application.
(44) "Ordinary high-water mark" has the meaning given in s. NR 115.03(6), Wis. Adm. Code.
(45) “Outstanding resource waters” means waters listed in s. NR 102.10, Wis. Adm. Code.
(46) “Percent fines” means the percentage of a given sample of soil which passes through a # 200
sieve.
(47) “Performance standard” means a narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum
acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
(48) “Permit” means a written authorization made by the Public Works Department to the
applicant to conduct land disturbing construction activity or to discharge post-construction
runoff to waters of the state.
(49) “Permit administration fee” means a sum of money paid to the Public Works Department by
the permit applicant for the purpose of recouping the expenses incurred by the authority in
administering the permit.
(50) “Pervious surface” means an area that releases as runoff a small portion of the precipitation
that falls on it. Lawns, gardens, parks, forests, or other similar vegetated areas are examples
of surfaces that are typically pervious.
(51) “Pollutant” has the meaning given in s. 283.01(13), Wis. Stats.
(52) “Pollution” has the meaning given in s. 281.01(14), Wis. Stats.
(53) “Post-construction site" means a construction site following the completion of land disturbing
construction activity and final site stabilization.
(54) “Post-development” means the extent and distribution of land cover types present after the
completion of land disturbing construction activity and final site stabilization.
(55) “Pre-development” means the extent and distribution of land cover types present before the
initiation of land disturbing construction activity, assuming all land uses prior to development
activity are managed in an environmentally sound manner.
(56) “Preventive action limit” has the meaning given in s. NR 140.05(17), Wis. Adm. Code.
(57) "Redevelopment” means the portion of a post-construction site where impervious surfaces
are being reconstructed, replaced, or reconfigured. Any disturbance where the amount of
impervious area for the post-development condition is equal to or less than the predevelopment
condition is classified as redevelopment. For purposes of this ordinance, a postconstruction
site is classified as new development, redevelopment, routine maintenance, or
some combination of these three classifications as appropriate.
(58) “Responsible party” means any entity holding fee title to the property or other person
contracted or obligated by other agreement to implement and maintain post-construction
storm water BMPs.
(59) “Routine maintenance” means the portion of a post-construction site where pre-development
impervious surfaces are being maintained to preserve the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity, drainage pattern, configuration, or purpose of the facility. Remodeling of buildings
and resurfacing of parking lots, streets, driveways, and sidewalks are examples of routine
maintenance, provided the lower ½ of the impervious surface’s granular base is not disturbed.
The disturbance shall be classified as redevelopment if the lower ½ of the granular base
associated with the pre-development impervious surface is disturbed or if the soil located
beneath the impervious surface is exposed. For purposes of this ordinance, a post7
updated on 4/19/2016
construction site is classified as new development, redevelopment, routine maintenance, or
some combination of these three classifications as appropriate.
(60) “Runoff” means storm water or precipitation including rain, snow or ice melt, or similar
water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
(61) “Sediment” means solid material, which can settle, that is transported by runoff, suspended
within runoff, or deposited by runoff away from its original location.
(62) “Separate storm sewer” means a conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with
drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels, or storm
drains, which meet all of the following criteria:
(a) Is designed or used for collecting water or conveying runoff.
(b) Is not part of a combined sewer system.
(c) Is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary or
more stringent treatment.
(d) Discharges directly or indirectly to waters of the state.
(63) “Silviculture activities” means activities including tree nursery operations, tree harvesting
operations, reforestation, tree thinning, prescribed burning, and pest and fire control.
Clearing and grubbing of an area of a construction site is not a silviculture activity.
(64) “Site” means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land
disturbing construction activity occurred.
(65) “Stop work order” means an order issued by the Public Works Department which requires all
construction activity on the site be stopped.
(66) “Storm water management plan” means a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the
discharge of pollutants from storm water after the site has under gone final stabilization
following completion of the construction activity.
(67) “Storm water management system plan” is a comprehensive plan designed to reduce the
discharge of runoff and pollutants from hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale.
(68) “Targeted performance standard” means a performance standard that will apply in a specific
area, where additional practices beyond those contained in this ordinance are necessary to
meet water quality standards. A total maximum daily load is an example of a targeted
performance standard.
(69) "Technical standard" means a document that specifies design, predicted performance and
operation, and maintenance specifications for a material, device, or method.
(70) “Top of the channel” means an edge or point on the landscape, landward from the ordinary
high-water mark of a surface water of the state, where the slope of the land begins to be less
than 12% continually for at least 50 feet. If the slope of the land is 12% or less continually
for the initial 50 feet, landward from the ordinary high-water mark, the top of the channel is
the ordinary high-water mark.
(71) “Total maximum daily load” (TMDL) means the amount of pollutants specified as a function
of one or more water quality parameters that can be discharged per day into a water quality
limited segment and still ensure attainment of the applicable water quality standard.
(72) “TP-40” means the Technical Paper No. 40, Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the United States,
published in 1961.
(73) “TR-55” means the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service), Urban Hydrology for Small
8 updated on 4/19/2016
Watersheds, Second Edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986, which is incorporated by
reference for this ordinance.
(74) “Transportation facility” means a public street, public road, public highway, railroad, public
mass transit facility, public-use airport, public trail, or any other public work for
transportation purposes, such as harbor improvements under s. 85.095(1) (b), Wis. Stats.
Transportation facility does not include building sites for the construction of public buildings
and buildings that are places of employment regulated by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources pursuant to s. 281.33, Wis. Stats.
(75) “Type II distribution” means a rainfall type curve as established in the “United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Technical Paper 149, published
1973,” which is incorporated by reference for this ordinance. The Type II curve is applicable
to all of Wisconsin and represents the most intense storm pattern.
(76) “Waters of the state” has the meaning given in s. 283.01 (20), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 6-7-6 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
The following methods shall be used in designing and maintaining the water quality, peak discharge,
infiltration, protective area, vehicle maintenance or fueling, and swale treatment components of
storm water practices needed to meet the water quality standards of this ordinance.
(1) Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources under subchapter V of chapter NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) Technical standards and guidance identified within the City of Menasha Storm Water
Reference Guide.
(3) Where technical standards have not been identified or developed by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources, other technical standards may be used provided that the
methods have been approved by the Public Works Department.
SEC. 6-7-7 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
(1) RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The responsible party shall develop and implement a postconstruction
storm water management plan that incorporates the requirements of this section.
(2) PLAN. A written storm water management plan shall be developed and implemented by the
responsible party in accordance with Sec. 6-7-9. The storm water management plan shall
meet all of the applicable requirements contained in this ordinance.
(3) REQUIREMENTS. The storm water management plan shall meet the following minimum
requirements to the MEP:
(a) WATER QUALITY. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to control
pollutants carried in runoff from the post-construction site. The design shall be
based on the average annual rainfall as compared to no runoff management controls.
1. For post-construction sites with 20,000 square feet or more of impervious
surface disturbance and post-construction sites with 1 acre or more of land
disturbance, the following is required.
a. Except as provided in Sec. 6-7-7(3)(a)1.b., a Total Suspended Solids
(TSS) and Total Phosphorus (TP) reduction is required as follows:
Watershed
Percent Reduction
New Development Redevelopment
Routine
Maintenance
TSS TP TSS TP TSS TP
9 updated on 4/19/2016
Lake
Winnebago 80% 60% 40% 30% 40% 30%
Lower Fox
River 80% 41% 72% 41% 72% 41%
b. A pollutant reduction is not required for routine maintenance areas
that are part of a post-construction site with less than 5 acres of
disturbance.
2. Post-construction sites with less than 20,000 square feet of impervious
surface disturbance that reduce the pollutant load using BMPs from the City
of Menasha Storm Water Reference Guide are not required to satisfy a
numeric performance standard.
3. Sites with a cumulative addition of 20,000 square feet or greater of
impervious surfaces after January 5, 2009 are required to satisfy the
performance standards within Sec. 6-7-7(3) (a) 1. a. and b.
4. The amount of pollutant control previously required for the site shall not be
reduced as a result of the proposed development or disturbance.
5. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from offsite areas shall
be taken into account in determining the treatment efficiency of the practice.
Any impact on the BMP efficiency shall be compensated for by increasing
the size of the BMP accordingly. The pollutant load reduction provided by
the BMP for an offsite area shall not be used to satisfy the required onsite
pollutant load reduction, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works
Department in accordance with Sec. 6-7-7(5).
6. If the design cannot meet the water quality performance standards of Sec. 6-
7-7(3)(a)1-5., the storm water management plan shall include a written, site
specific explanation of why the water quality performance standard cannot be
met and why the pollutant load will be reduced only to the MEP. Except as
provided in Sec. 6-7-7(6), the Public Works Department may not require any
person to exceed the applicable water quality performance standard to meet
the requirements of MEP.
(b) PEAK DISCHARGE. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to control
peak discharges from the post-construction site.
1. For post-construction sites with 20,000 square feet or more of impervious
surface disturbance and post-construction sites with 1 acre or more of land
disturbance, the following is required.
a. The peak post-development discharge rate shall not exceed the peak
pre-development discharge rate for the 1-year, 2-year, 10-year, 100-
year, and 24-hour design storms. These peak discharge requirements
apply to new development and redevelopment areas. No peak
discharge control is required for routine maintenance areas unless
runoff from the routine maintenance area discharges into a proposed
peak flow control facility.
b. TR-55 methodology, Atlas 14 precipitation depths, and the MSE3 or
MSE4 distribution shall be used for peak discharge calculations
unless the administering authority approves the TP-40 precipitation
depths and Type II distribution. The meaning of “hydrologic soil
group” and “runoff curve number” are as determined in TR-55.
10 updated on 4/19/2016
Unless the site is currently woodland, peak pre-development
discharge rates shall be determined using the following runoff curve
numbers for a “meadow” vegetative cover.
Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers
Vegetative Cover
Hydrologic Soil Group
A B C D
Meadow 30 58 71 78
Woodland 30 55 70 77
2. Post-construction sites with less than 20,000 square feet of impervious
surface disturbance that reduce peak post-development discharge rates using
BMPs from the City of Menasha Storm Water Reference Guide are not
required to satisfy a numeric performance standard.
3. Sites with a cumulative addition of 20,000 square feet or greater of
impervious surfaces after January 5, 2009 are required to satisfy the
performance standards within Sec. 6-7-7(3) (b)1.a. and b.
4. The amount of peak discharge control previously required for the site shall
not be reduced as a result of the proposed development or disturbance.
5. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from offsite areas shall
be taken into account in determining the performance of the practice. Any
impact on the BMP performance shall be compensated for by increasing the
size of the BMP accordingly. The peak discharge reduction provided by the
BMP for an offsite area shall not be used to satisfy the required onsite peak
discharge reduction, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works
Department in accordance with Sec. 6-7-7(5).
6. An adequate outfall shall be provided for each point of concentrated
discharge from the post-construction site. An adequate outfall consists of nonerosive
discharge velocities and reasonable downstream conveyance.
7. The peak discharge performance standards do not apply to the following:
a. A transportation facility where the discharge flows directly into a lake
over 5,000 acres or a stream or river segment draining more than 500
square miles;
b. Except as provided under Sec. 6-7-7(3) (b)4-6., a highway
reconstruction site; or
c. Except as provided under Sec. 6-7-7(3) (b)4-6., a transportation
facility that is part of a redevelopment project.
(c) INFILTRATION. BMPs shall be designed, installed, and maintained to infiltrate
runoff from the post-construction site, except as provided in Sec. 6-7-7(3)(c)8-12.
1. For post-construction sites with 1 acre or more of land disturbance, the
following is required.
a. Low Imperviousness. For development below 40 percent connected
imperviousness, such as parks, cemeteries, and low density residential
developments, the post-construction sites will infiltrate sufficient
runoff volume so that the post-development infiltration volume is at
least 90 percent of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on
an average annual rainfall. However, when designing appropriate
11 updated on 4/19/2016
infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than one percent
of the post-construction site is required as an effective infiltration
area.
b. Moderate imperviousness. For development with more than 40
percent and up to 80 percent connected imperviousness, such as
medium and high density residential, multi-family development,
industrial and institutional development, and office parks, the postconstruction
site will infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume is at least 75 percent of the pre-development
infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall.
However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this
requirement, no more than 2 percent of the post-construction site is
required as an effective infiltration area.
c. High imperviousness. For development with more than 80 percent
connected imperviousness, such as commercial strip malls, shopping
centers, and commercial downtowns, the post-construction site will
infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development
infiltration volume is at least 60 percent of the pre-development
infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall. However,
when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this
requirement, no more than 2 percent of the post-construction site is
required as an effective infiltration area.
2. Pre-development condition shall assume “good hydrologic conditions” for
appropriate land covers as identified in TR-55 or an equivalent methodology
approved by the administering authority. The meaning of “hydrologic soil
group” and “runoff curve number” are as determined in TR-55. The actual
pre-development vegetative cover and the following pre-development runoff
curve numbers shall be used.
Maximum Pre-Development Runoff Curve Numbers
Vegetative Cover
Hydrologic Soil Group
A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Grassland 39 61 71 78
Cropland 55 69 78 83
3. Post-construction sites with less than 1 acre of land disturbance should
infiltrate runoff volume using BMPs from the City of Menasha Storm Water
Reference Guide are not required to satisfy a numeric performance standard.
4. Sites with a cumulative addition of 1 acre or more of new development after
January 5, 2009 are required to satisfy the performance standards within Sec.
6-7-7(3)(c)1. and 2.
5. The amount of infiltration previously required for the site shall not be reduced
as a result of the proposed development or disturbance.
6. When designing BMPs, runoff draining to the BMP from offsite areas shall
be taken into account in determining the performance of the practice. Any
impact on the BMP performance shall be compensated for by increasing the
size of the BMP accordingly. The runoff volume reduction provided by the
12 updated on 4/19/2016
BMP for an offsite area shall not be used to satisfy the required onsite runoff
volume reduction, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works
Department in accordance with Sec. 6-7-7(5).
7. Pretreatment. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for
parking lot runoff and for runoff from road construction in commercial,
industrial, and institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system. The
pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging
prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality in
accordance with Sec. 6-7-7(3) (c) 14. Pretreatment options may include, but
are not limited to, oil/grease separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration,
swales, or filter strips.
8. Source area prohibitions. Runoff from the following areas may not be
infiltrated and may not qualify as contributing to meeting the requirements of
Sec. 6-7-7(3)(c) unless demonstrated to meet the conditions of Sec. 6-7-
7(3)(c)14.
a. Areas associated with a tier 1 industrial facility identified in s. NR
216.21(2) (a), Wis. Adm. Code, including storage, loading, and
parking. Rooftops may be infiltrated with the concurrence of the
Public Works Department.
b. Storage and loading areas of a tier 2 industrial facility identified in s.
NR 216.21(2) (b), Wis. Adm. Code.
c. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas. Rooftops of fueling and
vehicle maintenance areas may be infiltrated with the concurrence of
the Public Works Department.
9. Source area exemptions. Runoff from the following areas may be credited
toward meeting the requirement when infiltrated, but the decision to infiltrate
runoff from these sources is optional.
a. Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for
commercial development.
b. Parking areas and access roads less than 5,000 square feet for
industrial development not subject to the prohibitions under Sec. 6-7-
7(3)(c)8.
c. Redevelopment and routine maintenance areas, except as provided
under Sec. 6-7-7(3)(c)5.
d. In-fill development areas less than 5 acres.
e. Roads in commercial, industrial, and institutional land uses and
arterial residential roads.
f. Transportation facility highway reconstruction and new highways,
except as provided under Sec. 6-7-7(3)(c)5.
10. Prohibitions. Infiltration practices may not be located in the following areas.
a. Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet downgradient of
direct conduits to groundwater.
b. Areas within 400 feet of a community water system well as specified
in s. NR 811.16(4), Wis. Adm. Code, or within the separation distances
listed in s. NR 812.08, Wis. Adm. Code, for any private well or noncommunity
well for runoff infiltrated from commercial, multi-family
13 updated on 4/19/2016
residential, industrial, and institutional land uses or regional devices
for 1- and 2-family residential development.
c. Areas where contaminants of concern, as defined in s. NR 720.03(2),
Wis. Adm. Code, are present in the soil through which infiltration will
occur.
11. Separation distances. Infiltration practices shall be located so that the
characteristics of the soil and the separation distance between the bottom of the
infiltration system and the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top
of bedrock are in accordance with the following specifications.
Separation Distances and Soil Characteristics
Source Area Separation
Distance
Soil Characteristics
Industrial, Commercial,
Institutional Parking Lots and
Roads
5 feet or more Filtering Layer
Residential Arterial Roads 5 feet or more Filtering Layer
Roofs Draining to
Subsurface Infiltration
Practices
1 foot or
more
Native or Engineered Soil
with Particles Finer than
Coarse Sand
Roofs Draining to Surface
Infiltration Practices
Not
Applicable
All Other Impervious Source
Areas
3 feet or more Filtering Layer
Notwithstanding Sec. 6-7-7(3)(c)11., applicable requirements for injection
wells classified under ch. NR 815, Wis. Adm. Code, shall be followed.
12. Infiltration rate exemptions. Infiltration practices located in the following
areas may be credited toward meeting the requirement under the following
conditions but the decision to infiltrate under these conditions is optional.
a. Where the infiltration rate of the soil measured at the proposed bottom
of the infiltration system is less than 0.6 inches per hour using a
scientifically credible field test method.
b. Where the least permeable soil horizon to 5 feet below the proposed
bottom of the infiltration system using the U.S. Department of
Agriculture method of soils analysis is one of the following: sandy
clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, or clay.
13. Alternate uses. Where alternate uses of runoff are employed, such as for toilet
flushing, laundry, irrigation, or storage on green roofs where an equivalent
portion of the runoff is captured permanently by rooftop vegetation, such
alternate use shall be given equal credit toward the infiltration volume
required by Sec. 6-7-7(3)(c).
14. Groundwater standards.
a. Infiltration systems designed in accordance with this Sec. 6-7-7(3)(c)
shall, to the extent technically and economically feasible, minimize
the level of pollutants infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain
14 updated on 4/19/2016
compliance with the preventive action limit at a point of standards
application in accordance with ch. NR 140, Wis. Adm. Code.
However, if site specific information indicates that compliance with a
preventive action limit is not achievable, the infiltration BMP may not
be installed or shall be modified to prevent infiltration to the MEP.
b. Notwithstanding Sec. 6-7-7(3)(c)14.a., the discharge from BMPs shall
remain below the enforcement standard at the point of standards
application.
15. Where the conditions of Sec. 6-7-7(3)(c)8-12. limit or restrict the use of
infiltration practices, the performance standard of Sec. 6-7-7(3)(c) shall be
met to the MEP.
(d) PROTECTIVE AREAS.
1. “Protective area” means an area of land that commences at the top of the
channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the delineated boundary of
wetlands, and is the greatest of the following widths, as measured
horizontally from the top of the channel or delineated wetland boundary to
the closest impervious surface. However, in Sec. 6-7-7(3)(d), “protective
area” does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed
within a pipe or culvert, such that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this
location.
a. For outstanding resource waters and exceptional resource waters, 75
feet.
b. For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a United States
geological survey 7.5-minute series topographic map or a county soil
survey map, whichever is more current, 50 feet.
c. For lakes, 50 feet.
d. For wetlands not subject to Sec. 6-7-7(3)(d)1.e. or f., 50 feet.
e. For highly susceptible wetlands, 75 feet. Highly susceptible wetlands
include the following types: calcareous fens, sedge meadows, open
and coniferous bogs, low prairies, coniferous swamps, lowland
hardwood swamps, and ephemeral ponds.
f. For less susceptible wetlands, 10 percent of the average wetland
width, but no less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet. Less susceptible
wetlands include the following types: degraded wetlands dominated
by invasive species, such as reed canary grass, cultivated hydric soils,
and any gravel pits or dredged or fill material disposal sites that take
on the attributes of a wetland.
g. In Sec. 6-7-7(3)(d)1.d-f., determinations of the extent of the
protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be made on the basis of the
sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of the wetland in accordance with
the standards and criteria in s. NR 103.03, Wis. Adm. Code.
h. Wetlands shall be delineated. Wetland boundary delineations shall be
made in accordance with s. NR 103.08(1m), Wis. Adm. Code. Sec.
6-7-7(3)(d) does not apply to wetlands that have been completely
filled in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations.
The protective area for wetlands that have been partially filled in
compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations shall be
measured from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been
15 updated on 4/19/2016
placed. Where there is a legally authorized wetland fill, the protective
area standard need not be met in that location.
i. For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than 130
acres, 10 feet.
j. Notwithstanding Sec. 6-7-7(3)(d)1.a- i., the greatest protective area
width shall apply where rivers, streams, lakes, and wetlands are
contiguous.
2. Sec. 6-7-7(3)(d) applies to all post-construction sites located within a
protective area except those areas exempted pursuant to Sec. 6-7-7(3)(d)5.
3. The following requirements shall be met:
a. Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective area entirely or
to the MEP. If there is no practical alternative to locating an
impervious surface in the protective area, the storm water
management plan shall contain a written, site-specific explanation.
b. Where land disturbing construction activity occurs within a protective
area, adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative cover of 70 percent or
greater shall be established and maintained where no impervious
surface is present. The adequate sod or self-sustaining vegetative
cover shall be sufficient to provide for bank stability, maintenance of
fish habitat, and filtering of pollutants from upslope overland flow
areas under sheet flow conditions. Non-vegetative materials, such as
rock riprap, may be employed on the bank as necessary to prevent
erosion, such as on steep slopes or where high velocity flows occur.
c. Best management practices such as filter strips, swales, or wet
detention ponds, designed to control pollutants from non-point
sources may be located in the protective area.
4. A protective area established or created after January 5, 2009 shall not be
eliminated or reduced, except as allowed in Sec. 6-7-7(3)(d)5.b., c., or d.
5. Exemptions. The following areas are not required to meet the protective area
requirements of Sec. 6-7-7(3)(d).
a. Redevelopment and routine maintenance areas, provided the
minimum requirements within Sec. 6-7-7(3)(d)4. are satisfied.
b. Structures that cross or access surface waters such as boat landings,
bridges, and culverts.
c. Structures constructed in accordance with s. 59.692(1v), Wis. Stats.
d. Areas of post-construction sites from which the runoff does not enter
the surface water, including wetlands, without first being treated by a
BMP to meet the requirements of Sec. 6-7-7(3)(a) and (b), except to
the extent that vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain bank
stability.
(e) VEHICLE MAINTENANCE AND FUELING AREAS. Vehicle maintenance and
fueling areas shall have BMPs designed, installed, and maintained to reduce
petroleum within runoff so that the runoff that enters waters of the state contains no
visible petroleum sheen or to the MEP.
16 updated on 4/19/2016
(f) SWALE TREATMENT FOR TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES. This Sec. 6-
7-7(3)(f) is not applicable to transportation facilities that are part of a larger common
plan of development or sale.
1. Requirement. Except as provided in Sec. 6-7-7(3)(f)2., transportation
facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance and pollutant removal are
exempt from the requirements of Sec. 6-7-7(3)(a), (b), and (c), if the swales
are designed to do all of the following or to the MEP.
a. Swales shall be vegetated. However, where appropriate, nonvegetative
measures may be employed to prevent erosion or provide
for runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or check dams.
b. Swales shall comply with the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources Technical Standard 1005, “Vegetated Infiltration Swale,”
except as otherwise authorized in writing by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
2. Other Requirements. Notwithstanding Sec. 6-7-7(3)(f)1., the Public Works
Department, consistent with water quality standards, may require other
requirements, in addition to swale treatment, be met on a transportation
facility with an average daily traffic rate greater than 2,500 and where runoff
directly enters water of the state is any of the following:
a. An outstanding resource water;
b. An exceptional resource water;
c. Waters listed in section 303(d) of the federal clean water act that are
identified as impaired in whole or in part, due to nonpoint source
impacts; or
d. Waters where targeted performance standards are developed pursuant
to s. NR 151.004, Wis. Adm. Code.
(g) EXEMPTIONS. The following areas are not required to meet the performance
standards within Sec. 6-7-7(3).
1. Agricultural production areas with less than 100,000 square feet of
impervious surface disturbance.
2. Underground utility construction such as water, sewer, gas, electric,
telephone, cable television, and fiber optic lines. This exemption does not
apply to the construction of any above ground structures associated with
utility construction.
3. The following transportation facilities are exempt, provided the transportation
facility is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale.
a. A transportation facility post-construction site with less than 10
percent connected imperviousness, based on the area of land
disturbance, provided the cumulative area of all impervious surfaces
is less than one acre. Notwithstanding this exemption, the protective
area requirements of Sec. 6-7-7(3)(d) still apply.
b. Reconditioning or resurfacing of a highway.
c. Minor reconstruction of a highway. Notwithstanding this exemption,
the protective area requirements of Sec. 6-7-7(3)(d) apply to minor
reconstruction of a highway.
17 updated on 4/19/2016
d. Routine maintenance for transportation facilities that have less than 5
acres of land disturbance if performed to maintain the original line
and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility.
e. Routine maintenance if performed for storm water conveyance system
cleaning.
(4) GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ON-SITE AND OFF-SITE STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT MEASURES. The following considerations shall be observed in
managing runoff.
(a) Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural
depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas
shall be preserved and used, to the extent possible, to meet the requirements of this
section.
(b) Emergency overland flow for all storm water facilities shall be provided to prevent
exceeding the safe capacity of downstream drainage facilities and prevent
endangerment of downstream property or public safety.
(5) BMP LOCATION AND CREDIT.
(a) GENERAL. To comply with Sec. 6-7-7(3) performance standards, the BMPs may
be located on-site or off-site as part of a regional storm water device, practice, or
system.
(b) OFFSITE OR REGIONAL BMP.
1. The amount of credit that the Public Works Department may give an offsite or
regional BMP for purposes of determining compliance with the performance
standards of Sec. 6-7-7(3) is limited to the treatment capability or
performance of the BMP.
2. The Public Works Department may authorize credit for an off-site or regional
BMP provided all of the following conditions are satisfied.
a. The BMP received all applicable permits.
b. The BMP shall be installed and operational before the construction
site has undergone final stabilization.
c. The BMP shall be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of
storm water control equal to or greater than that which would be
afforded by on-site BMPs meeting the Sec. 6-7-7(3) performance
standards.
d. The owner of the BMP has entered into a Sec. 6-7-10 maintenance
agreement with the City of Menasha, or another municipal entity,
such that the BMP has a legally obligated entity responsible for its
long-term operation and maintenance. Legal authority exists if a
municipality owns, operates, and maintains the BMP.
e. The owner of the BMP has provided written authorization which
indicates the permit applicant may use the BMP for Sec. 6-7-7(3)
performance standard compliance.
f. Where an off-site or regional BMP option exists such that the Public
Works Department exempts the applicant from all or part of the
minimum on-site storm water management requirements, the
applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount determined in
negotiation with the Public Works Department. In determining the
18 updated on 4/19/2016
fee for post-construction runoff, the Public Works Department shall
consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land, engineering
design, construction, and maintenance of the off-site or regional
BMP.
(c) BMP IN NON-NAVIGABLE WATERS. For purposes of determining compliance
with the performance standards of Sec. 6-7-7(3), the Public Works Department may
give credit for BMPs that function to provide treatment for runoff from existing
development and post-construction runoff from new development, redevelopment,
and routine maintenance areas and are located within non-navigable waters.
(d) BMP IN NAVIGABLE WATERS.
1. New Development Runoff. Except as allowed under Sec. 6-7-7(5)(d)2., BMPs
designed to treat post-construction runoff from new development areas may
not be located in navigable waters and, for purposes of determining
compliance with the performance standards of Sec. 6-7-7(3), the Public Works
Department may not give credit for such BMPs.
2. New Development Runoff Exemption. BMPs to treat post-construction runoff
from new development areas may be located within navigable waters and may
be creditable by the Public Works Department under Sec. 6-7-7(3), if all the
following qualifications are met.
a. The BMP was constructed prior to October 1, 2002 and received all
applicable permits.
b. The BMP functions or will function to provide runoff treatment for
the new development area.
3. Existing Development & Post-Construction Runoff from Redevelopment,
Routine Maintenance, & Infill Development Areas. Except as provided in
Sec. 6-7-7(5)(d)4., BMPs designed to treat post-construction runoff for
existing development and post-construction runoff from redevelopment,
routine maintenance, and infill development areas may not be located in
navigable waters and, for purposes of determining compliance with the
performance standards of Sec. 6-7-7(3), the Public Works Department may not
give credit for such BMPs.
4. Existing Development & Post-Construction Runoff from Redevelopment,
Routine Maintenance, & Infill Development Areas Exemption. BMPs that
function to provide treatment of runoff from existing development and postconstruction
runoff from redevelopment, routine maintenance, and infill
development areas may be located within navigable waters and, for purposes
of determining compliance with the performance standards of Sec. 6-7-7(3),
the Public Works Department may give credit for such BMPs if any of the
following are met:
a. The BMP was constructed, contracts were signed or bids advertised,
and all applicable permits were received prior to January 1, 2011; or
b. The BMP is on an intermittent waterway and all applicable permits
are received.
(e) WATER QUALITY TRADING. To comply with Sec. 6-7-7(3)(a) performance
standards, the Public Works Department may authorize credit for water quality
trading provided all of the following conditions are satisfied.
1. The treatment practices associated with a water quality trade shall be in place,
effective and operational, before credit can be authorized.
19 updated on 4/19/2016
2. The water quality trade shall comply with applicable trading ratios
established by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or the City of
Menasha.
3. The water quality trade shall comply with applicable regulations, standards,
and guidance developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
or the City of Menasha.
4. The responsible party shall furnish a copy of executed water quality trading
agreements or other related information deemed necessary by the Public
Works Department in order to authorize credit.
(6) TARGETED PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. The Public Works Department may
establish numeric water quality requirements that are more stringent than those set forth in
Sec. 6-7-7(3) in order to meet targeted performance standards, total maximum daily loads,
and/or water quality standards for a specific water body or area. The numeric water quality
requirements may be applicable to any permitted site, regardless of the size of land disturbing
construction activity.
(7) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The Public Works Department may establish storm
water management requirements more stringent than those set forth in this section if the
Public Works Department determines that an added level of protection is needed to protect
sensitive resources. Also, the Public Works Department may establish storm water
management requirements less stringent than those set forth in this section if the Public
Works Department determines that less protection is needed to protect sensitive resources
and provide reasonable flood protection. However, the alternative requirements shall not be
less stringent than those requirements promulgated in rules by Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources under NR 151 Wisconsin Administrative Code.
SEC. 6-7-8 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES, AND FEES.
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. No responsible party may undertake a land disturbing construction
activity without receiving a post-construction runoff permit from the Public Works
Department prior to commencing the proposed activity.
(2) PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEES. Unless specifically excluded by this ordinance,
any responsible party desiring a permit shall submit to the Public Works Department a permit
application made on a form provided by the Public Works Department for that purpose.
(a) Unless otherwise exempted by this ordinance, a permit application must be
accompanied by a storm water management plan, a maintenance agreement, and a
non-refundable permit administration fee.
(b) The storm water management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of Sec.
6-7-7 and Sec. 6-7-9; the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the
requirements of Sec. 6-7-10; the financial guarantee shall meet the requirements of
Sec. 6-7-11; and fees shall be those established by the Common Council as set forth
in Sec. 6-7-12.
(3) REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PERMIT APPLICATION. The Public Works
Department shall review any permit application that is submitted with a storm water
management plan, maintenance agreement, and the required fee. The following approval
procedure shall be used.
(a) Within 20 business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all
items as required by Sec. 6-7-8(2), the Public Works Department shall inform the
applicant whether the application, plan, and maintenance agreement are approved or
disapproved based on the requirements of this ordinance.
20 updated on 4/19/2016
(b) If the storm water permit application, plan, and maintenance agreement are approved,
or if an agreed upon payment of fees in lieu of storm water management practices is
made pursuant to Sec. 6-7-7(5), the Public Works Department shall issue the permit.
(c) If the storm water permit application, plan, or maintenance agreement is disapproved,
the Public Works Department shall detail in writing the reasons for disapproval.
(d) The Public Works Department may request additional information from the applicant.
If additional information is submitted, the Public Works Department shall have 20
business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the
applicant the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved.
(e) Failure by the Public Works Department to inform the permit applicant of a decision
within 20 business days of a required submittal shall be deemed to mean approval of
the submittal and the applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued.
(4) PERMIT REQUIREMENTS. All permits issued under this ordinance shall be subject to
the following conditions and holders of permits issued under this ordinance shall be deemed
to have accepted these conditions. The Public Works Department may suspend or revoke a
permit for violation of a permit condition, following written notification of the responsible
party. An action by the Public Works Department to suspend or revoke this permit may be
appealed in accordance with Sec. 6-7-14.
(a) Compliance with this permit does not relieve the responsible party of the
responsibility to comply with other applicable federal, state, and local laws and
regulations.
(b) The responsible party shall design and install all structural and non-structural storm
water management measures in accordance with the approved storm water
management plan and this permit.
(c) The responsible party shall notify the Public Works Department at least 10 business
days before commencing any work in conjunction with the storm water management
plan and within 10 business days upon completion of the storm water management
practices. If required as a special condition under Sec. 6-7-8(5), the responsible party
shall make additional notification according to a schedule set forth by the Public
Works Department so practice installations can be inspected during construction.
(d) Practice installations required as part of this ordinance shall be certified "as built" by
a licensed professional engineer. Completed storm water management practices must
pass a final inspection by the Public Works Department or its designee to determine
if they are in accordance with the approved storm water management plan and
ordinance. The Public Works Department, or its designee, shall notify the
responsible party in writing of any changes required in such practices to bring them
into compliance with the conditions of this permit.
(e) The responsible party shall notify the Public Works Department of any significant
modifications it intends to make to an approved storm water management plan. The
Public Works Department may require the proposed modifications be submitted to it
for approval prior to incorporation into the storm water management plan and
execution by the responsible party.
(f) The responsible party shall maintain all storm water management practices in
accordance with the storm water management plan until the practices either become
the responsibility of the City of Menasha or are transferred to subsequent private
owners as specified in the approved maintenance agreement.
(g) The responsible party authorizes the Public Works Department to perform any work
or operations necessary to bring storm water management measures into conformance
21 updated on 4/19/2016
with the approved storm water management plan and consents to a special assessment
or charge against the property as authorized under subch. VII of ch. 66, Wis. Stats., or
to charging such costs against the financial guarantee posted under Sec. 6-7-11.
(h) If so directed by the Public Works Department, the responsible party shall repair at
the responsible party's own expense all damage to adjoining municipal facilities and
drainage ways caused by runoff, where such damage is caused by activities that are
not in compliance with the approved storm water management plan.
(i) The responsible party shall permit property access to the Public Works Department or
its designee for the purpose of inspecting the property for compliance with the
approved storm water management plan and this permit.
(j) Where site development or redevelopment involves changes in direction, increases in
peak rate, and/or total volume of runoff from a site, the Public Works Department
may require the responsible party to make appropriate legal arrangements with
affected property owners concerning the prevention of endangerment to property or
public safety.
(k) If the responsible party fails to comply with the terms of this permit the responsible
party is subject to the enforcement actions and penalties detailed in Sec. 6-7-13.
(l) The permit applicant shall post the “Certificate of Permit Coverage” in a conspicuous
location at the construction site.
(5) PERMIT CONDITIONS. Permits issued under this subsection may include conditions
established by Public Works Department in addition to the requirements needed to meet the
performance standards in Sec. 6-7-7 or a financial guarantee as provided for in Sec. 6-7-11.
(6) PERMIT DURATION. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of
issuance through the date the Public Works Department notifies the responsible party that all
storm water management practices have passed the final inspection required under Sec. 6-7-
8(4)(d).
(7) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The Public Works Department may prescribe
alternative requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site storm water
management performance standards under Sec. 6-7-7(5) or for applicants seeking a permit
for a post-construction site with less than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface
disturbance.
SEC. 6-7-9 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
(1) PLAN REQUIREMENTS. The storm water management plan required under Sec. 6-7-7(2)
and Sec. 6-7-8(2) shall comply with the City of Menasha Storm Water Reference Guide and
contain, at a minimum, the following information.
(a) Name, address, and telephone number of the landowner and responsible parties.
(b) A legal description of the property proposed to be developed.
(c) Pre-development site map with property lines, disturbed limits, and drainage patterns.
(d) Post-development site map with property lines, disturbed limits, and drainage
patterns, which includes:
1. Total area of disturbed impervious surfaces within the site;
2. Total area of new impervious surfaces within the site;
3. Performance standards applicable to site;
4. Proposed best management practices;
22 updated on 4/19/2016
5. Groundwater, bedrock, and soil limitations; and
6. Separation distances. Storm water management practices shall be adequately
separated from wells to prevent contamination of drinking water.
(2) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The Public Works Department may prescribe
alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site storm water
management performance standards under Sec. 6-7-7(5) or for applicants seeking a permit
for a post-construction site with less than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface
disturbance.
SEC. 6-7-10 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
(1) MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT REQUIRED. The maintenance agreement required
under Sec. 6-7-8(2) for storm water management practices shall be an agreement between the
City of Menasha and the responsible party to provide for maintenance of storm water
practices beyond the duration period of this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be
filed with the County Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction so it is binding upon all
subsequent owners of the land served by the storm water management practices.
(2) AGREEMENT PROVISIONS. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following
information and provisions and be consistent with the plan required by Sec. 6-7-8(2).
(a) Identification of the storm water facilities and designation of the drainage area served
by the facilities.
(b) A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the storm water management
system consistent with the storm water management plan required under Sec. 6-7-
8(2).
(c) Identification of the responsible party(s), organization, or city, county, town, or
village responsible for long term maintenance of the storm water management
practices identified in the storm water management plan required under Sec. 6-7-8(2).
(d) Requirement that the responsible party(s), organization, or city, county, town, or
village shall maintain storm water management practices in accordance with the
schedule included in Sec. 6-7-10(2)(b).
(e) Authorization for the Public Works Department to access the property to conduct
inspections of storm water management practices as necessary to ascertain if the
practices are being maintained and operated in accordance with the agreement.
(f) A requirement on the Public Works Department to maintain public records of the
results of the site inspections, to inform the responsible party responsible for
maintenance of the inspection results, and to specifically indicate any corrective
actions required to bring the storm water management practice into proper working
condition.
(g) Agreement that the party designated under Sec. 6-7-10(2)(c), is responsible for long
term maintenance of the storm water management practices and shall be notified by
the Public Works Department of maintenance problems which require correction.
The specified corrective actions shall be undertaken within a reasonable time frame
as set by the Public Works Department.
(h) Authorization of the Public Works Department to perform the corrected actions
identified in the inspection report if the responsible party designated under Sec. 6-7-
10(2)(c) does not make the required corrections in the specified time period. The
Public Works Department shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect the
money as a special charge against the property pursuant to subch. VII of ch. 66, Wis.
Stats.
23 updated on 4/19/2016
(3) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The Public Works Department may prescribe
alternative requirements for applicants seeking an exemption from on-site storm water
management performance standards under Sec. 6-7-7(5) or for applicants seeking a permit
for a post-construction site with less than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface
disturbance.
SEC. 6-7-11 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.
(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF THE GUARANTEE. The Public Works Department may require
the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall be acceptable to the
Public Works Department. The financial guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the
Public Works Department to be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of
maintenance of the storm water management practices during the period in which the
designated party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The financial
guarantee shall give the Public Works Department the authorization to use the funds to
complete the storm water management practices if the responsible party defaults or does not
properly implement the approved storm water management plan, upon written notice to the
responsible party by the Public Works Department that the requirements of this ordinance
have not been met.
(2) CONDITIONS FOR RELEASE. Conditions for the release of the financial guarantee are
as follows:
(a) The Public Works Department shall release the portion of the financial guarantee
established under this section, less any costs incurred by the Public Works
Department to complete installation of practices, upon submission of "as built plans"
by a licensed professional engineer. The Public Works Department may make
provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the financial guarantee based on the
completion of various development stages; and
(b) The Public Works Department shall release the portion of the financial guarantee
established under this section to assure maintenance of storm water practices, less any
costs incurred by the Public Works Department, at such time that the responsibility
for practice maintenance is passed on to another entity via an approved maintenance
agreement.
(3) ALTERNATE REQUIREMENTS. The Public Works Department may prescribe
alternative requirements for applicants seeking an exemption to on-site storm water
management performance standards under Sec. 6-7-7(5) or for applicants seeking a permit
for a post-construction site with less than 20,000 square feet of impervious surface
disturbance.
SEC. 6-7-12 FEE SCHEDULE.
The fees referred to in other sections of this ordinance shall be established by the Common Council
of the City of Menasha and may be modified by resolution. A schedule of the fees established by the
Common Council shall be available for review in the Public Works Department.
SEC. 6-7-13 ENFORCEMENT.
(1) Any land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff initiated after the
effective date of this ordinance by any person, firm, association, or corporation subject to the
ordinance provisions shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance with the
requirements of this ordinance.
24 updated on 4/19/2016
(2) The Public Works Department shall notify the responsible party by certified mail of any noncomplying
land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff. The notice shall
describe the nature of the violation, remedial actions needed, a schedule for remedial action,
and additional enforcement action which may be taken.
(3) Upon receipt of written notification from the Public Works Department under sub. (2), the
responsible party shall correct work that does not comply with the storm water management
plan or other provisions of this permit. The responsible party shall make corrections as
necessary to meet the specifications and schedule set forth by the Public Works Department
in the notice.
(4) If the violations to a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance are likely to result in damage to
properties, public facilities, or waters of the state, the Public Works Department may enter
the land and take emergency actions necessary to prevent such damage. The costs incurred
by the Public Works Department plus interest and legal costs shall be billed to the
responsible party.
(5) The Public Works Department is authorized to post a stop work order on all land disturbing
construction activity that is in violation of this ordinance or to request the city attorney to
obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
(6) The Public Works Department may revoke a permit issued under this ordinance for noncompliance
with ordinance provisions.
(7) Any permit revocation, stop work order, or cease and desist order shall remain in effect
unless retracted by the Public Works Department or by a court with jurisdiction.
(8) The Public Works Department is authorized to refer any violation of this ordinance, or of a
stop work order or cease and desist order issued pursuant to this ordinance, to the city
attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings in any court with jurisdiction.
(9) Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with the provisions of this
ordinance shall be subject to the penalties listed in Sec. 1-1-7. Each day the violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense.
(10) Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance may also be enforced by injunction in any
court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease and
desist order before resorting to injunction proceedings.
(11) When the Public Works Department determines the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this
ordinance has failed to follow practices set forth in the storm water management plan, or has
failed to comply with schedules set forth in said storm water management plan, the Public
Works Department or a party designated by the Public Works Department may enter upon
the land and perform the work or other operations necessary to bring the condition of said
lands into conformance with requirements of the approved plan. The Public Works
Department shall keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of performing this
work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any financial security posted pursuant
to Sec. 6-7-11 of this ordinance. Where such a security has not been established, or where
such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and expenses shall be entered on
the tax roll as a special charge against the property and collected with any other taxes levied
thereon.
SEC. 6-7-14 APPEALS.
(1) BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Board of Public Works, created pursuant to Sec. 2-2-5
of the City of Menasha ordinances pursuant to s. 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats, shall hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision, or determination
made by the Public Works Department in administering this ordinance. The board shall also
use the rules, procedures, duties, and powers authorized by statute in hearing and deciding
25 updated on 4/19/2016
appeals. Upon appeal, the board may authorize variances from the provisions of this
ordinance that are not contrary to the public interest, and where owing to special conditions a
literal enforcement of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship.
(2) WHO MAY APPEAL. Appeals to the Board of Public Works may be taken by any
aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the City of Menasha
affected by any decision of the Public Works Department. Such appeal shall be filed within
10 days of the alleged grievance.
SEC. 6-7-15 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance is judged unconstitutional or invalid by
a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in force and not be
affected by such judgment.
Title 6 Chapter 8
STORM WATER ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
6-8-1 PURPOSE/INTENT
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of
the City of Menasha through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This
ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order to
comply with requirements of the Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) permit
process. The objectives of this ordinance are:
(1) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by storm water discharges by any user.
(2) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
(3) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement
procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
6-8-2 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following shall mean:
Authorized Enforcement Agency. Employees or designees of the Director of Public Works.
Best Management Practices (BMPs). Structural or non-structural measures, practices, techniques or
devices employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the
state.
Contaminated Stormwater. Stormwater that comes into contact with material handling equipment or
activities, raw materials, intermediate products, final products, waste materials, byproducts or industrial
machinery in the source areas listed in NR 216 (effective August 1, 2004).
Department (DNR). The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
Discharge. As defined in Wisconsin Statute 283 (November 1, 2005), when used without qualification
includes a discharge of any pollutant.
Discharge of pollutant or discharge of pollutants. As defined in Wisconsin Statute 283 (November 1,
2005), means any addition of any pollutant to the waters of this state from any point source.
Hazardous Materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or
significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Illicit Discharge. Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed
entirely of storm water except discharges authorized by a WPDES permit or other discharge not
requiring a WPDES permit such as landscape irrigation, individual residential car washing, fire fighting,
diverted stream flows, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation
water, lawn watering, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and similar discharges.
Illicit Connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following:
? Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows an illicit discharge to
enter the MS4 including but not limited to any conveyances that allow any non-storm water
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the MS4 and any
connections to the MS4 from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency or,
? Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the MS4 which
has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
Industrial Activity. Activities subject to WPDES Industrial Permits per NR 216 (effective August 1,
2004) and Wisconsin Statute 283 (November 1, 2005)
Municipality. Any city, town, village, county, county utility district, town sanitary district, town utility
district, school district or metropolitan sewage district or any other public entity created pursuant to law
and having authority to collect, treat or dispose of sewage, industrial wastes, storm water or other
wastes.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). As defined in Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 216
(effective August 1, 2004), means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains,
which meets all the following criteria:
(a) Owned or operated by a municipality.
(b) Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water.
(c) Which is not a combined sewer conveying both sanitary and storm water.
(d) Which is not part of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary or
more stringent treatment.
Non-Storm Water Discharge. Any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of storm water.
Owner. Any person holding fee title, an easement or other interest in property.
Outfall. The point at which storm water is discharged to waters of the state or to a storm sewer.
Person. An individual, owner, operator, corporation, partnership, association, municipality, interstate
agency, state agency or federal agency.
Pollutant. As defined in Wisconsin Statute 283 (November 1, 2005), means any dredged spoil, solid
waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive substance, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt
and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
Pollution. As defined in Wisconsin Statute 283 (November 1, 2005), means any man-made or maninduced
alteration of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
Pollution Prevention. Taking measures to eliminate or reduce pollution.
Premises. Any building, lot parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved
including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
StormwWater. Runoff from precipitation including rain, snow, ice melt or similar water that moves on
the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
Storm Water Management Plan/Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. A document which describes the
Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources
of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
Stormwater, Stormwater Conveyance Systems, and/or Receiving Waters to the Maximum Extent
practicable.
Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a
facility.
Watercourse. A natural or artificial channel through which water flows. These channels include: all blue
and dashed lines on the USGS quadrangle maps, all channels shown on the soils maps in the NRCS soils
book for Winnebago County and Calumet County, all channels identified on the site, and new channels
that are created as part of a development. The term watercourse includes waters of the state as herein
defied.
Waters of the State. As defined in Wisconsin Statute 283 (November 1, 2005), means those portions of
Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within the boundaries of Wisconsin, all lakes, bays, rivers, streams,
springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, water courses, drainage systems and other
surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private within the state or under its
jurisdiction, except those waters which are entirely confined and retained completely upon the property
of a person.
Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit. A
Wisconsin pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued pursuant to Wisconsin Statute 283
(November 1, 2005).
6-8-3 APPLICABILITY
This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any lands unless explicitly
exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
6-8-4 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION
The Department of Public Works and/or its agents shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Department of Public
Works may be delegated in writing by the Director of the Department of Public Works to persons or
entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of agency.
6-8-5 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS
This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other
provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance are in addition to the requirements of any other
ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of
law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or
the environment shall control.
6-8-6 SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence,
or paragraph of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances
shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this ordinance.
6-8-7 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are minimum standards;
therefore this ordinance does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there
will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
6-8-8 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS
(1) Prohibition of Illicit Discharges
No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to
throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, other than storm water.
(2) Allowed Discharges
(a) Water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharges from potable water sources, foundation
drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps,
footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats
and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water.
(b) Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the
Department of Public Works as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(c) Discharges associated with dye testing, however this activity requires a verbal notification to the
Department of Public Works and the Department of Natural Resources a minimum of one day
prior to the time of the test.
(d) Any non-storm water discharge permitted under a WPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge
order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources. Any person subject to such a WPDES Stormwater discharge
permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
(3) Prohibition of Illicit Connections
(a) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is
prohibited.
(b) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection.
(c) A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line
conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
(d) Improper connections in violation of this ordinance must be disconnected and redirected, if
necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system
upon approval of the Department of Public Works.
(e) Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which
may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that
property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the Department of Public Works
requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period
within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or
conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or
point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point
be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the
Department of Public Works.
6-8-9 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION
Every person owning property through which watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee, shall keep
and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free to trash, debris, excessive vegetation,
and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or
adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
6-8-10 COMPLIANCE MONITORING
(1) Right of Entry: Inspecting and Sampling
The Department of Public Works shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to
regulation under this ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
ordinance.
(a) If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow
access to representatives of the Department of Public Works.
(b) Facility operators shall allow the Department of Public Works ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records.
(c) The Department of Pubic Works shall have the right to set up on any facility such devices as are
necessary in the opinion of the Department of Public Works to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility’s storm water discharge.
(d) The Department of Public Works has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All
devices used to measure Stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
(e) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the
Department of Public Works and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall
be borne by the operator.
(f) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Department of Public Works access to a facility is a
violation. A person who is the operator of a facility commits an offense if the person denies the
Department of Public Works reasonable access to the facility for the purpose of conducting any
activity authorized or required by this ordinance.
(2) Special Inspection Warrant
If the Department of Public Works has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part
of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, then the Department of Public works may seek issuance of a special inspection
warrant per state statute 66.0119.
6-8-11 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER
POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
The owner or operator of any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution
or contamination of storm water, the MS4, or waters of the State shall provide, at their own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
municipal MS4 or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further,
any person responsible for a property or premise, that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs
to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a
valid WPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the
extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be
part of a Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP)/Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) as
necessary for compliance.
6-8-12 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation,
or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the MS4, or waters of the State, said person shall take all necessary steps
to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such release of
hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said
person shall notify the Department of Public Works in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the
next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed
and mailed to the Department of Public Works within 3 business days of the phone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or
operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least 5 years.
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this ordinance.
6-8-13 VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES
(1) Violations
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this ordinance. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions
of this ordinance, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be
restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the
Department of Public Works is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving
prior notice, to take any and all measures to abate the violation. The Department of Public Works is
authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in Section 16.
(2) Warning Notice
When the Department of Public Works finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this ordinance, or any order issued hereunder, the Department of Public Works
may serve upon that person a written Warning Notice, specifying the particular violation believed
to have occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a
resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the matter
in response to the Warning Notice in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the Warning Notice. Nothing in the subsection shall
limit the authority of the Department of Public Works to take action, including emergency action or
any other enforcement action without first issuing a Warning Notice.
(3) Notice of Violation
Whenever the Department of Public Works finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to
meet a requirement of this ordinance, the Department of Public Works may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person.
The Notice of Violation shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the alleged violator;
(b) The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the
violation is occurring, or has occurred;
(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this ordinance and
a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to
whom the notice of violation is directed;
(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Department of Public
Works by filing a written notice of appeal within 3 days of service of notice of violation; and
(g) A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore compliance within the established
time schedule, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or contractor and
the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
(6) The implementation of BMPs.
(4) Suspension of MS4 Access
(a) Emergency Cease and Desist Orders
When the Department of Public Works finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this ordinance, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person’s past
violations are likely to recur, and that the person’s violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed
to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably
appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of the
persons or to the environment, the Department of Public Works may issue an order to the
violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator
to:
(1) Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing
or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the
discharge.
Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this subsection shall immediately
comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger’s failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the Department of Public Works may
take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the
State, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including immediate termination of
a facility’s water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The Department
of Public Works may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Department of Public Works that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this ordinance.
A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful
discharge and the measure taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Department of Public
Works within 3 days of receipt of the prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
violator.
(b) Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations
The Department of Public Works may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or
welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the State. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the Department of Public Works may take such steps
as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the State, or to
minimize danger to persons.
(c) Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge
Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this ordinance may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Department of
Public Works will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator
may petition the Department of Public Works for a reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this
Section, without the prior approval of the Department of Public Works.
(5) Prosecution and Penalties
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this ordinance shall be liable to prosecution to the
fullest extent of the law. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in
the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within the set time
period specified by the Department of Public Works, after the Department of Public Works has taken
one or more of the actions described above, the Department of Public Works may impose a penalty not
to exceed $1000 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains
unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation.
6-8-14 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION
Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the Department of Public
Works. The notice of appeal must be filed with the Department of Public Works 3 days from the date of
the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall
take place within 60 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
6-8-15 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation,
or, in the event of an appeal, the municipal authority upheld the decision of the Department of Public
Works, then representatives of the Department of Public Works are authorized to enter upon the subject
private property and authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
6-8-16 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION
The owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If the
amount due is not paid by the date determined by the municipal authority, the charges shall become a
special charge against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property.
6-8-17 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE
Any condition in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance and declared and deemed a
nuisance, may be summarily abated or restored at the violator’s expense.
6-8-18 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any
applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the Department of Public Works to
seek cumulative remedies.
The Department of Public Works may recover all attorneys’ fees, court costs and other expenses
associated with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
Updated: 11/22/2017
CHAPTER 1
Licensing of Dog, Cat or Ferret and Regulation of Animals
SEC 7-1-1 DOG, CAT, OR FERRET LICENSE REQUIRED; DEFINITIONS
(A) License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person in the City of Menasha to own, harbor,
or keep any dog or cat that is more than five (5) months of age after July 1 of the license
year without complying with the provisions of this Chapter related to the listing, licensing,
and tagging of the same, unless otherwise licensed in another municipality.
(B) Definitions. In this Chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise require:
(1) “Owner” or “Responsible party” includes any person owning, harboring, or keeping
a dog or cat.
(2) “At large” means to be off the premises of the owner or responsible party and not
under the control of some person either by leash or otherwise; but a dog or cat
within an automobile of its owner, or in an automobile of any other person with the
consent of the owner of said dog or cat, shall be deemed to be upon the owner’s
premises.
(3) “Dog” shall mean any domesticated member of the canis familiaris commonly
domesticated in the United States, regardless of age or sex.
(4) “Cat” shall mean any domesticated member of the felis domestica commonly
domesticated in the United States, regardless of age or sex.
(5) “Neutered” as used herein as describing a dog or cat shall mean a dog or cat having
nonfunctional reproductive organs.
(6) “Animal” means mammals, reptiles, and birds.
(7) “Domesticated animal” means any bird or animal of any species which usually lives
in or about the habitation of humans as a pet or animal companion. The term does
not include a dangerous animal, a prohibited dangerous animal, or a feral cat.
(8) “Cruel” means causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering or unjustifiable
injury or death.
(9) “Law Enforcement Officer” has that meaning which appears in Wis. Stats. §967-
02(5) and includes a humane officer under Wis. Stats. §58.07, but does not include a
conservation warden appointed under Wis. Stats. §23.10.
(10) “Farm animal” means any warm-blooded animal normally raised on farms in the
United States and used for food or fiber.
(11) “Pet” means a domestic or tamed animal kept and used for human companionship.
(12) “Dwelling Unit” is a building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for
residential purposes.
(13) “Supervisor of Building Inspection Services” is the designated enforcement official.
(14) “Licensed Kennel” shall be an establishment when or whereupon five (5) or more
dogs and/or cats are kept, owned, boarded, groomed, sheltered, protected, bred, or
offered for sale or any other merchandising.
Before a kennel license may be applied for, the applicant must apply for a special
use permit through the Community Development department and unless such permit
is granted such kennel license will not be granted.
(15) “Bite” shall mean to seize, pierce, or cut with the teeth or with parts of the jaw or to
create a wound, usually superficial, inflicted by nails or claws pulled across the skin.
(16) “Potentially Dangerous” means any animal that when unprovoked:
a. Bites a human or domestic animal either on public or private property
without causing great or substantial bodily harm;
b. Chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or public grounds
Updated: 11/22/2017
in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or any animal with the
known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked or cause injury
or otherwise to threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals.
(17) “Dangerous Animal” means any animal that:
a. Inflicts substantial bodily harm on a human being or domestic animal
without provocation on public or private property;
b. Engages in, or is found to have been trained to engage in, exhibitions of
fighting; or
c. Has been previously found, within the last 36 months, to be a potentially
dangerous animal, the owner having received notice of such and the animal
again aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of human beings or
domestic animals.
d. An animal shall not be deemed a dangerous animal if it bites, attacks, or
menaces any person or animal to:
i. Defend its owner, caretaker, or another person from an attack by a
person or animal;
ii. Protect its young or another animal
iii. Defend itself against any person or animal which has tormented,
assaulted, or abused it; or
iv. Defend its owner’s or caretaker’s property against trespassers.
(18) “Prohibited Dangerous Animal” means any animal that:
a. Without provocation has killed a human being or domestic animal;
b. Without provocation inflicts great bodily harm on a human being or
domestic animal;
c. Has on two or more reported occasions bitten or attacked a human being or
domestic animal, without provocation, on either public or private property,
at a level of aggression that meets the definition for dangerous animal;
d. No person may bring into or keep in the City an animal that a Wisconsin
City, Village, Town, or County has described as dangerous or vicious, has
banished from said City, Village, Town, or County, or has been ordered to
be destroyed. The Chief of Police may declare such an animal to be a
prohibited dangerous animal in the City of Menasha upon receipt of an
official written declaration from the other City, Village, Town, or County
setting forth the grounds for the declaration, the name of the animal, if
known, and the description of the animal.
SEC. 7-1-2 RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED FOR LICENSE.
(A) RABIES VACCINATION. The owner of a dog, cat or ferret shall have the animal
vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian within thirty (30) days after the animal reaches
five (5) months of age and re-vaccinated within one (1) year after the initial vaccination. If
the owner obtains the dog, cat or ferret or brings the dog, cat or ferret into the City of
Menasha after the animal has reached five (5) months of age, the owner shall have the
animal vaccinated against rabies within thirty (30) days after the animal is brought into the
City unless the animal has been vaccinated as evidenced by a current certificate of rabies
vaccination. The owner of a dog, cat or ferret shall have the animal re-vaccinated against
rabies by a veterinarian before the date of that immunization expires as stated on the
certificate of vaccination or, if no date is specified, within three (3) years after the previous
vaccination. The certificate of vaccination shall meet the requirements of Section 95.21(2),
Wis. Stats. Should the owner of a dog, cat or ferret evidence from a veterinarian that a
particular dog, cat or ferret should not be vaccinated for rabies, this requirement shall not
Updated: 11/22/2017
apply. The owner must file such veterinarian statement annually when applying for the cat,
dog or ferret license. The Finance Department shall notify the Police Department of any cat,
dog or ferret whose owner files such a veterinarian statement
(B) ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF RABIES VACCINATION. A veterinarian who
vaccinates a dog against rabies shall complete and issue to the owner a certificate of rabies
vaccination bearing a serial number and in the form approved by the City stating the owner's
name and address, the name, sex, spayed or unspayed, neutered or unneutered, breed and
color of the dog, the date of the vaccination, the type of rabies vaccination administered and
the manufacturer's serial number, the date that the immunization expires as specified for
that type of vaccine by the Center for Disease Control of the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services and the City.
(C) COPIES OF CERTIFICATE. The veterinarian shall keep a copy of each certificate of
rabies vaccination in a file maintained for this purpose until the date that the immunization
expires or until the dog is re-vaccinated, whichever occurs first.
(D) RABIES VACCINATION TAG. After issuing the certificate of rabies vaccination, the
veterinarian shall deliver to the owner a rabies vaccination tag of durable material bearing
the same serial number as the certificate, the year the vaccination was given and the name,
address and telephone number of the veterinarian.
(E) TAG TO BE ATTACHED. The owner shall attach the rabies vaccination tag or a
substitute tag to a collar and a collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog or cat at
all times, but this requirement does not apply to a dog or cat during competition or training,
to a dog or cat securely confined indoors or to a dog or cat securely confined in a fenced
area, or to a dog or cat on the premises of the owner. The substitute tag shall be of a durable
material and contain the same information as the rabies vaccination tag. The requirements
of this paragraph do not apply to a dog or cat which is not required to be vaccinated under
Subsection (a).
(F) DUPLICATE TAG. The veterinarian may furnish a new rabies vaccination tag with a new
serial number to an owner in place of the original tag upon presentation of the certificate of
rabies vaccination. The veterinarian shall then indicate the new tag number on the certificate
and keep a record in the file.
(G) COST. The owner shall pay the cost of the rabies vaccination and the cost associated with
the issuance of a certificate of rabies vaccination and the delivery of a rabies vaccination
tag.
SEC. 7-1-3 ISSUANCE OF DOG, CAT AND KENNEL LICENSES.
(A) DOG AND CAT LICENSES.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person in the City of Menasha to own, harbor or keep
any dog more than five (5) months of age without complying with the provisions of
Section 174.05 through Section 174.10, Wisconsin Statutes, relating to the listing,
licensing and tagging of the same.
(2) The owner of any dog more than five (5) months of age on January 1 of any year, or
five (5) months of age within the license year, shall annually, or on or before the
date the dog becomes five (5) months of age, pay a license tax and obtain a license.
(3) The fee under this Section shall be established by the Common Council upon the
recommendation of the Comptroller. The fee for spayed females or neutered males
may be lower than the fee for unspayed or unneutered animals. These amounts shall
be reduced by one-half (1/2) if the animal became five (5) months of age after July 1
during the license year. The license year shall commence January 1 and end
December 31. A duplicate license may be obtained upon payment of a fee
established by the Common Council upon the recommendation of the Comptroller.
Updated: 11/22/2017
(4) Upon payment of the required license tax and upon presentation of evidence that the
dog is currently immunized against rabies, as required by Section 7-1-2 of this
Chapter, the City Treasurer shall complete and issue to the owner a license for such
dog containing all information required by state law. The City Treasurer shall also
deliver to the owner, at the time of issuance of the license, a tag of durable material
bearing the same serial number as the license, the name of the county in which
issued and the license year.
(5) The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar and the collar with the tag
attached shall be kept on the dog for which the license is issued at all times, except
as provided in Section 7-1-2(e).
(6) The fact that a dog is without a tag attached to the dog by means of a collar shall be
presumptive evidence that the dog is unlicensed. Any City police or humane officer
shall seize, impound or restrain any dog for which a dog license is required which is
found without such tag attached.
(7) Notwithstanding the foregoing, every dog specifically trained to lead blind or deaf
persons is exempt from the dog license tax, and every person owning such a dog
shall receive annually a free dog license from the City Treasurer upon application
therefor.
(B) KENNEL LICENSES.
(1) Any person who keeps or operates a kennel may, instead of the license tax for each
dog required by this Chapter, apply for a kennel license for the keeping or operating
of the kennel. The annual kennel license fee shall be issued upon payment of the
applicable fee as follows: Seventy-five Dollars ($75.00) for each kennel authorized
to house between ten (10) and twenty-five (25) animals; One Hundred Twenty-five
Dollars ($125.00) for each kennel authorized to house between twenty-six (26) and
thirty-five (35) animals; Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for each kennel
authorized to house thirty-six (36) to fifty (50) animals. Kennels for more than fifty
(50) animals will be assessed Five Dollars ($5.00) per animal based upon proposed
operating population with a minimum fee of Two Hundred Seventy-five Dollars
($275.00). Upon payment of the required kennel license tax and, if required by the
Common Council, upon presentation of evidence that all dogs over five (5) months
of age are currently immunized against rabies, the City Treasurer shall issue the
kennel license and a number of tags equal to the number of dogs authorized to be
kept in the kennel.
(2) The owner or keeper of a kennel shall keep at all times a kennel license tag attached
to the collar of each dog over five (5) months old kept by the owner or keeper under
a kennel license but this requirement does not apply to a show dog during
competition, to a dog securely confined indoors or to a dog securely confined in a
fenced area. These tags may be transferred from one dog to another within the
kennel whenever any dog is removed from the kennel. The rabies vaccination tag or
substitute tag shall remain attached to the dog for which it is issued at all times but
this requirement does not apply to a show dog during competition, to a dog securely
confined indoors or to a dog securely confined in a fenced area. No dog bearing a
kennel tag shall be permitted to stray or to be taken anywhere outside the limits of
the kennel unless the dog is in leash or temporarily for the purposes of hunting,
breeding, trial, training or competition.
State Law Reference: Section 174.053, Wis. Stats.
Updated: 11/22/2017
SEC. 7-1-4 LATE FEES.
The City Treasurer shall assess and collect a late fee of Five Dollars ($5.00) from every
owner of a dog five (5) months of age or over if the owner failed to obtain a license prior to
April 1 of each year, or within thirty (30) days of acquiring ownership of a licensable dog or
if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before the dog reached licensable age. Said late
fee shall be charged in addition to the required license fee.
SEC. 7-1-5 RABIES QUARANTINE.
(A) DOG, CAT OR FERRET CONFINED. If a district is quarantined for rabies, all dogs,
cats or ferrets within the City shall be kept securely confined, tied, leashed or muzzled. Any
dog, cat or ferret not confined, tied, leashed or muzzled is declared a public nuisance and
may be impounded. All officers shall cooperate in the enforcement of the quarantine. The
City Clerk shall promptly post in at least three (3) public places in the City notices of
quarantine.
(B) EXEMPTION OF VACCINATED DOG, CAT OR FERRET FROM CITY
QUARANTINE. A dog, cat or ferret which is immunized currently against rabies, as
evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence, is exempt from the
City quarantine provisions of Subsection (a) if a rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag is
attached to the animal’s collar.
(C) QUARANTINE OR SACRIFICE OF AN ANIMAL SUSPECTED OF BITING A
PERSON OR BEING INFECTED OR EXPOSED TO RABIES.
(1) Quarantine or sacrifice of dog, cat or ferret. An officer shall order a dog, cat or ferret
quarantined if the officer has reason to believe that the animal bit a person, is
infected with rabies or has been in contact with a rabid animal. If quarantine cannot
be imposed because the dog, cat or ferret cannot be captured, the officer may kill the
animal. The officer may kill a dog, cat or ferret only as a last resort if the owner
agrees. The officer shall attempt to kill the animal in a humane manner and in a
manner which avoids damage to the animal's head.
(2) Sacrifice of other animals. An officer may order killed or may kill an animal other
than a dog, cat or ferret if the officer has reason to believe that the animal bit a
person or is infected with rabies.
(D) QUARANTINE OF DOG, CAT OR FERRET.
(1) Delivery to isolation facility or quarantine on premises of owner. An officer who
orders a dog, cat or ferret to be quarantined shall deliver the animal or shall order the
animal delivered to an isolation facility as soon as possible but no later than twentyfour
(24) hours after the original order is issued or the officer may order the animal
to be quarantined on the premises of the owner if the animal is immunized currently
against rabies as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other
evidence.
(2) Health risk to humans. If a dog, cat or ferret is ordered to be quarantined because
there is reason to believe that the animal bit a person, the custodian of an isolation
facility or the owner shall keep the animal under strict isolation under the
supervision of a veterinarian for at least ten (10) days after the incident occurred. In
this paragraph, "supervision of a veterinarian" includes, at a minimum, examination
of the animal on the first day of isolation, on the last day of isolation and on one (1)
intervening day. If the observation period is not extended and if the veterinarian
certifies that the dog, cat or ferret has not exhibited any signs of rabies, the animal
may be released from quarantine at the end of the observation period.
(3) Risk to animal health.
a. If a dog, cat or ferret is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to
Updated: 11/22/2017
believe that the animal has been exposed to a rabid animal and if the animal is not
currently immunized against rabies, the custodian of an isolation facility or the
owner shall keep the animal leashed or confined for one hundred eighty (180) days.
The owner shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies between one hundred
fifty-five (155) and one hundred sixty-five (165) days after the exposure to a rabid
animal.
b. If a dog, cat or ferret is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to
believe that the animal has been exposed to a rabid animal but if the dog, cat or
ferret is immunized against rabies, the custodian of an isolation facility or the owner
shall keep the animal leashed or confined for sixty (60) days. The owner shall have
the animal re-vaccinated against rabies as soon as possible after exposure to a rabid
animal.
(4) Sacrifice of a dog, cat or ferret exhibiting symptoms of rabies. If a veterinarian
determines that a dog, cat or ferret exhibits symptoms of rabies during the original
or extended observation period, the veterinarian shall notify the owner and officer
who ordered the animal quarantined and the officer or veterinarian shall kill the
animal in a humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's
head. If the dog, cat or ferret is suspected to have bitten a person, the veterinarian
shall notify the person or the person's physician.
(E) DELIVERY OF CARCASS; PREPARATION; EXAMINATION BY
LABORATORY OF HYGIENE. An officer who kills an animal shall deliver the carcass
to a veterinarian or local health department. The veterinarian or local health department
shall prepare the carcass, properly prepare and package the head of the animal in a manner
to minimize deterioration, arrange for delivery by the most expeditious means feasible of
the head of the animal to the State Laboratory of Hygiene and dispose of or arrange for the
disposal of the remainder of the carcass in a manner which minimizes the risk or exposure
to any rabies virus. The Laboratory of Hygiene shall examine the specimen and determine
if the animal was infected with rabies. The State Laboratory of Hygiene shall notify the
City, the veterinarian or local health department which prepared the carcass and, if the
animal is suspected to have bitten a person, that person or the person's physician.
(F) COOPERATION OF VETERINARIAN. Any practicing veterinarian who is requested
to be involved in the rabies control program by an officer is encouraged to cooperate in a
professional capacity with the City, the Laboratory of Hygiene, the local health department,
the officer involved and, if the animal is suspected to have bitten a person, the person's
physician.
(G) RESPONSIBILITY FOR QUARANTINE AND LABORATORY EXPENSES. The
owner of an animal is responsible for any expenses incurred in connection with keeping the
animal in an isolation facility, supervision and examination of the animal by a veterinarian,
preparation of the carcass for laboratory examination and the fee for the laboratory
examination. If the owner is unknown, the County is responsible for these expenses.
SEC 7-1-6 RESTRICTIONS ON KEEPING DOGS, CATS, FOWL, AND OTHER
ANIMALS
(A) Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person within the City of Menasha to own, harbor,
or keep any dog or cat which:
(1) Is at large within the limits of the City;
(2) Habitually barks, cries, or howls to the annoyance of any person or persons (see Sec.
7-1-12);
(3) Is known by such person to be infected with rabies or to have been bitten by an
animal known to have been infected with rabies; or
Updated: 11/22/2017
(4) In the case of a dog, is unlicensed.
(B) Dangerous animals
(1) Chief of Police’s authority. The Police Chief or the Chief’s designee may, in
accordance with the definitions of Section 7-1-1, determine an animal to be a
potentially dangerous animal, dangerous animal, or prohibited dangerous animal.
(2) Keeping a potentially dangerous animal. The Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee
may issue a written order declaring an animal to be a potentially dangerous animal.
The written order shall put the owner on notice that the animal has engaged in
behavior that has resulted in the Chief’s declaration and that any future similar
actions by the animal may result in the animal being declared a dangerous animal or
prohibited dangerous animal. The written order shall also require the animal to pass
the Canine Good Citizen Test within six (6) months of receipt of declaration and
may include suggestions for preventing aggressive behavior by the animal. The
written order shall be delivered in person or sent with certified delivery.
(3) Keeping a dangerous animal prohibited; exception. No personal shall own, posses,
harbor, keep, or maintain a dangerous animal except under the following terms and
conditions:
a. Written Order. The Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee shall issue a
written order declaring the animal to be a dangerous animal.
b. Additional License Requirements. In addition to the license requirement
found at Section 7-1-3 of this Code, a dangerous animal license issued by
the Finance Department shall be obtained before any person owns,
possesses, harbors, or maintains a dangerous animal. Prohibited dangerous
animals shall not be allowed in the City.
c. Fee and Term. The license term shall be from January 1 through December
31. The license fee, which is not pro-ratable, shall be established by the
Common Council.
(4) Conditions for license issuance. A dangerous animal license may only be granted
and issued subject to the owner or responsible party providing proof of the
following;
a. Current vaccination for rabies;
b. Current City License;
c. Neuter or spay records of the dangerous animal;
d. The pet animal’s age, weight, coloring, breed, and any special identifying
characteristics;
e. Two four-inch by six-inch (4x6) color photographs of the dangerous animal;
f. Within thirty (30) days after a dog has been designated dangerous, the owner
or responsible party must provide written proof from a licensed veterinarian
that a microchip has been placed in the dog so the dog may be easily
identified. The microchip must be numbered and the number must be
provided to the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee.
g. The owner or responsible party of a dangerous animal shall present to the
Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee a certificate of insurance that shows
that the owner or responsible party has procured liability insurance in an
amount not less than $1,000,000.00 for any personal injuries inflicted by the
dangerous animal. Whenever such policy is cancelled or not renewed, the
insurer and animal’s owner or responsible party shall notify the Chief of
Police or the Chief’s designee of such cancellation or nonrenewal in writing
by certified mail. Notification in writing shall be within five (5) days of the
cancelation or nonrenewal.
Updated: 11/22/2017
(5) Conditions for license maintenance. A license granted and issued hereunder is
conditioned upon the following;
a. Compliance with subsections (2) and (3) above.
b. The dangerous animal, while off premises will be kept muzzled and
restrained by a fluorescent yellow collar with harness and sturdy, nonretractable
lead of unfrayed material not exceeding four (4) feet in length
and under the direct control and supervision of a competent person at least
fifteen (15) years of age. The muzzle must be a basket-type muzzle and
made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its
vision or respiration, but must be able to prevent it from biting any human
being or domestic animal. The collar must be a bright fluorescent yellow
visible at fifty (50) feet in normal daylight.
c. Dangerous animals are not permitted in dog exercise parks and shall not be
transported in a vehicle that might allow the animal to escape or gain access
to any person or animal outside the vehicle.
d. The license issued to the owner or responsible party shall be worn by the
dangerous animal at all times as proof of registration, except when being
groomed.
e. While indoors, the dangerous animal shall be securely confined. No
dangerous animal may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or
structure on the premises of the owner or responsible party that would allow
the animal to exit the building of its own volition. No dangerous animal may
be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen
windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal from
exiting the structure.
f. Except when leashed and muzzled, all dangerous animals shall be securely
confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel that is
located on the premises of the owner or responsible party and constructed in
a manner that does not allow the animal to exit the pen or kennel of its own
volition. No dangerous animal may be kept in an outdoor yard, including a
yard controlled by an electric pet barrier. The animal may not be leashed to
inanimate objects such as trees, posts, and buildings on either public or
private property.
g. The pen or kennel shall, at a minimum, be constructed to conform to the
requirements of this paragraph. The pen or kennel shall be child-proof from
the outside and animal-proof from the inside. A strong metal double fence
with adequate space between fences (at least two (2) feet) shall be provided
so that a child cannot reach into the animal enclosure. The pen or kennel
shall have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides. The pen or
kennel used to confine a dangerous animal shall be locked with a key or
combination lock. The pen or kennel shall either have a secure bottom or
floor attached to the sides of the pen or kennel or the sides of the pen or
kennel shall be imbedded in the ground no less than two feet. All pens and
kennels erected to house dangerous animals shall comply with all city
zoning and building regulations. All pens and kennels shall be adequately
lighted, ventilated, and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(6) Non-canine dangerous animals. If the dangerous animal is not a dog, said animal
must be confined at all times within the premises of the owner or responsible party
of said animal.
(7) Notice of dangerous animal. The owner or responsible party shall have posted a
Updated: 11/22/2017
conspicuous and clearly legible sign made of metal or plastic and fluorescent in
color at each possible entrance to the premises on which the animal will be held and
on the pen or kennel where the dangerous animal is kept. Such sign must be at least
eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (8.5x11) in rectangular dimensions and
shall contain only the words “Dangerous Animal” in bold faced lettering not less
than 120 point type (one and one-half inches in height).
(8) Seizing a dangerous animal. An animal declared dangerous that is in violation of
this section and is not subject to a current appeal, may be seized by the City pursuant
to Wis. Stats. §173.13(1)
(9) Declaring a dangerous animal as a prohibited dangerous animal. Any animal
declared dangerous by this Chapter that subsequently has a second or more reported
unprovoked incidents in which the animal has bitten, inflicted injury, attacked, or
otherwise unreasonably endangered with aggressive or threatening behavior the
safety of a human being or domestic animal on either public or private property shall
be declared a prohibited dangerous animal by the Chief of Police.
(10) Order to kill a dog. Any dog that has caused serious injury to a person, persons, or a
domestic animal on two separate occasions off the owner’s or responsible party’s
premises, without provocation, may be destroyed as a result of judgement rendered
by a court of competent jurisdiction, as specified under Wis. Stats. §174.02(3).
(11) Euthanization of dangerous animals. If the owner or responsible party of an animal
that has been designated a dangerous animal is unwilling or unable to comply with
the regulations for keeping the dangerous animal in accordance with this section,
they may have the dangerous animal humanely euthanized by a licensed
veterinarian, an animal shelter, or the humane society.
(12) Notification.
a. The owner or responsible party of an animal declared dangerous shall notify
the Police Department immediately if the animal is at large.
b. The owner or responsible party of an animal declared dangerous shall notify
the Police Department within 24 hours if the dangerous animal is
unconfined or has bitten or inflicts injury to a human being or domestic
animal.
c. No owner or responsible party may sell or transfer possession of a dangerous
animal to another individual within the City of Menasha without first
notifying the individual to whom the dangerous animal is being sold or
transferred of the fact that said animal has been determined to be a
dangerous animal and that all of the requirements imposed upon the former
owner or responsible party of said animal by this Chapter will be imposed
upon the new owner or responsible party.
d. No owner or responsible party may sell or transfer possession of a dangerous
animal to another individual without first notifying the Chief of Police or the
Chief’s designee thereof in writing to be received at least five (5) business
days in advance of the sale or transfer of possession.
e. If a dangerous animal is euthanized, the owner or responsible party thereof
shall provide the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee a certificate or other
written proof of euthanasia from a licensed veterinarian within five (5)
business days of the date of death of the animal.
f. If a dangerous animal is killed, destroyed, or dies from any other cause or
means, the owner or responsible party shall provide the Police Chief of the
Chief’s designee written notice within five (5) business days of the date of
death of the animal to.
Updated: 11/22/2017
(13) Prohibited dangerous animal.
a. The Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee may determine an animal to be a
prohibited dangerous animal whenever the Chief of Police or the Chief’s
designee finds that an animal meets the definition as provided for under
Section 7-1-1.
b. The Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee shall issue a written order by
certified delivery, which declares the animal to be a prohibited dangerous
animal and requires the owner or responsible party to remove the animal
from the City within five (5) business days or have the animal humanely
euthanized.
c. No owner or responsible party may sell or transfer possession of a prohibited
dangerous animal to another individual within the City of Menasha.
d. An animal declared to be a prohibited dangerous animal that is not removed
from the City within five (5) business days of it being declared a prohibited
dangerous animal and is not subject to a current appeal, may be seized by the
City pursuant to Wis. Stats. §173.13(1).
e. The owner or responsible party shall provide the Chief of Police or the
Chief’s designee within five (5) business days of the animal being declared a
prohibited dangerous animal the name, address, and phone number of the
individual that will be in possession of the prohibited animal or a
certification from a license veterinarian that the prohibited dangerous animal
was humanely euthanized.
(14) Appeal process for dangerous and prohibited dangerous animals.
a. The owner or responsible party aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of
Police or the Chief’s designee to declare an animal dangerous or prohibited
dangerous under Subsections (9) or (13) may appeal such decision by filing
a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within five (5) business days
of the certified delivery of the written order from the Chief of Police or the
Chief’s designee. Appeals shall be heard by the Board of Health, which shall
make a final decision to uphold, deny, or modify the Chief’s determination.
A determination of an animal that is potentially dangerous is not appealable.
b. The animal shall be securely confined in a humane manner either on the
premises of the owner or responsible party or with a licensed veterinarian,
but not destroyed, until the time of the appeal is expired or until any timely
appeal has been heard and a written decision rendered. All costs incurred
shall be the responsibility of the owner or responsible party of the animal.
c. If the owner or responsible party further contests the final decision of the
Board of Health, they may, within five (5) business days of the certified
delivery of the written decision, seek review of the decision by the Circuit
Court.
(15) Removal of animal from dangerous animal status. Upon the written petition of the
owner or responsible party of an animal that has been previously determined to be
dangerous, the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee may remove the animal from
the list of dangerous animals if:
a. The owner or responsible party demonstrates that changes in circumstances
or measures taken by the owner or responsible party have mitigated the risk
to public safety.
b. The owner or responsible party demonstrates there have been no additional
reported instances anywhere of the behavior that constitutes a potentially
dangerous animal or dangerous animal as defined in Section 7-1-1, within a
Updated: 11/22/2017
36 month period from the date of the order determining the animal to be
dangerous; and
c. The owner or responsible party provides documentation from an accredited
dog training specialist of the dog attending and passing an animal
socialization program offered through the American Kennel Club Canine
Good Citizen Program.
d. The Chief of Police or the Chief of Police’s designee concludes from all the
evidence presented that the animal no longer presents a risk to public safety.
(C) Animals Running at Large
(1) No person having in his possession or ownership any animal shall allow the same to
run at large within the City. The owner or responsible party of any animal, whether
licensed or unlicensed, shall keep the animal tied or enclosed in a proper enclosure
so as to not allow said animal to interfere with the passing public or neighbors. Any
animal running at large, unlicensed and required by State Law or City Ordinance to
be licensed shall be seized and impounded by a humane or law enforcement officer.
(2) A dog or cat shall not be considered to be running at large if it is on a leash and
under control of a person physically able to control it.
(D) Owner’s Liability for Damage Caused by Dogs; Penalties. Wis. Stats. §174.02 and §174.12
are adopted by reference.
(E) Limitations on number of dogs and cats. The total combination number of dogs and cats per
dwelling unit shall be limited to four (4). A dwelling unit that has obtained a previous
exemption under this paragraph allowing more than four (4) but no more than twelve (12)
dogs and cats shall retain its exemption for only the listed dogs and cats named on the
original petition for the life of the animal or until applicant’s ownership ceases, whichever
occurs first
SEC. 7-1-7 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS.
(A) ANIMAL CONTROL AGENCY. The City of Menasha does hereby delegate any such
animal control agency the authority to act pursuant to the provisions of this Section.
(B) IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS. In addition to any penalty hereinafter provided for a
violation of this Chapter, any Police or Humane Officer may impound any dog, cat or other
animal which habitually pursues any vehicle upon any street, alley or highway of this City,
assaults or attacks any person, is at large within the City, habitually barks, cries or howls,
kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal or is infected with rabies. In order for an
animal to be impounded, the impounding officer must see or hear the violation of this
Section or have in his possession a signed statement of a complaining witness made under
oath alleging the facts regarding the violation and containing an agreement to reimburse the
City for any damages it sustains for improper or illegal seizure.
(C) CLAIMING ANIMAL; DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED ANIMALS. After seizure of
animals under this Section by a law enforcement or humane officer, the animal shall be
impounded. The officer shall notify the owner, personally or through the U.S. Mail, if such
owner be known to the officer or can be ascertained with reasonable effort, but if such
owner be unknown or not ascertainable, the officer shall post written notice in three (3)
public places in the City, giving a description of the animal, stating where it is impounded
and the conditions for its release, after the officer has taken such animal into his possession.
If within seven (7) days after such notice the owner does not claim such animal, the officer
may dispose of the animal in a proper and humane manner; provided, if an animal before
being impounded has bitten a person, the animal shall be retained in the Animal Shelter for
ten (10) days for observation purposes. Within such times, the owner may reclaim the
animal upon payment of impoundment fees, such fees to be established by resolution of the
Updated: 11/22/2017
Common Council. No animal shall be released from the pound without being properly
licensed if so required by state law or City Ordinance.
(D) DISPOSAL OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS. If the owner doesn't reclaim the animal
within the time established by s. 173.23, the animal shelter may dispose of the animal
pursuant to s. 173.23 Wis. Stats.
CITY NOT LIABLE FOR IMPOUNDING ANIMALS. The City and/or its animal
control agency shall not be liable for the death of any animal which has been impounded or
disposed of pursuant to this Section.
SEC. 7-1-8 DOGS AND CATS RESTRICTED ON CEMETERIES.
No pet shall be permitted in any public cemetery. Every dog specially trained to assist
blind, deaf or mobility handicapped persons shall be exempt from this Section.
SEC. 7-1-9 DUTY OF OWNER IN CASE OF DOG, CAT OR FERRET BITE.
Every owner or person harboring or keeping a dog, cat or ferret who knows that such animal
has bitten any person shall immediately report such fact to the City Health Officer and shall
keep such animal confined for not less than ten (10) days or for such period of time as the
Health Officer shall direct. The owner or keeper of any such dog, cat or ferret shall
surrender the animal to a law enforcement or humane officer upon demand for examination.
SEC. 7-1-10 ANIMAL FECES.
The owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other animal shall not permit solid fecal
matter of such animal to deposit on any street, alley or other public or private property,
unless such matter is immediately removed there from by said owner or person in charge.
The person in charge of any dog, cat or other animal shall have in his or her possession a
means to comply with this section.
SEC. 7-1-11 INJURY TO PROPERTY BY ANIMALS.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing an animal, dog or cat to permit
such animal, dog or cat to go upon any parkway or private lands or premises without the
permission of the owner of such premises and break, bruise, tear up, crush or injure any
lawn, flower bed, plant, shrub, tree or garden in any manner whatsoever, or to defecate
thereon.
SEC. 7-1-12 BARKING DOGS AND HOWLING CATS.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to keep or harbor any dog which habitually
barks, howls, or yelps or cat which whines or howls to the great discomfort of the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in the
neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs or cats are hereby declared to be
a public nuisance. A dog or cat is considered to be in violation of this Section when two
(2) formal, written complaints are filed with the Police Department within a four (4) week
period.
SEC. 7-1-13 PROHIBITED AND PROTECTED ANIMALS, FOWL, REPTILES
AND INSECTS.
(A) PROTECTED ANIMALS. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
possess with intent to sell or offer for sale, or buy or attempt to buy, within the City any of
the following animals, alive or dead, or any part or product thereof: all wild cats of the
family felidae, polar bear (thalarctos maritimus), red wolf (canis niger), vicuna (vicugna
vicugna), or alligator, caiman or crocodile of the order of crocodilia, gray or timber wolf
Updated: 11/22/2017
(canis lupus), sea otter (enhydra lutris), Pacific ridley turtle (lepidochelys olivacea), Atlantic
green turtle (chelonia mydas), Mexican ridley turtle (lepidochelys kempi).
(B) EXCEPTIONS. The provisions of Subsection (a) above shall not be deemed to prevent
the lawful importation, possession, purchase or sale of any species by any public agency,
institute of higher learning, persons holding federal permits, or by a person holding a
Scientific Collectors Permit issued by the Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources
of the state, or to any person or organization licensed to present a circus.
(C) WILD ANIMALS; PROHIBITION ON KEEPING. It shall be unlawful for any person
to keep, maintain or have in his possession or under his control within the City any
poisonous reptile or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal, insect or reptile, any
vicious or dangerous domesticated animal or any other animal or reptile of the wild, vicious
or dangerous propensities. Specifically, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep,
maintain or have in his possession or under his control within the City any of the following
animals, reptiles or insects:
(1) All poisonous animals and reptiles including rear-fang snakes.
(2) Apes: Chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (Hylobates); gorillas (Gorilla); orangutans
(Pongo); and ans siamangs (Symphalangus).
(3) Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus).
(4) Bears (Ursidae).
(5) Bison (Bison).
(6) Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus).
(7) Crocodilians (Crocodilia), thirty (30) inches in length or more.
(8) Constrictor snakes, six (6) feet in length or more.
(9) Coyotes (Canis latrans).
(10) Deer (Cervidae); includes all members of the deer family; for example, whitetailed
deer, elk, antelope and moose.
(11) Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonta).
(12) Game cocks and other fighting birds.
(13) Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae).
(14) Hyenas (Hyaenidae).
(15) Jaguars (Pantera onca).
(16) Leopards (Panthera pardus).
(17) Lions (Pantera leo).
(18) Lynxes (Lynx).
(19) Monkeys, old world (Cercopithecidae).
(20) Ostriches (Struthio).
(21) Puma (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions and panthers.
(22) Rhinoceroses (Rhinocero tidae).
(23) Snow leopards (Panthera uncia).
(24) Tigers (Panthera tigris).
(25) Wolves (Canis lupus) and wolf hybrids
(26) Poisonous insects.
(27) Bees, wasps and hornets.
(28) Except in properly zoned districts, horses, mules, ponies, donkeys, cows, pigs,
goats, sheep, chickens or any animal raised for fur-bearing purposes unless
otherwise permitted elsewhere in this Code.
(29) EXCEPTIONS; PET SHOPS. The prohibitions of subsection (c) above shall not apply
where the creatures are in the care, custody or control of: a veterinarian for treatment;
agricultural fairs; shows or projects of the 4-H Clubs; a display for judging purposes; an
itinerant or transient carnival, circus or other show; dog or cat shows or trials; public or
Updated: 11/22/2017
private educational institutions; licensed pet shops; zoological gardens; if:
(1) Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the City.
(2) All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so
maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors.
(3) Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape.
(4) No person lives or resides within one hundred (100) feet of the quarters in which the
animals are kept.
SEC. 7-1-14 TRAPPING OF ANIMALS.
(A) In the interest of public health and safety, it shall be unlawful for any person, in or on City
parks or other municipally owned property, to set, place or tend any trap for the purpose of
trapping, killing, catching, wounding, worrying or molesting any animal, except by use of
live box-type traps only. Live box-type traps shall be defined as those traps which capture
and hold an animal in an alive and unharmed condition.
(B) This Section shall prohibit the use of all traps other than live traps as described above,
including, but not limited to, traps commonly known as leg traps, pan-type traps or other
traps designed to kill, wound or close upon a portion of the body of an animal.
(C) All such traps set, placed or tended shall comply with Chapter 29 of the Wisconsin Statutes
as they relate to trapping.
(D) This Section shall not apply to trapping within the confines of buildings or homes.
(E) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit or hinder the City of Menasha or its employees or
agents from performing their official duties.
SEC. 7-1-15 KEEPING OF BEES.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any hive, stand or box where
bees are kept or keep any bees in or upon any premises within the corporate limits of the
City unless the bees are kept in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) No hive, stand or box where bees are kept shall be located closer than twenty (20)
feet to any property boundary.
(2) If bee colonies are kept within fifty (50) feet of any exterior boundary of the
property on which the hive, stand or box is located, a barrier that will prevent bees
from flying through it, no less than five (5) feet high, shall be installed and
maintained along said exterior boundary. Said barrier may be either a natural
planting or artificial.
(3) Fresh, clean watering facilities for bees shall be provided on the said premises.
(4) The bees and equipment shall be kept in accordance with the provisions of the state
statutes.
(B) Nothing in this Section shall be deemed or construed to prohibit the keeping of bees in a
hive, stand or box located within a school or university building for the purpose of study or
observation.
120294
7:1
CHAPTER 2
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
ARTICLE A
Fermented Malt Beverages and Intoxicating Liquor
SEC. 7-2-1 STATE STATUTES ADOPTED.
The provisions of Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes, relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor
and fermented malt beverages, except provisions therein relating to penalties to be imposed, are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act
required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or
prohibited by this Chapter. Any future amendment, revisions or modifications of the statutes
incorporated herein are intended to be made a part of this Chapter in order to secure uniform
statewide regulation of alcohol beverage control.
State Law Reference: Chapter 125, Wis Stats.
SEC. 7-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Chapter the terms "Alcoholic Beverages," "Intoxicating Liquors," "Sell," "Sold,"
"Sale," "Restaurant," "Club," "Retailer," "Person," "Fermented Malt Beverages," "Wholesalers,"
"Retailers," "Operators," and "Non-Intoxicating Beverages" shall have the meaning given them by
Chapter 125, Wisconsin Statutes.
SEC. 7-2-3 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person, firm or corporation shall vend, sell, deal or traffic in or have in his possession with
intent to vend, sell, deal or traffic in or, for the purpose of evading any law or ordinance, give away
any intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in any quantity whatever, or cause the same to
be done, without having procured a license as provided in this Chapter nor without complying with
all the provisions of this Chapter, and all statutes and regulations applicable thereto, except as
provided by Sections 125.16, 125.27, 125.28 and 125.51 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
SEC. 7-2-4 CLASSES OF LICENSES.
(a) RETAIL CLASS "A" INTOXICATION LIQUOR LICENSE. A retail Class "A"
intoxicating liquor license, when issued by the City Clerk under the authority of the
Common Council, shall permit its holder to sell, deal and traffic in intoxicating liquors only
in original packages or containers and to be consumed off the premises so licensed.
(b) RETAIL CLASS "B" INTOXICATING LIQUOR LICENSE. A retail Class "B"
intoxicating liquor license, when issued by the City Clerk under authority of the Common
120294
7:2
Council, shall permit its holder to sell, deal and traffic in intoxicating liquors to be
consumed by the glass only on the premises so licensed and in the original package or
container in multiples not to exceed four (4) liters at any one (1) time, to be consumed off
the premises, except that wine may be sold in the original package or otherwise in any other
quantity to be consumed off the premises.
(c) CLASS "A" FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGE RETAILER'S LICENSE. A Class
"A" retailer's fermented malt beverage license, when issued by the City Clerk under the
authority of the Common Council, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for
sale fermented malt beverages only for consumption away from the premises where sold
and in the original packages, containers or bottles.
(d) CLASS "B" FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGE RETAILER'S LICENSE. A Class
"B" fermented malt beverage retailer's license, when issued by the City Clerk under the
authority of the Common Council, shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for
sale, fermented malt beverages, either to be consumed upon the premises where sold or
away from such premises. The holder may also sell beverages containing less than one-half
(1/2) of a percentum of alcohol by volume, without obtaining a special license to sell such
beverages.
(e) SPECIAL CLASS "B" FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGE PICNIC LICENSE.
(1) License. A special Class "B" picnic license, when issued by the City Clerk under
authority of the Common Council, as provided for in Sec. 125.26(6) and Sec.
125.51(10), Wis. Stats., shall entitle the holder thereof to possess, sell or offer for
sale fermented malt beverages or wine at a particular picnic, post meeting, fair, or
similar gathering. Such license may be issued only to bona fide clubs, state, county,
or local fairs, associations or agricultural societies, lodges or societies that have been
in existence for not less than six (6) months prior to the date of application for such
license or to posts of ex-servicemen's organizations now or hereafter established.
Such license is valid for dates as approved by the City Clerk. Irrespective of other
Sections of this Chapter, the City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue a fermented
malt beverage license to any local civic, religious, or not-for-profit organization
pursuant to this Section.
(2) Application. Application for such license shall be signed by the president or
corresponding officer of the society making such application and shall be filed with
the City Clerk together with the appropriate license fee for each day for which the
license is sought. The license shall specify the hours and dates of license validity.
The application shall be filed a minimum of five (5) days prior to the meeting of the
Common Council at which the application will be considered. Such license shall be
valid for no more than three (3) consecutive days. If the application is for a license
to be used in a City Park pursuant to Section 11-5-1 of this Code, the applicant shall
specify the main point of sale. The application shall include a Certificate of
Insurance naming the City of Menasha as an additional insured with limits of at least
$1,000,000.
(3) The City Clerk shall consult with the City Attorney, the Chief of Police, the Health
Department, and the Mayor prior to the issuance of such license.
(4) Any applicant and/or organization receiving such license who is convicted of any
offense of the City of Menasha involving alcoholic or fermented malt beverages
during the event for which the license is issued shall not be eligible for a subsequent
license unless twenty-four months passes from the date of the incident resulting in
the citation.
(f) WHOLESALER'S LICENSE. A wholesaler's fermented malt beverage license, when
120294
7:3
issued by the City Clerk under authority of the Common Council, shall entitle the holder
thereof to possess, sell or offer for sale fermented malt beverages only in original packages
or containers to dealers, not to be consumed in or about the premises of said wholesaler.
Cross Reference: Section 7-2-17
SEC. 7-2-5 LICENSE FEES.
There shall be the following classes and denominations of licenses which, when issued by the City
Clerk under the authority of the Common Council after payment of the fee hereinafter specified
shall permit the holder to sell, deal or traffic in intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages as
provided in Chapter 125 Wis. Stats.:
(a) “Class A” Intoxicating Liquor License—as per fee schedule approved by City of Menasha
Common Council.
(b) Class “A” Fermented Malt Beverages License—as per fee schedule approved by City of
Menasha Common Council.
(c) “Class B” Intoxicating Liquor License—as per fee schedule approved by City of Menasha
Common Council.
(d) Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage License— as per fee schedule approved by City of
Menasha Common Council.
(e) Special Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage Picnic License—as per fee schedule approved
by City of Menasha Common Council.
(f) Wholesaler’s License—as per fee schedule approved by City of Menasha Common
Council.
(g) Reserve “Class B” Intoxicating Liquor License fees—$10,000 for the initial application and
the renewal price as specified by 7-2-5 (b)
(h) “Class C” Wine License—as per fee schedule approved by City of Menasha Common
Council.
(i) The provisions of s.125.185 Wis. Stats. are hereby adopted by reference. The City Clerk is
designated as the municipal authority to authorize provisional licenses. Before issuing such
provisional license, the Clerk shall ascertain that the inspections required by sec.7-2-8 have
been stated and that the designated municipal official under sec. 7-2-8 has no objection to
the provisional license. All fees for the permanent license shall have been paid prior to
issuance of the provisional license. The fee for the provisional license shall be set by the
Clerk and approved by the Common Council as part of the budget process. The initial fee
shall be $15. No provisional licenses may be granted where the application is for a picnic
license or a temporary license. If the provisional license is requested for a premise that
already holds a license, the existing license must be surrendered to the Clerk before a
provisional license is issued.
SEC. 7-2-6 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
(a) CONTENTS. Application for a license to sell or deal in intoxicating liquor or fermented
malt beverages shall be made in writing on the form prescribed by the Wisconsin
Department of Revenue and shall be sworn to by the applicant as provided by Sections
887.01 to 887.04, Wis. Stats., and shall be filed with the City Clerk not less than fifteen (15)
days prior to the granting of such license. The premises shall be physically described to
120294
7:4
include every room and storage space to be covered by the license, including all rooms not
separated by a solid wall or joined by connecting entrances.
(b) CORPORATIONS. Such application shall be filed and sworn to by the applicant if an
individual, by the president and secretary, of a corporation.
(c) PUBLICATION. The application shall be published once in the official City newspaper,
and the costs of publication shall be paid by the applicant.
(d) AMENDING APPLICATION. Whenever anything occurs to change any fact set out in
the application of any licensee, such licensee shall file with the issuing authority a notice in
writing of such change within ten (10) days after the occurrence thereof.
SEC. 7-2-7 QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS AND PREMISES.
(a) RESIDENCE REQUIREMENTS. No licensee shall be granted a license unless he or she
is a real estate owner or a registered voter of the City of Menasha. Where the business
premises is owned by a partnership, fifty percent (50%) of the partnership must either be a
registered voter or a property owner; and where the business is owned by a corporation, the
president, vice president, or secretary must either be a registered voter or a property owner.
Where the selling of groceries is the principal form of business in which at least
seventy-five percent (75%) of the sales are from groceries, said establishment can apply for
a Class "A" Fermented Malt Beverage License. "Grocery store" is defined as a retail
establishment where the principal source of income is the selling of food staples, produce
and meats. For purposes of Sec. 7-2-7 (a) a person shall be determined to be a real estate
“owner” if the applicant has a written lease with the real estate owner to operate the
establishment for a term that exceeds one year. Such applicant shall file with the Clerk at
the time the request for a license or renewal is made a copy of such lease.
(b) APPLICANT TO HAVE MALT BEVERAGE LICENSE. No retail Class "B"
intoxicating liquor license shall be issued to any person who does not have or to whom is
not issued a Class "B" retailer's license to sell fermented malt beverages.
(c) RIGHT TO PREMISES. No applicant will be considered unless he has the right to
possession of the premises described in the application for the license period, by lease or by
deed.
(d) SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH PLACE OF SALE. A separate
license shall be required for each stand, place, room or enclosure or for each suite of rooms
or enclosures which are in a direct connection or communication where intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale; and no license shall be issued
to any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association for the purpose of possession,
selling or offering for sale any intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages in any
dwelling house, flat or residential apartment.
SEC. 7-2-8 INVESTIGATION.
The police investigation will include a criminal history check through the Wisconsin criminal
history records transformation or other available database to determine the applicant’s prior
criminal history.
SEC. 7-2-9 APPROVAL OF APPLICATION.
120294
7:5
(a) In determining the suitability of an applicant, consideration shall be given to the moral
character and financial responsibility of the applicant, the appropriateness of the location
and premises proposed and generally the applicant's fitness for the trust to be reposed.
(b) No license shall be granted for operation on any premises or with any equipment for which
taxes or assessments or other financial claims of the City are delinquent and unpaid.
(c) No license shall be issued unless the premises conform to the sanitary, safety and health
requirements of the State Building Code, and the regulations of the State Board of Health
and local Board of Health applicable to restaurants. The premises must be properly lighted
and ventilated, must be equipped with separate sanitary toilet and lavatory facilities
equipped with running water for each sex and must conform to all Ordinances of the City.
SEC. 7-2-10 GRANTING OF LICENSE.
Opportunity shall be given by the governing body to any person to be heard for or against the
granting of any license. Upon the approval of the applicant by the Common Council, the City Clerk
shall issue to the applicant a license, upon payment by the applicant of the license fee to the City.
The full license fee shall be charged for the whole or fraction of any year.
SEC. 7-2-11 TRANSFER AND LAPSE OF LICENSE.
(a) In accordance with the provisions of Section 125.04(12), Wis. Stats., a license shall be
transferable from one premises to another if such transfer is first approved by the Common
Council. An application for transfer shall be made on a form furnished by the City Clerk.
Proceedings for such transfer shall be had in the same form and manner as the original
application. The fee for such transfer is Ten Dollars ($10.00). Whenever a license is
transferred, the City Clerk shall forthwith notify the Wisconsin Department of Revenue of
such transfer. In the event of the sale of a business or business premises of the licensee, the
purchaser of such business or business premises must apply to the City for reissuance of
said license and the City, as the licensing authority, shall in no way be bound to reissue said
license to said subsequent purchaser.
(b) Whenever the agent of a corporate holder of a license is for any reason replaced, the
licensee shall give the City Clerk written notice of said replacement, the reasons therefor
and the new appointment. Until the next regular meeting or special meeting of the
Common Council, the successor agent shall have the authority to perform the functions and
be charged with the duties of the original agent. However, said license shall cease to be in
effect upon receipt by the City Clerk of notice of disapproval of the successor agent by the
Wisconsin Department of Revenue or other peace officer of the municipality in which the
license was issued. The corporation's license shall not be in force after receipt of such
notice or after a regular or special meeting of the Common Council until the successor agent
or another qualified agent is appointed and approved by the City and the Wisconsin
Department of Revenue.
SEC. 7-2-12 NUMBERING OF LICENSE.
All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the
specific premises for which granted, the date of issuance, the fee paid and the name of the licensee.
120294
7:6
The City Clerk shall affix to the license his affidavit as provided by Sec. 125.04(4) of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
SEC. 7-2-13 POSTING LICENSES; DEFACEMENT.
(a) Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall immediately
post such license and keep the same posted while in force in a conspicuous place in the
room or place where said beverages are drawn or removed for service or sale.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to post such license or to be permitted to post it upon
premises other than those mentioned in the application or knowingly to deface or destroy
such license.
SEC. 7-2-14 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
All retail Class "A" and "B" licenses granted hereunder shall be granted subject to the following
conditions, and all other conditions of this Section, and subject to all other Ordinances and
regulations of the City applicable thereto.
(a) CONSENT TO ENTRY. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents to the entry
of police or other duly authorized representatives of the City at all reasonable hours for the
purpose of inspection and search, and consents to the removal from said premises of all
things and articles there had in violation of City Ordinances or state laws. and consents to
the introduction of such things and articles in evidence in any prosecution that may be
brought for such offenses.
(b) EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS. No retail Class "B" licenses shall employ any underage
person, as defined in the Wisconsin Statutes, but this shall not apply to hotels and
restaurants. Family members may work on the licensed premises but are not permitted to
sell or dispense alcoholic beverages.
(c) DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED. Each licensed premises shall, at all times,
be conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or indecent conduct shall be
allowed at any time on any licensed premises.
(d) LICENSED OPERATOR ON PREMISES. There shall be upon premises operated
under a Class "B" license, at all times, the licensee, members of the licensee's immediate
family who have attained the legal drinking age, and/or some person who shall have an
operator's license and who shall be responsible for the acts of all persons serving as waiters,
or in any other manner, any fermented malt beverages to customers. No person other than
the licensee shall serve fermented malt beverages in any place operated under a Class "B"
license unless he possesses an operator's license, or there is a person with an operator's
license upon said premises at the time of such service.
(e) HEALTH AND SANITATION REGULATIONS. The rules and regulations of the State
Board of Health governing sanitation in restaurants shall apply to all Class "B" liquor
licenses issued under this Chapter. No Class "B" license shall be issued unless the premises
to be licensed conform to such rules and regulations.
(f) RESTRICTIONS NEAR SCHOOLS AND CHURCHES. No retail Class "A" or Class
"B" license shall be issued for premises if the main entrance of which is less than three
hundred (300) feet from the main entrance of any established public school, parochial
school, hospital or church. Such distance shall be measured by the shortest route along the
highway from the closest point of the maintenance entrance of such school, church or
120294
7:7
hospital to the main entrance to such premises. This subsection shall not apply to premises
licensed as such on June 30, 1947, nor shall it apply to any premises licensed as such prior
to the occupation of real property within three hundred (300) feet thereof by any school
building, hospital building or church building.
(g) CLUBS. No club shall sell or give away any intoxicating liquors except to bona fide
members and guests invited by members.
(h) CREDIT PROHIBITED. No retail Class "A" or Class "B" liquor or fermented malt
beverage licensee shall sell or offer for sale any alcohol beverage to any person or persons
by extending credit, except hotel credit extended to a resident host or a club to a bona fide
member. It shall be unlawful for such licensee or permittee to sell alcohol beverages to any
person on a passbook or store order or to receive from any person any goods, ware,
merchandise or other articles in exchange for alcohol beverages.
(i) LICENSEE OR PERMITTEE RESPONSIBLE FOR ACTS OF HELP. A violation of
this Chapter by a duly authorized agent or employee of a licensee or permittee under this
Chapter shall constitute a violation by the licensee or permittee. Whenever any licensee or
permittee under this Chapter shall violate any portion of this Chapter, proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of the license or permit of the holder thereof may be instituted in
the manner prescribed in this Chapter.
(j) TYPES OF CONDUCT PROHIBITED. The following types of conduct on premises
which are licensed to sell intoxicating liquors and/or fermented malt beverages are
prohibited:
(1) Specified sexual activities.
a. Display of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
b. Acts or representation of acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation or flagellation.
c. Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or the
female breast.
d. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities set forth in
Subsections a. through c. above.
(2) Sexual contact. Sexual contact means any touching of the sexual or other intimate
parts of a person done for the purpose of gratifying the sexual desires of either party.
(3) Simulation. The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or
genitals.
(4) Certain Performances and Costumes Prohibited. No licensee, either personally or
through his agent or employee, shall furnish entertainment or permit the
performance of any act, stunt or dance by dancers, performers or entertainers,
whether such dancers, performers or entertainers are employed by the licensee that
does not meet the following wearing apparel standards when performing or when
present upon the premises:
a. That portion of every costume to be worn by dancers, performers or
entertainers covered by the provisions of this Subsection and which relates
to the area of the sex organs herein defined as the pubic area and buttocks
shall be on nontransparent material.
b. The lower portion of the costume worn by a female dancer, performer or
entertainer, or a female impersonator, shall encircle the body at the area of
the sex organs and buttocks. This portion of the costume shall be of such
dimensions and so conformed, fabricated and affixed to the body so as to
completely cover the sex organs, the pubic area and the cleavage of the
buttocks at all times. An animal fur piece or other device simulating the hair
120294
7:8
surrounding the pubic area shall not constitute compliance with the costume
requirements of the Ordinance.
c. The lower portion of the costume worn by a male dancer, performer or
entertainer shall encircle the area of the sex organs and the buttocks. This
portion of the costume shall be of such dimensions and so conformed,
fabricated and affixed to the body so as to completely cover the pubic area,
sex organs and the cleavage of the buttocks at all times. The display of the
male genitals in the turgid state, whether covered or uncovered, shall
constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
(5) Disorderly Conduct by Patrons Prohibited. No licensee of a business where dancing
occurs, be it personally or through his agent or employee, or persons sponsoring
such dances shall permit any patron to participate in any act, stunt or dance in
violation of the provisions of this Section.
(6) Further Physical Conduct Prohibited. Entertainers may not have physical contact
with customers during their act, nor shall they entice customers into joining into the
same.
(k) ADDRESS AND TELEPHONE NUMBER. All licensees of a Class "B" retail liquor and
fermented malt beverage license and their agents shall file with the City Clerk their current
home address and telephone numbers which shall be transmitted by the City Clerk to the
Police Department. The City Clerk shall be advised of any change of same within fifteen
(15) days. If the licensee or agent has an unlisted telephone number, such number shall be
treated as confidential information and shall be used for no other purposes other than law
enforcement.
Annotation: See Colonnade Catering Corp. v. United States, 397 U.S. 72, 90 S. Ct. 774
(1970); and State v. Erickson, 101 Wis. 2d 224 (1981), for guidelines for
warrantless searches of licensed premises.
SEC. 7-2-15 CLOSING HOURS.
Closing hours shall be established in conformance with Section 125.32(3), Wis. Stats., and further
restricted as follows:
(a) “CLASS B" LICENSES.
(1) No premises for which a retail “Class B” liquor and fermented malt beverage license
has been issued shall be permitted to remain open for the sale of liquor or fermented
malt beverages or for any other purpose between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m., Monday through Friday, and 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday
except that, on the Sunday that daylight saving time begins as specified in Section
175.095(2), Wis. Stats., the closing hours shall be between 3:30 a.m. and 6 a.m.
There shall be no closing hours on January 1.
(2) Hotels and restaurants, whose principal business is the furnishing of food or lodging
to patrons shall be permitted to remain open for the conduct of their regular business
but shall not sell liquor or malt beverages during the closing hours of Subsection
(a)(1) above.
(3) The licensee or permittee and one (1) employee shall be permitted to check out
receipts, check the licensed premises for security and do minor cleaning during
closed hours. Under no circumstances shall the consumption of alcohol beverages
be permitted during closed hours. Commercial janitorial service personnel shall be
120294
7:9
allowed to enter the licensed premises for the purpose of cleaning during closed
hours. The premises shall be well lighted during cleanup.
(b) CLASS "A" LICENSES. Premises that have been granted a “Class A” license may
remain open for the conduct of their regular business daily but may not sell fermented
malt beverages between 12 midnight and 8 a.m. Intoxicating liquor may not be sold
between 9 p.m. and 8 a.m. If such “Class A” premise wishes to sell fermented malt
beverages between 9 p.m. and 12 midnight, all intoxicating liquor must either be locked
up or removed from that portion of the business open to customers.
(c) “CLASS A” LICENSES. No premises for which a “Class A” license or permit has been
issued may remain open for the sale of intoxicating liquor or fermented malt between the
hours of 9 p.m. and 8 a.m. Such premises may remain open for the conduct of their regular
business unrelated to the sale of intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages.
(d) TEMPORARY CLASS “B” AND TEMPORARY “CLASS B” LICENSES.
Temporary Class “B” and Temporary “Class B” licenses may only sell fermented malt
beverages or wine during the hours specified in the temporary license.
(e) MODIFICATION OF CLOSING HOURS. Closing hours may be modified for specific
events by a majority vote of the Common Council.
SEC. 7-2-16 RESTRICTIONS ON SPECIAL CLASS "B" FERMENTED MALT
BEVERAGE SPECIAL EVENT LICENSE.
Groups that have been granted a special Class "B" fermented malt beverage license shall comply
with the following conditions of license:
(a) Licensed Operators. There shall be at least one person properly licensed as an operator on
the premises at all times to supervise the service of beverages.
(b) Compliance With Laws. Holders of special Class "B" fermented malt beverage licenses
shall fully comply with all provisions of this Code and the state statutes.
(c) Suitable Facilities. For indoor events, the structure used must have suitable exits and open
spaces to accommodate anticipated attendance. It should contain adequate sanitary facilities
to accommodate the size of the group.
(d) Posting of License. The special Class "B" fermented malt beverage license shall be posted
in a conspicuous place and shall specify the date(s) and hours for which said license is
issued.
(e) Insurance. The applicant for a special Class "B" fermented malt beverage shall be required
to indemnify, defend, and hold the City and its employees and agents harmless against all
claims, death or any person or any damage to property caused by or resulting from the
activities for which the permit is granted. Organizations holding a Class "B" license from
the City that use municipal property must first file with the City Clerk evidence of
insurability covering property damage in the amount of Fifty Thousand Dollars
($50,000.00), personal liability in the amount of One Hundred Thousand Dollars
($100,000.00) per person injured, and Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00) in
the aggregate. The applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond prior to being
granted the permit.
Cross Reference: Section 11-5-1.
SEC. 7-2-17 OUTDOOR FOOD AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PERMITS REQUIRED
120294
7:10
AT CLASS "B" PREMISES.
(a) REQUIRED FOR OUTDOOR CONSUMPTION. No licensee shall permit the
consumption of alcohol beverages on any part of the licensed premises not enclosed within
the building, except under permit granted by the Common Council. The permits are a
privilege in which no rights vest and, therefore, may be revoked by the Common Council at
its pleasure at any time. The request shall accompany the original or renewal license
application. No person shall consume or have in his or her possession alcoholic beverages
on any unenclosed part of a licensed premise which is not described in a valid Outdoor
Food and Alcoholic Beverage permit.
(b) LIMITATIONS ON ISSUANCE OF OUTDOOR FOOD AND ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGE PERMITS. No permit shall be issued for Outdoor Food and Alcoholic
Beverage service if any part of the outdoor seating area is within one hundred (100) feet of
the property line of improved property with a structure used exclusively for residential
purposes. No Food and Outdoor Alcoholic Beverage permit shall be issued if the outdoor
seating area is greater than fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the licensed
premises enclosed within the building. Each applicant for an Outdoor Food and Alcoholic
Beverage permit shall accurately describe the area intended for use as an outdoor seating
area and shall indicate the nature of fencing or other measures intended to provide control
over the operation of the outdoor seating area. Except for the entryway, every outdoor
seating area shall be completely enclosed with a fence or wall not less than forty-two (42)
inches in height measured from the hard surface on which the outdoor seating area is
constructed.. Amplified sound or music is permitted in the outdoor seating area provided
such music may not be audible within 150 feet of the outdoor seating area or the nearest
structure used exclusively for residential purposes whichever is less. A licensed operator
shall have control over the outdoor seating area at all times the outdoor seating area is in
operation.
(c) TIME OF OPERATION. The outdoor seating area may only be open from seven a.m.
until one-half hour before the closing time required by State law. The shift commander of
the Police Department has the authority to order any outdoor seating area to be closed down
at any time the Shift Commander believes it is in violation of this ordinance.
(d) ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS TO BE NOTIFIED OF PENDENCY OF
APPLICATIONS. All property owners within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the
proposed outdoor seating area measured from property line to property line shall be notified
of the pendency of application for a permit by first class mail.
(e) STATE STATUTES ENFORCED WITHIN OUTDOOR SEATING AREA. Every
permittee under this Section shall comply with and enforce all provisions of Ch. 125, Wis.
Stats., applicable to Class "B" licensed premises, except insofar as such provisions are
clearly inapplicable. Violation of the provisions of Ch. 125, Wis. Stats., shall be grounds
for immediate revocation of the Outdoor Food and Alcoholic Beverage permit by the
Administration Committee.
(f) PERMIT REVOCABLE. Three violations of this ordinance shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the Outdoor Food and Alcoholic Beverage permit shall be revoked. Such
revocation shall be preceded by a hearing with the Administration committee whose
decision shall be final. There shall be no use of the Outdoor Food and Alcoholic Beverage
permit from the time the third violation is alleged to have occurred and the hearing. Each
violation shall also carry 40 points pursuant to sec. 7 – 2 – 19(b).
(g) FEE REQUIRED. The Common Council shall approve the fee for Outdoor Food and
Beverage Service permits.
120294
7:11
(h) TEMPORARY EXPANDED PREMISES.
(1) Premises Defined. Consumption means dispensation or sale of fermented malt
beverages and intoxicating liquors on licensed premises shall be restricted to the
building itself and no fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors may be
consumed, dispensed or sold outside the building.
(2) Permit Issued. Whenever a licensee under this Subsection desires to expand the
selling, dispensation of fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquors on an area
adjacent to said building, such as a parking lot, for a special event, it may do so by
applying to the Chief of Police. Such permission shall not be unreasonably
withheld. Should the Chief of Police withhold such permit, he shall immediately
notify the City Clerk. It is the intention of this Subsection to permit scheduled
special events and to prohibit extended use of off-premises sales, dispensation or
consumption.
Cross Reference: Section 7-2-4(e)
SEC. 7-2-18 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSES; NON-RENEWAL.
(a) PROCEDURE. Whenever the holder of any license under this Chapter violates any
portion of this Chapter or Title 11, Chapter 5, of this Code of Ordinances, proceedings for
the revocation of such license may be instituted in the manner and under the procedure
established by Chapter 125, Wis. Stats.
(b) ABANDONMENT OF PREMISES. Any licensee holding a license to sell alcohol
beverages who abandons such business shall forfeit any right or preference he may have to
the holding of or renewal of such license. Abandonment shall be sufficient grounds for
revocation of any alcohol beverage license. The losing of the licensed premises for at least
six (6) months shall be prima facie evidence of the abandonment, unless extended by the
Common Council. All persons issued a license to sell alcohol beverages in the City for
which a quota exists limiting the number of such licenses that may be issued by the City
shall cause such business described in such license to be operated on the premises described
in such license for at least one hundred fifty (150) days during the terms of such license,
unless such license is issued for a term of less than one hundred eighty (180) days, in which
event this Subsection shall not apply.
(c) OTHER PROVISIONS. Any license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to
such further regulations and restrictions as may be imposed by the Common Council by
amendment to this section or by the enactment of new ordinances. If any licenses shall fail
or neglect to meet the requirements imposed by such new restrictions and regulations his
license may be revoked in accordance with this Section. In case of revocation of any license
or any violation of any provision of this Chapter in accordance with this Section or by the
court or for any reasonable cause except the imposition of new restrictions, no refund shall
be made of any part of the license fee.
SEC. 7-2-19 POINT SYSTEM FOR ALCOHOL BEVERAGE LICENSE VIOLATIONS
AND REVOCATIONS AND SUSPENSIONS.
(a) PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to administratively interpret those portions of
the Menasha Municipal Code relating to alcohol beverage violations and to establish a
120294
7:12
system for suspension and revocation.
(b) POINT SCHEDULE. The scheme of demerit points is listed according to the type of
alcohol beverage violation. This demerit point system is used to identify habitually
troublesome license holders who have repeatedly violated State Statutes and the Menasha
City Ordinance, for the purpose of recommending suspension or revocation of their alcohol
beverage license.
Type of Violation: Traffic to underage person
Demerit Points: 80
Type of Violation: Traffic to intoxicated person
Demerit Points: 50
Type of Violation: Underage person on premises
Demerit Points: 50
Type of Violation: Failure to be licensed
Demerit Points: 100
Type of Violation: False statement on application
Demerit Points: 50
Type of Violation: Failure to post liquor license
Demerit Points: 40
Type of Violation: Transfer of license without permission, including operating
on another's license
Demerit Points: 90
Type of Violation: Unlicensed bartender
Demerit Points: 40
Type of Violation: Failure to display bartender license upon request
Demerit Points: 25
Type of Violation: Open after hours
Demerit Points: 40
Type of Violation: No carry-out after hours
Demerit Points: 25
Type of Violation: Gambling
Demerit Points: 50
Type of Violation: Adult entertainment without permit
Demerit Points: 50
Type of Violation: Nude or semi-nude entertainer employee visible outside
Demerit Points: 100
120294
7:13
Type of Violation: Nude or semi-nude entertainer employee visible inside
Demerit Points: 50
Type of Violation: Failure to display permit
Demerit Points: 25
Type of Violation: Owner selling controlled substances
Demerit Points: 130
Type of Violation: Bartender selling controlled substances
Demerit Points: 75
Type of Violation: Failure to continue residency or ownership status during the
license year
Demerit Points: 75
Type of Violation: Outdoor food and beverage service
Demerit Points: 40
(c) VIOLATIONS HOW CALCULATED. In determining the accumulative demerit points
against a licensee within 24 months, the City shall use the date each violation was
committed as the basis for a determination if there has been a conviction.
(d) SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE. Prior to the imposition of the
demerit points by the Administration Committee, a hearing shall be scheduled to allow any
licensee to provide any relevant information to the Administration Committee. Any
conviction resulting from any violation is sufficient evidence for the Administration
Committee to impose the demerit points. If the demerit point accumulation accumulated
from the date of violation which results in a conviction which meets or exceeds 75 points in
a 12-month period, the Administration Committee shall issue a warning to the licensee.
Failure to appear at the time of the hearing before the Administration Committee shall not
be a reason to claim lack of notice of the warning. Notice shall be provided to the named
licensee that the Administration Committee intends to issue the demerit points. Should such
accumulation of points exceed 125 within a 12-month period, the Administration
Committee shall suspend the license for a period of not less than 3 days nor more than 10
days. Should such accumulation exceed 150 points and be less than 200 in an 18-month
period, the Administration Committee shall suspend such license for not less than 10 days
nor more than 90 days. Should such accumulation exceed 200 points in a 24 month period,
the penalty shall be revocation.
(e) TIME OF SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
(1) The dates for any suspension shall be negotiated between the licensee and
the City Attorney provided that the beginning date shall not be less than 15
days after the Administration Committee order.
(2) Any revocation ordered by the Administration Committee shall begin three
days from the date of the Administration Committee order. No licensee
whose license has been revoked may apply to be an officer, agent, or
120294
7:14
licensee for 12 months after the revocation.
(3) The Common Council will not act on a request for a license for any property
or license that has been revoked until not less than 60 days has elapsed since
the date of revocation.
(4) The Common Council will not act on a request for a license for any property
or license that has been suspended until the suspension period has expired.
(f) EGREGIOUS VIOLATIONS. Should the Administration Committee make a specific
finding that the circumstances of the violation constitute an egregious
violation, the Administration committee may determine to impose a
suspension or revocation even if the number of demerit points is not
sufficient to meet the threshold of paragraph d.
5/24/13
7:1
ARTICLE B
Operator's License
SEC. 7-2-20 OPERATORS’ LICENSE
(a) REGULAR OPERATORS’ LICENSE APPLICATIONS
(1) Applications for all operators’ licenses shall be made on a form provided by the City
Clerk or designee.
(2) An application shall be accurately completed in its entirety or shall be rendered void by
the City Clerk or designee.
(3) The Police Department shall verify the veracity of the application as well as research the
qualifications of the applicant.
(4) The license fee shall be submitted with the application.
(5) Operators’ licenses may be granted by the Common Council without further review in
the event the Police Department and City Clerk approved of the application.
(6) The Common Council shall issue an Operators’ license to any applicant meeting the
qualification under Wis. Stats. §§125.04(5) and 125.17(6) and shall be valid for a period
of two (2) years and shall expire on the thirtieth (30) day of June.
(b) TEMPORARY OPERATORS LICENSE. The City Clerk or designee is authorized to
issue a Temporary Operator's license to an applicant under the terms outlined in Wis.
Stats. §125.17(4).
(c) PROVISIONAL LICENSE.
(1) The City Clerk or designee is authorized to issue a Provisional Operators’ license to an
applicant for a regular Operators’ license provided the applicant:
(a) Files a certified copy of a valid operators’ license issued by another municipality;
and
(b) Pays the fee; and
(c) Meets the “City of Menasha Guidelines for Operators’ Licenses” adopted by the
Common Council; and
(d) Has not been denied an Operators’ license by the Common Council; and
(e) Has met the training requirement under Wis. Stats. §125.17(6)
(2) A Provisional Operators license expires 60 days after its issuance or when a regular
Operator’s license is issued or upon expiration of an Operators’ license issued by
another municipality and filed under paragraph (1)(a) above, whichever is sooner.
(3) The City Clerk or designee may revoke a Provisional Operators’ license upon discovery
of a false statement made on the application or if an applicant enrolled in a responsible
beverage server training course fails to successfully complete the course in which he or
she is enrolled.
(d) APPEALS. Any applicant whose application has been voided or denied or whose license
has been revoked by the City Clerk or Police Department may appeal such determination
of the Administration Committee.
(e) The police investigation will include a criminal history check through the Wisconsin
criminal history records transformation or other available database to determine the
applicant’s prior criminal history.
SEC. 7-2-21 OPERATORS’ LICENSE FEE.
(a) The fees for Operators’ licenses shall be established by the Common Council.
SEC. 7-2-22 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
(a) Each Operators’ license issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be posted on the
5/24/13
7:2
premises whenever the operator dispenses beverages.
120294
7:1
CHAPTER 3
Cigarette Licenses
SEC. 7-3-1 CIGARETTE LICENSES.
(a) LICENSE REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall, in any manner, directly or
indirectly, upon any premises, or by any device, sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or give
away, or keep for sale, any cigarette, cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers, or any substitute
therefor, without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided.
(b) APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE. Every person, firm or corporation desiring a
license under this Section shall file with the City Clerk a written application therefor, stating
the name of the person and the place for which such license is desired. Each license shall be
filed by the City Clerk and shall name the licensee and the place wherein he is authorized to
conduct such business, and the same shall not be delivered until the applicant shall pay to the
City Clerk a license fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).
(c) ISSUANCE AND TERM OF LICENSE. Licenses for the sale, exchange, barter,
disposition of, or giving away or keeping for sale of cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers or
any substitute therefor shall be issued by the City Clerk. Each license shall be issued on the
first day of July in each year, or thereafter whenever applied for, and shall continue in force
from date of issuance until the succeeding June 30th unless sooner revoked for any violation
of this Section.
State Law Reference: Section 134.65, Wis Stats.
120294
7:1
CHAPTER 4
Direct Sellers
SEC. 7-4-1 REGULATIONS AFFECTING THE ACTIVITIES OF DIRECT SELLERS,
SOLICITORS, AND HAWKERS OF MERCHANDISE
(a) Purpose. The Common Council finds it necessary to regulate the practice of direct sellers
going in and upon private dwellings in the City of Menasha not having been requested or
invited to do so by the owner or occupant of said private residences for the purpose of
conducting any trade, profession, pursuit or occupation for gain. This ordinance is
intended to provide a safe, profitable, and peaceful method for direct seller businesses to
conduct any pursuit for gain within the city limits. It is also necessary for the city to
protect the consumer against the sale of inferior products or services provided by the
businesses to be regulated herein.
(b) Registration Required. Any person who is a direct seller and engages in the business of
going from door to door, in and upon private dwellings within the city, selling or taking
orders for or offering to sell or take orders for goods or services shall first be registered
with the city for that purpose as provided herein.
(c) DEFINITIONS. In this section:
(1) Charitable organization shall include any person, association or corporation,
described in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that is exempt from
taxation under Section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, that is or purports to be
established for a charitable purpose, including for a benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic, religious, or eleemosynary objective.
(2) Clerk shall mean the City Clerk.
(3) Direct seller refers to any individual who, for him/herself, or for a partnership,
business, association or corporation, sells or offers to sell goods or services, or takes
orders or offers to take orders for the later delivery of goods or services, by going
from door to door, and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and
transient merchants. The sale of goods or services includes donations required by the
direct seller for the retention of goods or services by a donor or prospective customer.
(4) Goods shall include personal property of any kind, and shall include goods provided
incidental to services offered or sold.
(d) EXEMPTIONS. Except as otherwise indicated, the following shall be exempt from
registering:
(1) Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to regular
customers on established routes;
(2) Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from the
established place of business for the sale of goods regularly offered for sale by such
merchant within the counties of Winnebago, Calumet or Outagamie County and who
delivers such goods in their regular course of business;
(3) Any person who has an established place of business where the goods or services
being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer or
120294
7:2
prospective buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested a dwelling
visit by, said person;
(4) Any charitable organization or bona fide employee, officer or agent of the same which
has for at least six months maintained a permanent office or headquarters in
Winnebago, Calumet or Outagamie counties.
(e) REGISTRATION.
(1) Applicants for registration must complete and return to the Clerk a registration form
furnished by the Clerk containing the following information:
A. Legal name, permanent address and telephone number; and temporary address, if
any;
B. Date of birth, height, weight, and color of hair and eyes, and driver license
number;
C. Name, address and telephone number of the person, association, business,
corporation or group that the direct seller represents or is employed by, or whose
merchandise is being sold;
D. Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the goods offered
and any services offered;
E. Proposed method of delivery of goods or services, if they are to be delivered at a
later time after a solicitation;
F. Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by applicant
conducting such business;
G. Last cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where applicant conducted similar
business;
H. Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving the
City of Menasha, or for at least seven days after the last delivery date of any goods
or services sold or purchased in the City of Menasha, whichever day is later;
I. Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance
violation related to applicant’s business within the last five years; the nature of the
offense and the place of conviction.
(2) Applicants shall present to the Clerk for examination:
A. A fully completed registration form; and
B. A driver license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required.
(3) At the time the registration form is returned, a fee of $20.00 shall be paid to the Clerk
to cover the cost of processing said registration. The applicant shall also be required
to sign a statement identifying his/her agent with a physical Wisconsin address to
accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising out
of any sale or service performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales
activities of the applicant. Except as otherwise provided herein, upon filing a
completed application, payment of said fee and the signing of said completed
statement, the Clerk shall register the applicant as a direct seller and date the entry.
Said registration shall be valid for a period of three months from the date of entry,
subject to subsequent refusal as provided in subsection (5)(b) of this section.
120294
7:3
(f) Investigation.
(1) Upon receipt of each application, the Clerk may refer it immediately to the Chief of
Police or designee, who may make and verify the statements made in such
registration.
(2) The Clerk shall refuse to register or reregister the applicant if it is determined,
pursuant to any investigation in subsection (5)(a) of this section, that: the application
contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a
material nature have been received against the applicant/registrant by authorities in
the last cities, villages and towns, in which the applicant conducted similar business;
the applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory or ordinance violation within the last
five years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant’s fitness to engage in
direct selling; or the applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of
subsection (4) of this section.
(g) Appeal. An applicant or registrant may request a hearing before the Administration
Committee appealing the denial or revocation of registration under this Section.
(h) Regulation of Direct Sellers.
(1) Prohibited Practices. The following prohibited practices shall apply to all direct
sellers, including those otherwise exempt under subsection (3) of this section.
A. A direct seller shall be prohibited from: calling at any dwelling or other place
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by appointment; calling at
any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words “No
Peddlers,” “No Solicitors” or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of
any dwelling place; or remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the
owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises.
B. A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading
statements concerning the quality, quantity or characteristics of any goods offered
for sale, the purpose of his/her visit, his/her identity or the identity of the
organization he/she represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall
specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of goods or services being
offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization
is soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of
the goods or services.
(2) Disclosure Requirements.
A. Where the direct seller initiates contact with the prospective buyer, after the initial
greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a
direct seller shall expressly disclose in oral or written form his/her name, the
formal name, and the popular name if not identical to the formal name, of the
company or organization he/she is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of the
goods or services he/she offers to sell or purchase.
B. If any sale of goods or services is made by a direct seller, or any sales order for the
later delivery of goods or services is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the
right to cancel said transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash
transaction of any amount, in accordance with the procedure as set forth in Wis.
120294
7:4
Stat. Ch. 423, except that cash transactions of any amount shall be covered
hereunder. The seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice
of that fact. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of Wis. Stat.
§ 423.203(1)(a), (b) and (c), (2) and (3).
C. All direct sellers shall wear upon their person a clearly, legible identification card
or tag.
(3) If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods or services, he/she
shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement
containing the terms of the agreement, the amount paid in advance whether full,
partial or no advance payment is made, the name, address and telephone number of
the seller, the delivery or performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is
provided and, if so, the terms thereof.
(i) Revocation of Registration.
(1) Registration may be revoked if the applicant made any material omission or
materially inaccurate statement in the application for registration, made any
fraudulent, false, deceptive or misleading statement or presentation in the course of
engaging in direct sales, violated any provision of this section or was convicted of any
crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the registrant’s
fitness to engage in direct selling.
(2) Written notice of the revocation shall be served personally on the applicant and the
revocation will become immediately effective.
(j) Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this section shall forfeit not
less than $20.00 nor more than $500.00 for each violation plus costs of prosecution. Each
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(k) Severance Clause. The provisions of this section are declared to be severable, and if any
subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section shall for any reason be held to be
invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this section; they shall remain in effect, it
being the legislative intent that this section shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of
any part.
120294
7:1
CHAPTER 5
Auctions
SEC. 7-5-1 AUCTION PERMIT REQUIRED.
(a) WHEN REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation on behalf of another, shall sell or
offer for sale at public auction within the City any goods, wares or merchandise or other
property without first having obtained from the City Clerk a permit in writing to do so. Such
permit shall be granted only upon the conditions set forth in this Chapter and shall be
revoked for any violation of this Chapter. The permit is valid for one (1) year, or on a per
day basis.
(b) EXCEPTIONS.
(1) No permit shall be required for the sale at public auction of goods, wares or
merchandise by virtue of any rule, order or judgment of any court or of any law
respecting the collection of any tax or duty, either of this State or the United States,
or for any sale by auction of property belonging to this State or the United States, or
for any sale by any trustee of bankruptcy, or any sale made by any executor,
administrator or guardian duly authorized by the court to conduct such sale,
personally or when made by any officer of any court in person, or by any officer of
this City, County, State or the United States in person.
(2) No permit shall be required for any auction held by any church, fraternal, or
charitable organization whose principal location is within the City of Menasha.
(c) APPLICATION. Application for a permit shall be by verified petition filed with the City
Clerk, stating the name of the applicant, his residence, the street and number of the proposed
place of sale. It shall set forth in detail a description of the goods to be sold and what
statements or representations are to be made or advertised as to the same, the length of time
for which the permit is desired, and if the applicant, his residence, the street and number of
the proposed place of sale. It shall set forth in detail a description of the goods to be sold and
what statements or representations are to be made or advertised as to the same, the length of
time for which the permit is desired, and, if the applicant has been previously engaged in a
like or similar business, the places where the same were conducted, and shall furnish the City
Clerk with such further evidence as shall be deemed necessary to establish the truth of the
statements made in the petition. In no event shall the petition be supplemented or additional
merchandise added to the stock set forth in the petition during the period for which the
permit is granted. Such list of merchandise shall be submitted within seven (7) days of each
auction. Said application shall further set forth all taxes previously levied or assessed against
said stock of goods set forth in said inventory, whether against the applicant or any former
owner thereof and no permit shall be granted for the sale thereof until all taxes owing as a
result of assessment or levy shall have been paid. The applicant shall also report whether he
was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last three (3)
years.
(d) FEES. The fees for a per day auction permit shall be One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for
each day.
State Law Reference: Section 130.06, Wis. Stats.
120294
7:2
SEC. 7-5-2 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
(a) DENIAL OR REVOCATION. An auctioneer's license may be revoked by the Chief of
Police or renewal of such license may be refused by the City Clerk when it is determined:
(1) That the application of the applicant or license-holder contains any false, fraudulent,
or misleading material statement; or
(2) That the applicant or license-holder has made any false, fraudulent, or misleading
material statement in the course of conducting an auction sale of, or in offering for
sale at auction, any real or personal property (goods, wares, or merchandise) in the
City of Menasha; or
(3) That the applicant or license-holder has perpetrated a fraud upon any person whether
or not such fraud was perpetrated in the conduct of an auction in the City of
Menasha; or
(4) That the applicant or license-holder has violated any of the statutes of the State of
Wisconsin relating to auctions or auctioneers during the license period; or
(5) That the applicant or license-holder has conducted an auction sale of, or offered for
sale at auction, any real or personal property (goods, wares, or merchandise) in the
City of Menasha in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach
of the peace or a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
(b) APPEALS. Any person who receives a determination or order from the City of Menasha
regarding an auction permit and objects to all or any part thereof may appeal to the Common
Council within seven (7) days of receipt of the order and the Common Council shall hear
such appeal within thirty (30) days of receipt of written notice of the appeal. After such
hearing, the Common Council shall by letter notify the party appealing the order or
determination of its decision within ten (10) days after the hearing has been concluded and
file its written decision with the City Clerk.
SEC. 7-5-3 NO AUCTION WARES ON SIDEWALK.
No goods, wares, or merchandise or any thing whatsoever shall be placed, sold or exposed for sale at
a public auction or vendue, in any street, sidewalk, alley or public grounds in the City.
SEC. 7-5-4 NO AUCTION BIDDING HELD ON SIDEWALK.
No auctioneer, his agent or servant, or any person engaged or employed in selling goods or other
things at auction shall expose for sale at public auction or vendue any goods, wares, or merchandise
or other things whatever to any person or persons, who, at the time of bidding for the same or while
examining the same, shall be on the sidewalk of any street in the City.
SEC. 7-5-5 STATE REGULATIONS.
Chapter 130, Wis. Stats., shall apply to auction within the City of Menasha so far as applicable.
Updated: 2/26/2018
TITLE 7 – Licensing and Regulation
CHAPTER 6
Retail Food and Recreational Licensing
SEC. 7-6-1 RETAIL FOOD, RECREATIONAL LICENSING AND REGISTRATION
(a) AGENT STATUS. Pursuant to the “Bridges of Fox River Consortium” contract with the City
of DePere, the City of Menasha shall hold Agent Status with the Wisconsin Department of
Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection (WDATCP) for both cities pursuant to the
provisions of ATCP 74. City of Menasha Environmental Health Sanitarian shall act as Program
Standard for the consortium.
(b) PERMITS AND LICENSES REQUIRED. Upon the authority and scope of Chapters 97, 101
and 254 of the Wisconsin State Statutes, this regulation adopts by reference Wisconsin
Administrative Code Sections ATCP 72 Hotels, Motels and Tourist Rooming Houses, ATCP 73
Bed and Breakfast, ATCP 74 Designation of Agents, ATCP 76 Swimming Pools and Water
Attractions, ATCP 78 Recreational Educational Camps, ATCP 79 Campgrounds and ATCP 75
Retail Food and Appendices (Wisconsin Food Code), SPS 221 Tattooing and Body Piercing,
SPS 326 Regulation of Manufactured Home Communities and the most recent edition of the
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Food Code and appendices.
(c) RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND RECREATIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
(1) No person shall conduct a business of or operate a retail food or recreational
establishment without obtaining a license therefor from the Menasha Health Department.
(2) Retail Food Establishment shall mean an operation that stores, prepares, vends, sells or
otherwise provides food for human consumption based on a fee. Retail Food
establishment refers to restaurants, mobile restaurants, temporary restaurants, vending
and retail food establishments as defined by Wisconsin Administrative Code, Section
ATCP 75.
(3) Recreational Establishment includes all swimming pools and water attractions covered
by Wisconsin Administrative Code, Section ATCP 76, ATCP 72 Hotels, Motels and
Tourist Rooming Houses, ATCP 73 Bed and Breakfast, ATCP 78 Recreational
Educational Camps, ATCP 79 Campgrounds and ATCP 75 Retail Food and Appendices
(Wisconsin Food Code), SPS 221 Tattooing and Body Piercing, SPS 326 Regulation of
Manufactured Home Communities
(d) APPLICATION FOR LICENSES.
(1) Applications for all licenses shall be made upon such forms supplied and prescribed by
the Menasha Health Department.
(2) Prior to approval of an application for a license, the Menasha Health Department shall
inspect the retail food establishment or recreational establishment to determine
compliance with this regulation.
(3) The fee for licenses required by this regulation shall be payable before the issuance of a
license and annually before July 1 every year. An additional penalty fee shall be
assessed for license renewals received on or after July 1. Applications post marked
before July 1 shall be accepted regardless of the date of receipt.
(4) A pre-inspection fee shall be collected at the time of application from an operator of a
new retail food or recreational establishment or a new operator of an existing at change
of operator.
(e) REGISTRATION AND LICENSE ISSUANCE AND REQUIREMENTS.
Updated: 2/26/2018
(1) License Issuance.
a. No person shall operate a retail food establishment or recreational establishment
covered by this regulation within the City of Menasha that does not have a valid
license issued by the Menasha Health Department or the Wisconsin Department
of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection (WDATCP), unless otherwise
exempted.
b. City of Menasha Health Department shall only issue a license to mobile or
temporary food establishments that operate solely within the City limits of
Menasha. All other mobile food establishments and temporary establishments
shall be licensed by WDATCP. Additionally, if the mobile food establishment
service base is within the City limits of Menasha the Menasha Health
Department shall license that service base.
c. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this regulation shall be
entitled to receive or retain such a license.
d. Transferability of licenses shall be pursuant to Wis. Stats. Chapter 97 and ATCP
75.
e. A valid license shall be posted in plain view in every retail food establishment or
recreational establishment as required by this ordinance.
f. At least one employee responsible for food safety shall be certified as a food
manager through the State of Wisconsin as evidenced by a current certificate
stating the employee has successfully passed an approved Certified Food
Manager Exam with identification number and expiration date. A Person in
Charge (PIC) shall be designated at all times during hours of operation. Provided
there is one certified food manager the alternate employees designated as PIC are
not required to be certified by the State of Wisconsin. Enforcement of violations
of this section shall be consistent with the most current guidance from
WDATCP. Retail food establishments and Recreational establishments shall only
be issued a license if the property taxes for that establishment are current as
evidenced by the Calumet or Winnebago County Treasurer.
(2) License Requirements. The City of Menasha Common Council shall establish all fees
related to licensing facilities and/or establishments covered by this ordinance.
(3) INSPECTIONS.
a. Inspection Frequency. An inspection of licensed facilities under the scope of this
ordinance shall be performed at least once per year.. Inspection frequency of
Retail Food establishments shall be based on risk category where complex
establishments and establishments with a history of chronic priority violations
shall be prioritized for inspections over the annual inspection
b. Report of Inspections. Whenever an inspection of a retail food or recreational
establishment is conducted the findings shall be entered into the HealthSpace
program. The inspection shall include observations and violations to this
ordinance. A copy of the completed inspection shall be left with the PIC and a
copy shall be provided to the Licensee at the conclusion of the inspection. A
signed copy of the inspection shall be maintained in the permanent file for that
establishment.
c. Correction of Violations. The completed inspection report shall specify a
reasonable amount of time for the correction of the violations found during the
inspection. It shall be the expectation that violations will be corrected during the
inspection when possible at the discretion of the Sanitarian or designee.
Updated: 2/26/2018
d. Access. Sanitarian, or designee, after providing proper identification, shall be
permitted to enter the retail food establishment or recreational establishment at
any reasonable time to determine compliance with this regulation.
e. Hours of Inspection. Inspections shall be made during the regular operating hours
of the establishment and primarily during the regular office hours of the Menasha
Health Department unless circumstances necessitate conducting an inspection at
a time other than normal Health Department business hours. In the event a
mobile or temporary permit is issued to an operator conducting business only
within the City of Menasha an inspection shall be done in conjunction with the
event including weekends or evenings.
(4) LICENSE DENIAL. Licenses issued under this Section may be denied by the Menasha
Health Department Sanitarian, or designee, upon annual application for renewal for
continued violations of this Code as it relates to payment for re-inspection fees levied in
the previous license year or delinquent property taxes for that business address.
(5) REINSTATEMENT OF LICENSE. The licensee of any establishment addressed in this
Section whose license has been suspended may, at any time, make application for the
reinstatement of the license within three (3) business days of the receipt of a written
application accompanied by a written statement signed by the applicant to the effect that
all violations have been corrected. Sanitarian, or designee, shall conduct a re-inspection
to determine if violations have been corrected and findings indicate compliance. The
license may be reinstated pending payment of any re-inspection fees which may have
been levied on the establishment.
(6) LICENSE REVOCATION. Licenses issued under this Section may be revoked after an
opportunity for hearing by the Menasha Board of Health. The Board of Health may
determine that the license revocation is necessary if a license is suspended twice in any
two (2) year period, if the health violations pose an immediate health risk or have
resulted in serious injury or illness to person(s).
(7) APPEAL. Whenever a license is suspended or revoked, the person to which the license
is issued shall be afforded the opportunity of a hearing before the City of Menasha
Common Council within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of a written request for such
hearing, unless both parties agree to a later date. Opportunity for a hearing before the
Common Council will be provided if the written request is submitted by the person
issued the license and received by the Health Department within ten (10) days of the
suspension or revocation.
(8) REQUIREMENTS AND FEES. The application for license or the request for renewal
of license or registration covered in this Section shall be accompanied with an
appropriate fee to be established by the Common Council. A list of fees shall be
maintained by the City Clerk and the Health Department.
a. Any establishment required by this section to pay any fee may, in addition to any
other penalties, also be required to pay a fee equal to twice the amount of the
normal fee if the failure is due to a late payment, insufficient funds or account
closed checks, or for any other reason the City has not received the proper
payment.
b. Any establishment required by this section to pay any fee may, in addition to any
other penalties, also be required to pay a fee equal to twice the amount of the
normal fee if such establishment opens for business without paying the required
fee. The Public Health Director, or designee, may also order such establishment
to close until the fee is paid.
120294
7:1
CHAPTER 7
Regulation and Licensing of Fireworks
SEC. 7-7-1 REGULATION OF FIREWORKS
(a) DEFINITION. In this Section, "fireworks" means anything manufactured, processed or
packaged for exploding, emitting sparks or combustion which does not have another
common use, but does not include any of the following:
(1) Fuel or a lubricant.
(2) A firearm cartridge or shotgun shell.
(3) A flare used or possessed or sold for use as a signal in an emergency or in the
operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or motor vehicle.
(4) A match, cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space heater.
(5) A cap containing not more than one-quarter (1/4) grain of explosive mixture, if the
cap is used or possessed or sold for use in a device which prevents direct bodily
contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion.
(6) A toy snake which contains no mercury.
(7) A model rocket engine.
(8) Tobacco and a tobacco product.
(9) A sparkler on a wire or wood stick not exceeding thirty-six (36) inches in length or
0.25 inch in outside diameter which does not contain magnesium, chlorate or
perchlorate.
(10) A device designed to spray out paper confetti or streamers and which contains less
than one-quarter (1/4) grain of explosive mixture.
(11) A device designed to produce an audible sound but not explode, spark, move or emit
an external flame after ignition and which does not exceed three (3) grams in total
weight.
(12) A device that emits smoke with no external flame and does not leave the ground.
(13) A cylindrical fountain not exceeding one hundred (100) grams in total weight with
an inside tube diameter not exceeding 0.75 inch, designed to sit on the ground and
emit only sparks and smoke.
(14) A cone fountain not exceeding seventy-five (75) grams in total weight, designed to
sit on the ground and emit only sparks and smoke.
(b) SALE. No person may sell or possess with intent to sell fireworks, except:
(1) To a person holding a permit under Subsection (c)(3);
(2) To a municipality; or
(3) For a purpose specified under Subsection (c)(2)b-f.
(c) USE.
(1) Permit Required. No person may possess or use fireworks without a user's permit
from the Mayor or from an official or employee of the City as designated by the
Mayor following a recommendation from the Fire Chief. No person may use
fireworks or a device listed under Subsection (a)(5)-(7) and (9)-(14) while attending
a fireworks display for which a permit has been issued to a person listed under
Subparagraph (c)(3)a-e or under Subparagraph (c)(3)f if the display is open to the
general public.
(2) Permit Exceptions. Subparagraph (c)(1) above does not apply to:
a. The City, except that City fire and law enforcement officials shall be notified
120294
7:2
of the proposed use of fireworks at least two (2) days in advance.
b. The possession or use of explosives in accordance with rules or general
orders of the Wisconsin Department of Industry, Labor and Human
Relations.
c. The disposal of hazardous substances in accordance with rules adopted by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
d. The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in any
manufacturing process.
e. The possession or use of explosive or combustible materials in connection
with classes conducted by educational institutions.
f. A possessor or manufacturer of explosives in possession of a license or
permit under 18 U.S.C. 841 to 848 if the possession of the fireworks is
authorized under the license or permit.
(3) Who May Obtain Permit. A permit under this subsection may be issued only to the
following:
a. A public authority.
b. A fair association.
c. An amusement park.
d. A park board.
e. A civic organization.
f. An agricultural producer for the protection of crops from predatory birds or
animals.
(4) Crop Protection Signs. A person issued a permit for crop protection shall erect
appropriate warning signs disclosing the use of fireworks for crop protection.
(5) Bond; Insurance. The Mayor issuing a permit under this Subsection shall require an
indemnity bond with good and sufficient sureties or policy of liability insurance for
the payment of all claims that may arise by reason of injuries to person or property
from the handling, use or discharge of fireworks under the permit. The bond or
policy shall be taken in the name of the City, and any person injured thereby may
bring an action on the bond or policy in the person's own name to recover the
damage the person has sustained, but the aggregate liability of the surety or insurer to
all persons shall not exceed the amount of the bond or policy. The bond or policy,
together with a copy of the permit, shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
Whenever the City sponsors a fireworks event in or near a municipal park, the person
or persons conducting same shall first file evidence of insurability with the City
Clerk that they are covered with $100,000.00 for property damage, $100,000.00 for
personal liability coverage, and an umbrella coverage policy in the amount of
$1,000,000.00.
(6) Required Information for Permit. A permit under this Subsection shall specify all of
the following:
a. The name and address of the permit holder.
b. The date on and after which fireworks may be purchased.
c. The kind and quantity of fireworks which may be purchased.
d. The date and location of permitted use.
e. Other special conditions prescribed by ordinance.
(7) Copy of Permit. A copy of a permit under this Subsection shall be given to the Fire
Chief and Chief of Police at least two (2) days before the date of authorized use.
(8) Minors Prohibited. A permit under this Subsection may not be issued to a minor.
(d) STORAGE AND HANDLING.
120294
7:3
(1) Fire Extinguishers Required. No wholesaler, dealer or jobber may store or handle
fireworks on the premises unless the premises are equipped with fire extinguishers
approved by the Fire Chief.
(2) Smoking Prohibited. No person may smoke where fireworks are stored or handled.
(3) Fire Chief to be Notified. A person who stores or handles fireworks shall notify the
Fire Chief of the location of the fireworks.
(4) Storage Distance. No wholesaler, dealer or jobber may store fireworks within five
hundred (500) feet of a dwelling.
(5) Restrictions on Storage. No person may store fireworks within five hundred (500)
feet of a public assemblage or place where gasoline or volatile liquid is sold in
quantities exceeding one (1) gallon.
(e) PARENTAL LIABILITY. A parent or legal guardian of a minor who consents to the use
of fireworks by the minor is liable for damages caused by the minor's use of the fireworks.
Updated: 5/8/2017
CHAPTER 8
Street Use Permit
SEC. 7-8-1 STREET USE PERMITS.
(a) PURPOSE. The streets in possession of the City are primarily for the use of the public in
the ordinary way. However, under proper circumstances, the City Clerk may grant a permit
for street use, subject to reasonable municipal regulation and control. Therefore, this
Section is enacted to regulate and control the use of streets pursuant to a Street Use Permit
to the end that the health, safety and general welfare of the public and the good order of the
City can be protected and maintained.
(b) APPLICATION. A written application for a Street Use Permit by persons or groups
desiring the same shall be made on a form provided by the City Clerk and shall be filed with
the City Clerk. The application shall set forth the following information regarding the
proposed street use:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant or applicants.
(2) If the proposed street use is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization,
the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and
of the authorizing responsible heads of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons who will be
responsible for conducting the proposed use of the street.
(4) The date and duration of time for which the requested use of the street is proposed
to occur.
(5) An accurate description of that portion of the street proposed to be used.
(6) The approximate number of persons for whom use of the proposed street area is
requested.
(7) The proposed use, described in detail, for which the Street Use Permit is requested.
(8) Applications for a street use permit must be completed and filed with the City Clerk
not less than thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled date of the street use.
(c) REPRESENTATIVE AT MEETING. The person or representative of the group making
application for a Street Use Permit shall be present when the Board of Public Works and
Common Council gives consideration to the granting of said Street Use Permit to provide
any additional information which is reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to
whether a permit should be granted.
(d) REVIEW BY CHIEF OF POLICE AND DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. Before
any application for a Street Use Permit is considered by the Common Council, the
application shall be reviewed by the Director of Public Works and Chief of Police for their
recommendation as to the effect that the temporary closing of the street will have on the
public safety and traffic movement in the area during the time the street may be closed.
(e) MANDATORY DENIAL OF STREET USE PERMIT. An application for a Street Use
Permit shall be denied if:
(1) The proposed street use is primarily for private or commercial gain.
(2) The proposed street use would violate any federal or state law or any ordinance of
the City.
(3) The proposed street use will substantially hinder the movement of police, fire or
emergency vehicles, constituting a risk to persons or property.
(4) The application for a Street Use Permit does not contain the information required
above.
(5) The proposed use could equally be held in a public park or other location. In
addition to the requirement that the application for a Street Use Permit shall be
denied, as hereinabove set forth, the Common Council may deny a permit for any
Updated: 5/8/2017
other reason or reasons if it concludes that the health, safety and general welfare of
the public cannot adequately be protected and maintained if the permit is granted.
(f) PERMIT FEE. Each application for a Street Use Permit shall be accompanied by a fee of
Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00).
(g) ALCOHOL BEVERAGE LICENSES. If the applicant requests permission to possess,
sell or offer for sale fermented malt beverages and/or wine containing not more than six
percent (6%) alcohol by volume within the perimeter of the street use permit area, the
applicant shall follow the procedure for a Temporary Class “B” Picnic License under SEC.
7-2-1(e)(1) of the Code of Ordinances. The Common Council may impose conditions for
the street use permit not inconsistent with a concurrent alcohol beverage license and
applicable laws.
(h) INSURANCE.
(1) The applicant for a Street Use Permit may be required to indemnify, defend and
hold the City and its employees and agents harmless against all claims, liability,
loss, damage or expense incurred by the City on account of any injury to or death of
any person or any damage to property caused by or resulting from the activities for
which the permit is granted. As evidence of the applicant's ability to perform the
conditions of the permit, the applicant may be required to furnish a Certificate of
Comprehensive General Liability Insurance with the City of Menasha. The
applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond prior to being granted the
permit.
(2) Any street use applicant may apply to meet the insurance requirements through the
office of the Risk Manager by purchasing insurance through a TULIP program.
(Tenant/Users Liability Insurance Program.) Any fees or costs shall be prepaid by
such street use applicant prior to Common Council consideration of any Street Use
Permit.
(3) The City Attorney or Risk Manager shall review any Street Use Permit Application
for satisfactory insurance coverage.
(4) Proof of insurance is not required for parades sponsored by the Menasha Public
Schools or St. Mary's Central High School.
(i) TERMINATION OF A STREET USE PERMIT. A Street Use Permit for an event in
progress may be terminated by the Police Department if the health, safety and welfare of the
public appears to be endangered by activities generated as a result of the event or the event
is in violation of any of the conditions of the permits or Ordinances of the City of Menasha.
The Chief of Police has the authority to revoke a permit or terminate an event in progress if
the event organizers fail to comply with any of the regulations in the street use policy or
conditions stated in the permit.
(j) The City of Menasha may require a deposit fee to insure that appropriate clean-up or
dismantling of structures is done upon the conclusion of the event. This deposit shall be in
an amount established by the Common Council.
(k) The City of Menasha may require any Street Use applicant to pay any costs necessary for
additional staffing to maintain safety of participants or the public or to satisfactorily clean
up after the event.
(l) (1) The Chief of Police and Fire Chief are allowed to authorize a use of the streets for a
short duration without other compliance with this section.
(2) The Common Council may waive any of the requirements of this section in the
event of special mitigating circumstances.
(m) The Common Council may waive any of the requirements of sections 7 – 8 – 1 (c),
7 – 8 – 1 (d) or 7 – 8 – 1 (e) in the event of special mitigating circumstances.
Any such motion to waive any of these requirements must state the specific mitigating
circumstances.
Updated: 5/8/2017
SEC. 7-8-2 OUTDOOR RESTAURANT SERVICE.
(a) Intent. The intent of this section is to establish standards for the limited use of public
right-of-way and other public property for Outdoor Restaurant Service by licensed
restaurants in the historic downtown while maintaining right-of-way and other public
property accessibility, safety, and preserving the historic character of the area.
(b) Purpose. To promote and encourage the revitalization of Downtown and historic Main
Street areas of the City of Menasha, including the development of social and economic
activity.
(c) Definition of Outdoor Restaurant Service. Outdoor Restaurant Service is an expansion
of an establishment creating an outdoor seating facility on part of the public right-ofway/
sidewalk or other public property that immediately adjoins the licensed premises for
the purpose of consuming food and beverages prepared at the full service restaurant
adjacent thereto.
(d) General Standards. The Common Council may grant a permit to licensed restaurants
located in the C-2 Central Business Zoning District for serving food and beverages on
public right-of-way/ sidewalks, or other public property adjoining and adjacent to the
restaurant. Such service, referred to herein as “Outdoor Service,” shall be in compliance
with the requirements set forth in this section.
(1) Outdoor Service shall be allowed by permit only.
(2) Outdoor Service shall be permitted from April 1 through November 30. Hours of
outdoor service shall be allowed between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. An Outdoor
Service shall not be open during hours when food and beverage service is not
available.
(3) Permits issued under this section may not be valid on any day that a permitted
special event will close the right-of-way/sidewalk or other public property in front
of the outdoor service area to normal use or traffic, at the discretion of the city.
(4) All food and beverages to be sold or served in an Outdoor Service area must be
prepared in the regular on-site kitchen or bar facilities, as approved by the
Menasha Health Department.
(5) Outdoor Service area capacity is limited to the number of seats located at tables
within the service area. No person shall be served unless seated.
(6) A permit holder may sell and serve alcoholic beverages in an outdoor service area
only if a valid and appropriate alcohol beverage license for the principal premises
has previously been obtained.
a. The alcoholic beverage license must include the Outdoor Service area in
the description of the licensed premises.
b. Alcoholic beverages may only be sold and/or served to persons seated at
tables in the Outdoor Service area by a licensed bartender in compliance
with the alcoholic beverage laws, ordinances, and regulations.
c. The alcoholic beverage license holder shall be responsible for monitoring
the area to ensure only customers of the legal drinking age are in
possession of or consuming any alcoholic beverages.
d. The alcohol beverage license holder shall not allow patrons of the Outdoor
Service area to bring alcoholic beverages into the Outdoor Service area
from another location, nor carry open containers of alcoholic beverages
about in the Outdoor Service area, nor carry open containers of alcoholic
beverages served in the Outdoor Service area outside the Outdoor Service
area.
(7) The placement of tables and chairs on the public right-of-way/sidewalks or other
public property for the purpose of Outdoor Service shall conform to the following
standards:
Updated: 5/8/2017
a. The Outdoor Service area shall be limited to the length of the building
facade of the licensed restaurant’s designated address. Outdoor Service
areas may extend into adjacent building frontage(s) with written consent
from the neighboring property owner(s). At any time, the neighboring
property owner may terminate the use of the extended Outdoor Service
within their designated building frontage if submitted in writing to both
the city and the Outdoor Service permit holder.
b. At least five (5) feet of any right-of-way/ sidewalk, or public property
must remain open to and be easily accessible for pedestrian or other traffic.
c. There must be no interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or interference with any designated public parking space. No part of
the Outdoor Service shall obstruct access to or view of any fire hydrant or
other public safety fixture from the street.
d. No Outdoor Service shall be permitted within five (5) feet of any bus stop,
curb-cut opening, marked crosswalk, or other street amenity (such as
sidewalk bench, bicycle rack, kioske, etc.).
e. No portion of an Outdoor Service area shall be located on any grass, lawn,
or other unpaved area of the right-of-way or public property.
f. All Outdoor Service furnishings should enhance the aesthetics of the
surrounding area and shall be in good repair, safe, sturdy, and designed for
outdoor use. All furnishings shall be readily removable and not be
physically attached, chained, or affixed to any structure, tree, post or other
fixture. No Outdoor Service furnishings shall be used as advertisement of
off-premise activities, products, or uses.
g. The City is not responsible for loss or damage to Outdoor Service
furnishings or fixtures.
(e) Sanitation. The restaurant shall maintain the Outdoor Service area and adjacent right-ofway/
sidewalk or public property in a clean and sanitary manner as well as be responsible
for removing any trash, litter, grease, beverage-food stains, or other unsightly conditions
caused by the Outdoor Service. Additionally, the restaurant shall remove trash and litter
from abutting properties which may have originated from the Outdoor Service area. Such
maintenance shall be done on a daily basis.
(f). Noise. No musical instruments, radios, juke boxes, or other means of electric sound
amplification may be used or operated in a permitted Outdoor Service area after 9:30 p.m.
(g) Liability Insurance. Any request for such permit must include an agreement by the
licensed premise and property owner to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Menasha
for any damages or liabilities whatsoever resulting from the Outdoor Service on the
public right-of-way/sidewalk or other public property. As evidence of liability insurance,
the permit holder shall furnish a Certificate of Insurance, on a form acceptable to the City,
evidencing the existence of adequate liability insurance naming the City of Menasha, its
employees and agents as additional insureds in the amount not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000). Whenever such policy is cancelled, not renewed, or materially
changed the insurer and the permit holder shall notify the City of Menasha by certified
mail.
(h) Application Procedures. The procedure to obtain a permit for Outdoor Restaurant
Service on the public right-of-way/sidewalk or other public property shall consist of the
following:
(1) The applicant shall submit the following information to the City Clerk at least ten
(10) days prior to the next scheduled Common Council meeting:
a. An application and fee as established by the Common Council.
Updated: 5/8/2017
b. A drawing to show the right-of-way/sidewalk or other public property to
be utilized for Outdoor Service and the location, number and size of the
proposed amenities including but not limited to tables and chairs.
c. Liability agreement as described in 7-8-2(g).
d. Any other material necessary to evaluate the application.
(2) The City Clerk shall distribute copies of the application material to the Director of
Public Works, Public Health Director, the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, the
Community Development Director, and the City Attorney who shall make such
appropriate recommendations to the Common Council prior to its consideration.
The application shall be placed on the agenda of the next scheduled Common
Council meeting.
(3) After consideration of the recommendations of City staff, the Common Council
may grant a permit for Outdoor Restaurant Service on the public right-ofway/
sidewalk or other public property by majority vote. The Common Council
shall have discretion in applying conditions or limitations to the permit as deemed
necessary.
(4) All permits are valid on April 1 and expire on November 30 of the same year of
its issuance. Applicants may reapply for a new permit on an annual basis.
(f) Revocation. The approval of an Outdoor Service area permit is conditional at all times.
An Outdoor Service area permit may be revoked or suspended by the city when necessary
to protect the public health, safety, or welfare; to prevent nuisance from developing or
continuing; in emergency situations; or due to nonconformance with this section, the
Municipal Code, or applicable state or federal law.
(1) The Chief of Police, Police Lieutenant or Police Sergeant may order such Outdoor
Service to cease for the balance of that day if, in his/her discretion, the
circumstances so warrant.
(2) The Mayor, Chief of Police, or designee, without notice, may close an Outdoor
Service area at any time if the health safety, welfare or good order of the city is
threatened.
(3) The Common Council may temporarily or permanently revoke the permit by
majority vote due to violations of the Menasha Code of Ordinances or other
circumstances deemed appropriate for revocation.
(g) Penalties. Any violations of the requirements listed in this section shall be subject to the
penalties listed in Section 1-1-7 of the Menasha Code of Ordinances.
120294
7:1
CHAPTER 9
Tattoo Parlors
SEC. 7-9-1 REGULATION AND LICENSING OF TATTOO PARLORS.
(a) PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall engage in the business of tattooing or body
piercing in the City of Menasha without a permit, permanently or temporarily, on a profit or
non-profit basis.
(b) ENFORCEMENT. The Director of Public Health shall be charged with the enforcement of
this Section.
(c) FEE. The Board of Health, with the approval of the Common Council, shall set the permit
fees.
(d) APPLICATION AND INVESTIGATIONS. The State of Wisconsin must license any
artist operating as a tattooist or any person practicing body piercing. No City permit shall be
issued unless the Director of Public Health/Health Officer or City Sanitarian has first
inspected the premises and method of operation. Should the permit be denied, the applicant
may appeal that decision to the Administration Committee.
(e) MINORS.
1. It shall be unlawful to tattoo any person under the age of eighteen (18) years without
written parental consent.
2. It shall be unlawful to body pierce any person under the age of sixteen (16).
3. It shall be unlawful to body pierce any person 16 or 17 years of age without written
parental consent.
4. The tattooist or body piercer must maintain such written parental consent for not less
than 2 years after the date of the consent.
(f) PERMIT, RULES TO BE POSTED. The permit, together with any rules promulgated by
the Director of Public Health/Health Officer pursuant to Subsection (g) and this Ordinance
shall be posted at all times in the licensed premises in a conspicuous location.
(g) DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH. With the aid of the Board of Health, said officer
shall promulgate rules and regulations reasonably necessary to insure the safe and sanitary
operation of tattooing or body piercing establishments. The rules and regulations, or
amendments, shall be effective upon filing them with the office of City Clerk. Any person
aggrieved under the rules and regulations may appeal same to the Board of Health.
(h) STATUTORY REFERENCE. S. 252.23, 252.24(4), 252.245(9), Wis. Stats., HFS Chapter
173.
(1) Any establishment required by this section to pay any fee may, in addition to any
other penalties, also be required to pay a permit fee equal to twice the amount of the
normal fee if the failure is due to a late payment, insufficient funds or account closed
checks, or for any other reason the City ha snot received the proper payment.
(2) Any establishment required by this section to pay any fee may, in addition to any
other penalties, also be required to pay a permit fee equal to twice the amount of the
normal fee if such establishment opens for business without paying the required fee.
The Public Health Director, or designee, may also order such establishment to close
until the fee is paid.
1 4/30/2018
Title 7 – Licensing and Regulation
CHAPTER 10
Hotel and Motel Room Tax
SEC. 7-10-1 DEFINITIONS.
In addition to those terms defined in this Section, the terms used in this Ordinance shall have the definition, if
any, ascribed to them in §66.0615 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(a) “CVB” shall mean the Fox Cities Convention & Visitors Bureau, Inc., a Wisconsin nonstock
corporation, and its’ successors.
(b) “Exhibition Center Bonds” shall mean the Redevelopment Authority of the City of Appleton,
Wisconsin Taxable Lease Revenue Bonds, Series 2018 (Fox Cities Exhibition Center Project), issued
to finance or refinance the construction and related costs of the Fox Cities Exhibition Center, and any
additional bonds issued to refinance said bonds.
(c) “Fiscal Agent” shall mean a financial institution acting in the capacity as an agent on behalf of the
City for the receipt and allocation of the Room Taxes in accordance with this Ordinance.
(d) “Fiscal Agency Agreement” shall mean an agreement entered into by and among the Municipalities,
the Room Tax Commission, and the Fiscal Agent that sets forth the duties of the Fiscal Agent with
respect to the Room Taxes as described in this Ordinance.
(e) “Fox Cities Tourism Zone” shall mean that geographic area encompassing the City of Appleton,
Wisconsin; the City of Kaukauna, Wisconsin; the City of Neenah, Wisconsin, the Village of
Kimberly, Wisconsin, the Village of Little Chute, Wisconsin; the Town of Grand Chute, Wisconsin;
the Town of Neenah, Wisconsin, the Village of Fox Crossing, Wisconsin; the City of Menasha,
Wisconsin; the Village of Sherwood, Wisconsin; and that may in the future include any municipality
that hereafter becomes a party to the Room Tax Commission Agreement.
(f) “Operators” shall mean hotelkeepers, motel operator, lodging marketplaces, owners of short-term
rentals, and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public, which are
located in the City and are obligated to pay Room Taxes under this Ordinance.
(g) “Pledge Agreement” shall mean any pledge agreement entered into by the Municipalities and the
Room Tax Commission, pursuant to which a portion of the Room Tax is pledged to pay a particular
project or purpose in furtherance of the purposes of the Room Tax set forth in this Ordinance, which
includes the Exhibition Center Bonds and any Tourism Facilities Bonds.
(h) “Quarterly Payment Date” shall mean each January 31, April 30, July 31, and October 31, each of
which is the last day of the month next succeeding the end of a calendar quarter.
(i) “Room Tax” shall mean a tax on the privilege of furnishing, at retail, except sales for resale, rooms
or lodging to transients by the Operators pursuant to the Room Tax Act.
2 4/30/2018
(j) “Room Tax Act” shall mean §66.0615 of the Wisconsin Statutes, as amended from time to time.
(k) “Room Tax Commission” shall mean the Fox Cities Room Tax Commission created by the
Municipalities within the Fox Cities Tourism Zone pursuant to the Room Tax Commission
Agreement in order to coordinate tourism promotion and tourism development within the Fox Cities
Tourism Zone.
(l) “Room Tax Commission Agreement” shall mean the Amended and Restated Room Tax
Commission Agreement, dated November 24, 2015 entered into by and among the Municipalities
and the Room Tax Commission, as amended from time to time.
(m) “Tourism Facilities Bonds” shall mean any one or more series of bonds issued to finance or
refinance the construction and related costs of projects undertaken by or on behalf of the
Municipalities in furtherance of the Tourism Facilities Room Tax, and any additional bonds issued to
refinance said bonds.
SEC. 7-10-2 IMPOSITION OF ROOM TAX.
(a) Pursuant to the Room Tax Act, there is hereby imposed a ten percent (10%) Room Tax on the
privilege of furnishing, at retail, except sales for resale, rooms or lodging to transients, by the
Operators. Operators shall remit all Room Taxes to (i) the City Treasurer or (ii) to a Fiscal Agent on
behalf of the City pursuant to a Fiscal Agency Agreement in accordance with the requirements of
this Ordinance and the Room Tax Act. Such ten percent (10%) Room Tax shall be allocated as
follows:
(1) Two and eighty-five hundredths percent (2.85%) shall be imposed and allocated toward the
support of the CVB, to be used for the promotion of the Fox Cities Tourism Zone as a
tourism destination (“CVB Room Tax”)
(2) Three percent (3%) shall be imposed (subject to sunset as provided in subsection hereof) and
allocated toward payment of debt service on the Exhibition Center Bonds in accordance with
a Pledge Agreement (“Exhibition Center Room Tax”).
(3) One and fifteen hundredths percent (1.15%) (“Municipal Room Tax”) shall be imposed and
retained by the City of Menasha to be used for general tourism support and development in
the Fox Cities Tourism Zone in accordance with the requirements of the Room Tax Act.
(4) Three percent (3%) shall be imposed and allocated toward the support of amateur sports
facilities within the Fox Cities Tourism Zone and/or other facilities which are reasonably
likely to generate paid overnight stays at more than one hotel, motel, or other lodging
establishment within the Fox Cities Tourism Zone (“Tourism Facilities Room Tax”).
(b) The City or its Fiscal Agent shall forward the Room Taxes it has received, to be used as described
above, to the following parties: (i) the CVB Room Tax to the CVB; (ii) the Exhibition Center Room
Tax as required under the related Pledge Agreement; (iii) the Municipal Room Tax to the City; and
(iv) the Tourism Facilities Room Tax to the Room Tax Commission or its designee on its behalf
(including the CVB), or as otherwise required under a Pledge Agreement.
3 4/30/2018
(c) EXPIRATION OF EXHIBITION CENTER ROOM TAX. The Exhibition Center Room Tax
shall sunset and expire upon full payment of all outstanding Exhibition Center Bonds and any
related outstanding fees or expenses therefor, at which time the Room Tax shall be reduced by three
percent (3%) with such reductions being deemed to be the share of the Room Tax allocated to the
Exhibition Center Room Tax. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Operators may not discontinue
collection of the Exhibition Center Room Tax until the City of Menasha provides notice that the
Exhibition Center Room Tax has been terminated by operation of this Ordinance. Exhibition Center
Room Tax revenues collected that are not needed to pay the Exhibition Center Bonds or any related
outstanding fees or expenses shall be forwarded to the CVB and reallocated to the purposes of the
Tourism Facilities Room Tax.
(d) PRIORITY OF PAYMENT. In the event any Operator fails to remit the entire Room Tax
amounts due on any Quarterly Payment Date under this Ordinance, the City directs that the
amounts actually received by the City (or its Fiscal Agent) shall be applied in the following
priority order:
(1) first, to the CVB Room Tax until paid in full;
(2) second, to the Exhibition Center Room Tax, if any, until paid in full;
(3) third, to the Tourism Facilities Room Tax until paid in full; and
(4) fourth, to the Municipal Room Tax.
(e) TOURISM ENTITY. The CVB shall act as the “tourism entity,” as that term is defined in the
Room Tax Act, for purposes of providing staff, support services and assistance to the Room Tax
Commission in developing and implementing programs to promote the Fox Cities Tourism Zone
to visitors, as more fully set forth in an agreement between the Room Tax Commission and the
CVB. The CVB may also hold and administer the Tourism Facilities Room Tax on behalf of the
Room Tax Commission in furtherance of the purpose of the Tourism Facilities Room Tax, except
when a related Pledge Agreement is in effect.
SEC. 7-10-3 COLLECTION AND ADMINISTRATION OF ROOM TAX.
(a) This Ordinance shall be administered by the City Treasurer. The tax imposed by this Ordinance shall
be payable on each Quarterly Payment Date to the City (or to a Fiscal Agent on behalf of the City
pursuant to a Fiscal Agency Agreement). A report shall be filed by each Operator with the City’s
Treasurer (or with a Fiscal Agent) on or before each Quarterly Payment Date. Such report shall
show the gross room receipts of the preceding calendar quarter from such retail furnishing of rooms
or lodging, the amount of Room Tax imposed for such period and such other information as the City
of Menasha deems necessary. Every Operator required to file such quarterly report shall, with the
first report, elect to file an annual report based on either the calendar year or its fiscal year. Such
annual report shall be filed within ninety (90) days of the close of each such calendar or fiscal year.
The annual return shall summarize the quarterly reports, shall reconcile and adjust for errors in the
quarterly reports, and shall contain certain such additional information as the City of Menasha
requires. Such annual reports shall be signed by a representative of the Operator or its duly
authorized agent, but need not be verified by oath. The City of Menasha may, for good cause, extend
4 4/30/2018
the time of filing any report, but in no event shall such extension be longer than one (1) month after
the due date.
(b) PERMIT REQUIRED. Every Operator under this Ordinance shall file with the City Treasurer an
application for a permit for each place of business that is required to collect Room Tax hereunder.
Every application for a permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the City of Menasha and
shall set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the
location of place of business, and such other information as the City of Menasha requires. The
application shall be signed by the owner if a sole proprietor and, if not a sole proprietor, by the
person authorized to act on behalf of such sellers. At the time of making an application, the applicant
shall pay the City of Menasha an initial fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each permit. A permit
issued hereunder is non-transferable.
SEC. 7-10-4 ENFORCEMENT.
The City of Menasha shall enforce this Ordinance in accordance with the Room Tax
Act.
(a) PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS. In addition to the Schedule of Forfeiture set forth in subsection
(c) herein, any Operator in violation of the terms of this Ordinance by failing to obtain and maintain a
permit, when such permit is required, shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $200.00 for each
violation. Each room or unit separately rented or offered for rent, and each day of such rental or
offer for rental of such unit shall be a separate violation. In addition, injunctive relief is hereby
authorized to discontinue any violation of this Ordinance. Any Operator deemed to have violated
any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be obligated to pay the costs of prosecution, in addition
to actual attorney fees expended in the course of said enforcement. The City of Menasha may revoke
or suspend any permit issued hereunder for failure to comply with the provisions hereof.
(b) LIABILITY FOR TAX ON SALE OR TRANSFER OF BUSINESS. If any Operator liable for
any amount of tax under this Ordinance sells or transfers all or substantially all of its interest in its
hotel, motel or other lodging accommodation, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient
amounts from the purchase price to pay any amount of Room Tax liability due through the sale or
transfer date until the Operator produces a receipt from the City Treasurer that its liability has been
paid in full or a certificate stating that no Room Tax amount is due. If a successor Operator subject
to the tax imposed by this Ordinance fails to withhold such amount from the purchase price as
required, such successor Operator shall become personally liable for payment of the Room Tax
amount it is required to withhold.
(c) SCHEDULE OF FORFEITURE. In addition to paying the Room Taxes due hereunder, any
Operator that has failed to pay any Room Tax when due shall be required to pay a forfeiture in an
amount equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the Room Tax due from the Operator to the City of
Menasha for the previous year and unpaid, or Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000), whichever is less.
(d) CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION. To the extent permitted by law, the information
provided to the City of Menasha under §66.0615(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes shall remain
confidential; provided, however, that the City of Menasha or any employee thereof may use such
5 4/30/2018
information in the discharge of duties imposed by law or of the duties of his or her office or by order
of a court. Persons violating the provisions of this subsection may be required to forfeit not less than
One Hundred Dollars ($100) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500).
SEC. 7-10-5 SUPERSEDE CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; SEVERABILITY.
This Ordinance continues, amends, and restates the Prior Ordinance. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are repealed to the extent of such conflict. The invalidity of any
section or provision of this Ordinance hereby passed and approved shall not invalidate other sections or
provisions thereof.
120294
7:1
CHAPTER 11
Miscellaneous Business Licenses
SEC. 7-11-1 POOL AND BILLIARD ROOMS; BOWLING ALLEYS.
(a) LICENSE. No person shall within the City keep, operate or engage in the operations of a
pool hall, billiard parlor or bowling alley to be used or patronized by others for hire, without
a license therefor.
(b) LICENSE APPLICATION. Application for license to own or operate a bowling alley,
billiard table(s), pool table(s) or shuffleboard tables(s) or similar devices within the City
shall be made to the City Clerk, giving the applicant's name, residence, a description of the
operation for which a license is requested to include a description of the device for which the
license is requested, the interest of the applicant in such device(s), a description of the
premises upon which said device shall be operated and maintained, the name of the owner of
the device(s), and whether or not such device(s) are situated upon any premises licensed for
the sale of either intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages, or both, and, if so, the
exact nature of such business and the license under which it is operated. At the time of filing
such application with the Clerk, the applicant shall pay the Clerk the proper license fee as
stated in Subsection (e).
(c) TRANSFER OF LICENSE. Every license issued pursuant to this Section may, for a fee of
Ten dollars ($10.00) be transferred by the City Clerk from one (1) premises to another within
the City but no license issued pursuant to this Section may be transferred by the licensee to
any other person.
(d) DURATION OF LICENSE. Licenses issued pursuant to this Section expire on June 30 of
each year.
(e) LICENSE FEES. The fees for licenses granted under this Section are:
(1) For each pool or billiard table used in the licensed premises: Five Dollars ($5.00)
per year.
(2) For each bowling alley: Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per year for each alley.
(3) For each shuffleboard table: Five Dollars ($5.00) per year.
SEC. 7-11-2 TRANSIENT AND TEMPORARY PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENTS.
(a) LICENSE REQUIRED.
(1) No person shall maintain or operated any transient or temporary public entertainment
within the City without first obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
(2) This Section does not require a license for the giving of fairs, lectures, concerts,
exhibitions or entertainments of a scientific, historical, political, literary or musical
character for humane, religious, charitable or scientific purposes.
(b) DEFINITION. A transient or temporary public entertainment is one to which the public
may gain admission by payment of an admission charge. It includes shows, circuses,
exhibitions, carnivals and vaudeville.
(c) APPLICATION. Application for carnival licenses shall be made by the applicant to the
Common Council in writing at least ten (10) days before the planned event and all of the
information regarding insurance, etc., shall be filed within ten (10) days and referred to the
Council for examination of the qualifications, character and reputation of the applicant and
120294
7:2
into the desirability of permitting the carnival to operate, show or exhibit in the City.
(d) REQUIREMENTS.
(1) Insurance Required. No license shall be granted unless the applicant therefor shall
have filed with the City Clerk a public liability insurance policy to cover accidents to
its patrons in the amount of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00), with the condition
that the applicant shall indemnify and save harmless the City and its officers and
agents and citizens against any injuries and damages resulting or arising from the
conducting of any carnival for which the license is issued or from the performance
by the applicant or his agents of any negligence incident to or connected with the
conduct of such carnival and that the applicant shall pay all judgments, costs and
charges that may be recovered against the City or any of its officers or agents by
reason of the conduct of such carnival.
(2) License Fees Required. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall pay a
permit fee for the operation or maintenance of the public entertainment as follows:
Carnivals -- Fifty Dollars ($50.00).
Circuses -- Fifty Dollars ($50.00).
Public Entertainment -- Ten Dollars ($10.00) per day, Twenty-five Dollars
($25.00) per week.
All public entertainments listed in subsection (b) shall be exempt from any license
fee if sponsored by a nonprofit organization.
(3) Posting of License. Such permits when issued shall be prominently displayed while
the carnival is in operation.
(4) Inspection of Mechanical Devices. The applicant shall indicate the date of the last
State inspection of rides, merry-go-rounds and other mechanical devices. The City
reserves the right to require inspections of all mechanical devices that would be
available to the public. All inspection costs shall be paid for by the licensee.
(e) USE OF PARKS. Parking of heavy equipment by such travelling organization or any
organization or persons on park grounds of the City of Menasha is expressly prohibited.
Heavy equipment shall mean trucks, trailers, house trailers, and so forth. Nothing in this
Section shall prohibit such shows from unloading their equipment and then so journeying to
another location for the purpose of parking.
(f) REVOCATION. Any license granted by the Common Council under the provisions of this
Section may be revoked by the Mayor, including when the person who maintains, owns,
controls or operates such carnival permits the violation of any provisions of this Code of
Ordinances or State laws or where, in the opinion of the Mayor, the carnival is deemed
undesirable or presents a threat to the public safety. Revocations or suspensions may be
appealed to the Common Council.
SEC. 7-11-3 MECHANICAL ENTERTAINMENT DEVICES.
(a) LICENSE REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall own or operate any coin
operated device of any kind or nature, or any other mechanical or similar entertainment
device unless such device shall be licensed as hereinafter provided.
(b) APPLICATION. Application for license to own or operate a coin operated music device or
mechanical skill or other musical devices in the City of Menasha shall be made to the City
Clerk upon a form furnished by him for that purpose. The application form shall contain a
statement of the applicant's name and residence, type of device for which license is desired,
together with a description which will clearly identify such device, the name of the owner,
120294
7:3
and such other material facts as may be necessary.
(c) FEE.
(1) The annual fee to be paid for each such license shall be the sum of Ten Dollars
($10.00) for coin operated mechanical devices or for other music devices for which
license is required in Subsection (a) and Ten Dollars ($10.00) for coin operated
mechanical devices.
(2) The license granted hereunder shall expire on the 30th day of June and thereafter
annual licenses shall be issued to expire on the 30th day of June of each succeeding
year after same is granted.
SEC. 7-11-4 SECOND HAND DEALERS.
(a) LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall carry on the business of a dealer in second hand
furniture, household goods, or other articles of merchandise in the City of Menasha without
having first obtained a license therefor.
(b) LICENSE FEE. The license shall be a fee of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per year. The license
required by section 7-11-4 runs from July 1st – June 30th.
(c) RECORDS TO BE KEPT. Every such dealer shall keep a book in which shall be written
at the time of the purchases of any article or thing in the way of his business an accurate
account and description of the article or things so purchased, the price paid therefor, the
precise time of making such purchase and the name and address of the person from whom
such purchase was made. Said record books shall be available to the Police Department at
all times.
(d) LIMITATIONS. Nothing in this Section shall apply to the resale of merchandise where
such merchant does not engage in or carry on the business of buying second-hand
merchandise, nor shall this Section apply to sales made wholly on behalf of charity that is an
organization conducting such sale, having received tax exempt status from the Wisconsin
Department of Revenue.
SEC. 7-11-5 JUNK DEALERS REGULATED.
(a) REGULATIONS OF JUNK DEALERS.
(1) No person or persons, association, partnership, firm or corporation shall hereafter in
the City of Menasha, keep, conduct, or maintain any building, structure, yard or
place for keeping, storing or piling in commercial quantities, whether temporarily,
irregularly, or continually or for the buying or selling at retail or wholesale or dealing
in any old, used or second-hand materials of any kind, including cloth, rages,
clothing, paper, rubbish, bottles, rubber, iron, brass, copper or other metal, furniture,
used motor vehicles or the parts thereof or other articles which from its worn
condition renders it practically useless for the purpose for which it was made and
which is commonly classed as junk, nor shall any person or persons, association,
partnership, firm or corporation engage in the business of buying or selling junk as
described above in the City of Menasha, whether with a fixed place of business or as
an itinerant peddler, without first having obtained and paid for a license as
hereinafter provided. One carrying on the aforesaid business shall be referred to
herein as a "junk dealer."
(2) Every applicant for a license to engage in the business of junk dealing shall file with
120294
7:4
the City Clerk a written application upon a form prepared and provided by the City,
signed by the applicant or applicants. Said application shall state:
a. The name and residence of the applicant as an individual, partnership, or
firm, or the names of the principal officers and their residences if the
applicant is an association or corporation.
b. Whether the applicant or applicants or officers or manager of applicant has
been employed by a junk dealer or has been a junk dealer.
c. The detailed nature of the business to be conducted and the kind of materials
to be collected, bought, sold, or otherwise handled.
d. The premises where such business is to be located or carried on.
(b) DUTIES OF CITY OFFICIALS. The City Clerk shall report such application to the Chief
of Police, Health Officer, Fire Chief, and Building Inspector who shall inspect or cause to be
inspected such premises to determine whether it complies with all laws, ordinances, rules,
and regulations. Said premises and all structures thereon shall be so situated and constructed
that the business of junk dealing may be carried on in a sanitary manner, shall contain no fire
hazards, and shall be arranged so that thorough inspection may be made at all times by the
proper health, fire, building and police authorities.
(c) LICENSE FEE. Every junk dealer shall pay an annual license fee of Fifty Dollars ($50.00).
All licenses shall be issued as of July 1 and shall continue in force until June 30 next
succeeding the date of issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked.
(d) CONDITION PRECEDENT OF ISSUANCE OF LICENSE. A fence shall be erected,
constructed and maintained in proper repair surrounding the premises around which such
junk is stored, no less than eight (8) feet high; such fence shall contain no more than twentyfive
percent (25%) void.
(e) FURTHER REGULATIONS.
(1) No junk dealer shall purchase or acquire from any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years any junk other than rags or paper, without the written consent of a parent
or guardian. No item shall be acquired from an intoxicated person.
(2) The contents of the premises of every junk dealer shall be arranged in an orderly
manner with all similar things located together so as to facilitate inspection by the
proper authorities. The premises of every junk dealer shall be subject to inspection
by the proper municipal authorities at any time.
(3) All paper that is stored shall be baled and all rags shall be baled or bagged; and both
shall be kept within a building on the premises.
Updated: 2/6/2012
7:1
CHAPTER 12
Licensees to Pay Local Claims; Appellate Procedures;
Insurance Requirements
SEC. 7-12-1 LICENSEES REQUIRED TO PAY LOCAL TAXES, ASSESSMENTS AND
CLAIMS; APPELLATE PROCEDURES.
(a) The City shall not issue or renew any license to transact any business within the City of
Menasha:
(1) For any purposes for which taxes, assessments or other claims of the City are delinquent
and unpaid.
(2) For any person who is delinquent in payment:
a. Of any taxes, assessments or other claims owed the City; or
b. Of any forfeiture resulting from a violation of any City Ordinance.
(b) This Section shall apply to licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of Title 7 of this Code of
Ordinances, except Chapter 1.
(c) An application for renewal of a license subject to this Chapter shall be denied pursuant to the
provisions of Subsection (a) only following notice and opportunity for hearing as provided by
Subsection (d) below.
(d) Prior to any denial of an application for renewal of a license, including denials pursuant to
Subsection (a), the applicant shall be given notice and opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter
provided:
(1) With respect to licenses renewable under Chapter 2 of Title 7 of this Code of
Ordinances, notice and opportunity for hearing shall be as provided by Section 125.12,
Wis. Stats., as amended from time to time, and in Title 7, Chapter 2.
(2) With respect to licenses other than those described in Subsection (a) herein, the
Common Council or its assignee shall notify the applicant in writing of the City's
intention not to renew the license and shall provide the applicant with an opportunity for
hearing. The notice shall state the reasons for the intended action and shall establish a
date, not less than three (3) days nor more than ten (10) days after the date of the notice
on which the applicant shall appear before the Common Council. If the applicant shall
fail to appear before the Common Council on the date indicated on the notice, the
Council shall deny the application for renewal. If the applicant appears before the
Council on the date indicated in the notice and denies that the reasons for non renewal
exist, the Common Council shall conduct a hearing with respect to the matter. At the
hearing, both the City and the applicant may produce witnesses, cross examine
witnesses and be represented by counsel. The applicant shall, upon request, be provided
a written transcript of the hearing at the applicant's expense. If the Common Council
determines the applicant shall not be entitled to renewal pursuant to Subsection (a), the
application for renewal shall be denied.
(e) Where an individual, business or corporation wishes to appeal the City Clerk's decision not to
issue a license or permit under this Title on grounds other than those specified in Subsections
(a) through (d) above, the applicant may file a request in writing with the Clerk that the matter
be referred to the Common Council. A public hearing shall be scheduled within fourteen (14)
calendar days by the Common Council. All parties may be represented by counsel. The
Council shall consider all relevant information and shall render a decision which shall be
binding.
Updated: 2/6/2012
7:2
SEC. 7-12-2 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
All organizations with a special Class B fermented malt beverage license, whether they are
unincorporated or not, before they can use a municipally owned facility, and before they receive a
permit or license, must first file with the City Clerk evidence of insurability covering property damage
in the amount of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00), personal liability in the amount of One Hundred
Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) per person injured, and Three Hundred Thousand Dollars
($300,000.00) in the aggregate.
CHAPTER 13
Escorts and Escort Services
Sec. 7-13-1. Definitions.
(a) For the purposes of this article, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Escort means any person who, for a fee, commission, salary, hire, profit, payment or other monetary
considerations accompanies or offers to accompany another person to or about social affairs,
entertainment or places of amusement or consorts with another person about any place of public resort or
within any private quarters or agrees to privately model lingerie, perform a striptease or perform in a
nude or semi-nude state for another person or persons.
Escort Service means service provided by any person who, for a fee commission, salary, hire, profit,
payment or other monetary considerations, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons who may
accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement or consorts
with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters or agrees to privately model
lingerie, perform a striptease or perform in a nude or semi-nude state for another person or persons.
Person means any individual and is also extended and applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate.
Sec. 7-13-2. Exemptions.
This section does not apply to businesses, agencies and persons licensed by the State of Wisconsin or the
City of Menasha pursuant to a specific statute or ordinance, and employees employed by a business so
licensed and which performs an escort or an escort service function as a service merely incidental to the
primary function of such profession, employment or business and which do not hold themselves out to
the public as an escort or an escort service.
Sec. 7-13-3. License required.
(a) No escort service shall operate or provide service in the City of Menasha without first obtaining an
escort service license issued by the City of Menasha.
(b) No person shall escort in the City of Menasha unless employed by an escort service licensed by the
City of Menasha and property registered pursuant to §7-13-10.
(c) Any person, partnership or corporation which desires to operate or provide services from more than
one (1) location must have a license for each location.
(d) No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person, partnership or corporation.
(e) No person may advertise indicating that an escort service is available in the City of Menasha unless
that service possesses a valid license. No escort service may in any manner advertise its services as
licensed by the City of Menasha.
(f) Such license shall require a fee as established by the City Clerk and approved by the Common
Council.
Sec. 7-13-4. Application for license.
(a) Any person desiring to secure a license under this article shall make application to the City Clerk.
(b) The application for a license shall be on a form approved by the City Clerk. An applicant for a
license (which shall include each partner and limited partner of a partnership applicant, each officer and
director of a corporate applicant, each stockholder holding ten percent (10%) or more of the stock or
beneficial ownership and every other person who is interested directly in the ownership or operation of
the business) shall furnish the following information under oath:
(1) Name and address, including all aliases;
(2) Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(3) All residential addresses of the applicant for the past ten (10) years;
(4) The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for ten (10) years immediately
preceding the date of application;
(5) Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other state, county or city under an
escort service license or similar business license; whether the applicant has ever had such a
license revoked or suspended, the reason therefore and the business entity or trade name under
which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or revocation;
(6) All convictions and pending charges of felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violations, except
minor traffic violations;
(7) Fingerprints and photographs registration with the Menasha Police Department;
(8) The address of the escort service to be operated by the applicant;
(9) If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the name of the corporation, the
date and state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent and all officers and
directors of the corporation.
(c) A receipt from the finance Department showing payment of the appropriate fee shall be submitted
with the application. The amount of the non-refundable fee shall be on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
Sec. 7-13-5. Standards for license issuance.
(a) To receive a license to operate an escort service, an applicant must meet the following standards;
(1) If the applicant is an individual:
a. The applicant shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
b. Subject to Ch. 111, Wis. Stats., the applicant shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo
contendere, or no contest, to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution,
obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction;
c. The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation
which substantially relates to the licensed activity;
d. The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated this ordinance within five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
(2) If the applicant is a corporation:
a. All officers, directors and others required to be named under §7-13-4 shall be at least
eighteen (18) years of age;
b. Subject to Ch. 111, Wis. Stats., no officer, director or other person to be named under
§7-13-4 shall have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere, or no contest, to a felony or
any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature
in any jurisdiction;
c. No officer, director or other person required to be named under §7-13-4 shall have been
convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation which substantially relates to the
licensed activity;
d. No officer, director or other person required to be named under§7-13-4 shall have been
found to have previously violated this ordinance within five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of the application.
(3) If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of organization where two (2)
or more persons have a financial interest:
a. All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of
organization shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
b. No persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of
organization shall, Subject to Ch. 111, Wis. Stats., have been convicted of or pleaded nolo
contendere, or no contest, to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution,
obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction;
c. No persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of
organization shall have been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance
violation which substantially relates to the licensed activity;
d. No persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of
organization shall have been found to have previously violated this ordinance within five (5)
years immediately preceding the date of the application.
(4) No license shall be issued unless the Menasha Police Department has investigated the
applicant’s qualifications to be licensed.
(5) If any charges are currently pending which, if resulting in a conviction, would disqualify the
applicant pursuant to subsections (1), (2) or (3) above, the Administration Committee may
postpone action on the application until such time as the charge is resolved. Should the
Administration Committee fail to act upon an application within sixty (60) days of the resolution
of the charge, the application shall be deemed granted.
(6) Any business required to be licensed by this section may only be located in a General
Commercial Zoning District as defined by sec. 13-1-29. The business shall constitute an adult
establishment as defines under sec. 13 -1 – 160 (a) (7).
Sec. 7-13-6. Renewal of license.
(a) Every license issued pursuant to this article will terminate on December 31st following its
issuance, unless sooner revoked. Application for renewal shall be on a form provided by the City
Clerk.
(b) No renewal application will be considered filed in the office of the City Clerk unless it is
accompanied by the receipt of the Finance Department showing payment of the appropriate fee. The
amount of the renewal fee shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk.
Sec. 7-13-7. Denial of application.
Whenever an initial application is denied, the duties of the City Clerk and the rights of the applicant
shall be as set forth in the Menasha Municipal Code.
Sec. 7-13-8. Suspension, revocation or non-renewal of license.
(a) Any license issued under this article may be suspended for not less than ten (10) days nor more
than ninety (90) days, or revoked, pursuant to Menasha Municipal Code. The same provisions shall
apply to denial of an application for renewal of a license issued under this article.
(b) Any violation of the requirements of this article shall be grounds for revocation of a license
issued under this article.
Sec. 7-13-9. Responsibilities of the operator.
(a) The operator of an escort service shall maintain a registration of all employees or independent
contractors, showing the name and aliases used by the employee, home address, birth date, sex,
telephone numbers, social security number and date of employment and termination. The above
information on each employee shall be maintained in the register on the
premises for a period of three (3) years following termination.
(b) The operator of an escort service shall make the register of employees available immediately for
inspection by police upon demand of a member of the Menasha Police Department at all reasonable
times.
(c) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the
authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator’s negligent failure
to supervise the employee’s conduct. The operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in
the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
(d) Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the
operator’s license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
(e) No person shall escort or agree to escort a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
Sec. 7-13-10. Registration of employees.
(a) All operators or employees working for any escort service and independent contractors shall,
prior to beginning employment or contracted duties, obtain a photo identification card from the Police
Department Prior to issuance, the person shall provide:
(1) Name, address, birth date, any aliases used, telephone numbers, date of employment and
name of employer;
(2) Photographs and fingerprinting with the Menasha Police Department.
(b) Upon registration, the Menasha Police Department will provide to each registered employee or
independent contractor an identification card, provided by the Police Department, containing the
employee’s or independent contractor’s photograph identifying the person as such, which shall be
kept available for production upon request.
(c) All identification cards shall expire on December 31st following its issuance.
(d) The applicant shall pay a non-refundable fee, the amount of which is on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
(e) Any escort employed by more than one (1) escort service shall submit a separate registration for
each service by which the escort is employed.
Sec. 7-13-11. Penalties.
(a) Any person found to have violated any provisions of this article shall be subject to a forfeiture of
not more than five hundred dollars ($500). Every day shall constitute a new violation.
(b) Any licensed issued under this section may also be revoked if such license has been subject to two
or more convictions in a twelve month period or three or more convictions in a thirty-six month
period.
Sec. 7-13-12. Severability.
If any provision of this ordinance is deemed invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions of same.
CHAPTER 14
Short-Term Rental of Dwelling Units
SEC. 7-14-1 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the character and stability of the city’s neighborhoods by
limiting and regulating short-term rental of dwelling units and to ensure that accommodations
adequately provide for the health, safety and welfare of their occupants.
SEC. 7-14-2 Transient Rental Occupancy Requirements.
A. No person shall occupy, use, operate or manage, nor offer or negotiate to use, lease, or
rent a dwelling unit for short-term rental occupancy unless a short-term rental permit has
been issued to the owner of that dwelling.
B. The rental of a dwelling, or portion thereof for short-term occupancy shall be considered
a motel and be subject to compliance with the requirements of Municipal Code, Chapter
10, Hotel and Motel Room Tax.
C. A short-term rental permit is issued to a specific owner of a dwelling unit(s) and is not
transferable.
D. For the purposes of this subsection, an individual tenancy means a specific person or
group of persons who together occupy or are entitled to occupy a short-term rental
dwelling unit(s).
E. The minimum duration of tenancy for an individual occupant shall be one day.
F. The use of a dwelling for short-term occupancy shall not exceed one individual tenancy
within fourteen consecutive calendar days.
G. An individual tenancy described in Section 2 (F) shall commence on the first day that the
person(s) that constitute the individual tenancy occupy or are entitled to occupy the
dwelling unit.
H. The short-term rental occupancy of a dwelling unit, as permitted by subsection A of this
section shall comply with the standards of Section 3.
SEC. 7-14-3 Standards.
A. The short-term rental occupancy of a dwelling unit, as permitted by Section 2, shall
comply with the following standards:
1. Permit.
a. Any person who is permitted to engage in the rental of a dwelling for
short-term occupancy, pursuant to Section 2(A)(1), shall make application
to the city, upon suitable forms furnished by the city, for a revocable
transient rental permit accompanied by a fee as may be established by the
Common Council. The term of the permit shall be one (1) year
commencing from the date of permit issuance and must be renewed
annually. If complete application and applicable fee has not been received
by the city within 10 days of the termination date, the short-term rental
occupancy of the dwelling unit(s) shall be conclusively presumed to be
discontinued and the city shall commence the revocation of the permit
pursuant to the procedure described in Section 4(B).
b. The city shall issue the permit where it finds the standards of subsection
(A)(2) of this section are met.
2. The issuance of a short-term rental permit shall be subject to the following:
a. Inspection.
i. At the time of application for a new short-term rental permit
pursuant to Section 3(A)(1) the dwelling unit(s) shall be subject to
inspection by the building official or his designee. The purpose of
the inspection is to determine the conformance of the dwelling
with the requirements of Section 15-5 of the Housing Code of the
City of Menasha. Prior to the issuance of the short-term rental
permit, the owner of the dwelling unit(s) shall make all necessary
alterations to the dwelling required by the building official
pursuant to the Housing Code of the City of Menasha and the
Health Department official pursuant to Department of Health
Services 195 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
b. Occupancy.
i. The maximum occupancy for the dwelling shall be two persons per
bedroom and two additional persons (e.g., a two-bedroom dwelling
is permitted a maximum occupancy of six persons). The
maximum occupancy may be further limited by the requirements
of subsection (A)(2)(e) of this section. For the purpose of
establishing occupancy, a person is defined as an individual at least
two years of age.
ii. The maximum occupancy on the property shall be that determined
by the occupancy of the dwelling unit(s), per subsection
(4)(2)(b)(i) of this section. No recreational vehicle, travel trailer,
tent or other temporary shelter shall be used by any tenant on the
premises for living or sleeping purposes.
iii. When an owner applies for a building permit for a dwelling that
has a short-term rental occupancy permit that will increase the
occupancy of that dwelling unit(s), the owner will provide the city
documentation that additional off-street parking as required by
subsection (A)(2)(e) of this section will be provided.
c. Short-term Rental Room Tax. Compliance with the requirements for the
Municipal Code, Chapter 10, Hotel and Motel Room Tax is required.
d. Local Representative.
i. The property owner shall designate a local representative for the
short-term rental. For short-term rentals with three or more rental
units, there shall be a local representative who permanently resides
on the premises.
ii. The property owner or the designated local representative shall
maintain a guest and vehicle registry for each tenancy of the shortterm
rental. The register shall include the names, home addresses
and phone numbers of the tenants; the vehicle license plate
numbers of all vehicles used by the tenants, and the dates of the
rental period. The above information must be available for city
inspection upon request; failure to maintain or provide the required
information constitutes a violation and is grounds for a penalty
pursuant to Section 4.
iii. The local representative must be authorized by the owner of the
dwelling to respond to tenant and neighborhood questions or
concerns. The local representative shall serve as the initial contact
person if there are questions or complaints regarding the operation
of the dwelling for short-term rental purposes. The local
representative must respond to those complaints in a timely
manner to ensure that the use of the dwelling complies with the
standards for short-term rental occupancy, as well as other
pertinent city ordinance requirements pertaining to noise,
disturbances, or nuisances, as well as state law pertaining to the
consumption of alcohol, or the use of illegal drugs.
iv. If the police department is not able to contact the local
representative in a timely manner more than twice during the term
of the annual permit, this shall be considered a violation pursuant
to Section 5 and that violation shall be counted in the number of
violations assessed against the permit pursuant to Section 4.
v. The designated local representative may be changed by the permit
holder from time to time throughout the term of the permit.
However, to change the local representative, the permit holder
must file a revised permit application that includes the name,
address and telephone number of the new local representative.
Failure to notify the city of a change in the local representative
constitutes a violation pursuant to Section 4B and that violation
shall be counted in the number of violations assessed against the
permit pursuant to Section 4.
vi. The city will notify property owners and or residents within two
hundred feet of the dwelling of the name, address and telephone
number of the owner or the local representative. The purpose of
this notification is so that adjacent property owners and residents
can contact the responsible person to report and request the
resolution of problems associated with the operation of the shortterm
rental.
e. Parking. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each three
persons of dwelling occupancy, as determined by subsection (A)(2)(b)(i)
of this section; fractions shall be rounded to the next highest whole
number (e.g., a dwelling with a permitted occupancy of eight persons shall
provide three off-street parking spaces.) Each parking space shall be not
less than 9 feet in width and not less than 171 square feet in area. Where
the number of parking spaces required by this section cannot be provided
on-site, the permitted occupancy of the dwelling shall be reduced to
conform to the available amount of off-street parking (e.g., a dwelling
with a potential occupancy, pursuant to subsection (A)(2)(b) of this
section, of eight persons, which provides only two off-street parking
spaces shall have its occupancy limited to six persons.) No more vehicles
shall be parked on the property than there are designated off-street parking
spaces.
f. Permit Posting. The short-term rental permit shall be posted within the
dwelling adjacent to the front door. At a minimum, the permit will
contain the following information:
i. The name of the local representative and a telephone number
where the representative may be reached;
ii. The name and a telephone number where the property owner can
be reached;
iii. The telephone number of the Menasha Police Department;
iv. The maximum number of occupants permitted to stay in the
dwelling;
v. The maximum number of vehicles allowed to be parked on the
property; and
vi. The number and location of on-site parking spaces.
SEC. 7-14-4 Violations and Penalties.
A. Violations. The following conduct shall constitute a violation for which the penalties and
sanctions specified in Section 4B may be imposed.
1. Any property owner, or person acting as an agent for the property owner, such as
a motel, real estate broker or property manager, who arranges or otherwise
provides for short-term rental occupancy of a dwelling unit in violation of the
provisions of this section; or
2. The owner has failed to comply with the standards of Section 3; or
3. The owner has failed to pay the room tax as required by Municipal Code, Chapter
10, Hotel and Motel Room Tax; or
4. The tenants of the dwelling have created noise, disturbances, or nuisances, in
violation of the city municipal code, or violations of state law pertaining to the
consumption of alcohol, or the use of illegal drugs.
B. Penalties.
1. The permit holder is subject to the following penalties: written notice of violation,
suspension, or revocation of the license.
a. Written Notice of Violation. The city shall provide the permit holder with a
written notice of any violation of this section that has occurred. If
applicable, a copy of the warning notice shall be sent to the local
representative.
b. Suspension or Revocation of License. The city shall provide the permit
holder with a written notice of the permit suspension or revocation and the
reason for that suspension or revocation. The Administration Committee
shall conduct a due process hearing. During the hearing the permit holder
may present such evidence as may be relevant. At the conclusion of the
hearing, based on the evidence it has received, the Administration
Committee may uphold, modify, or overturn the decision to suspend or
revoke the permit based on the evidence it received.
2. A person who has had a short-term rental occupancy permit revoked shall not be
permitted to apply for a short term rental occupancy permit until at least one year
has lapsed since the date of revocation.
5/24/13
8:1
CHAPTER 1
Health and Sanitation
SEC. 8-1-1 PUBLIC HEALTH DIRECTOR; DUTIES AND POWERS.
(a) GENERAL DUTIES. The Public Health Director or other authorized City employee,
under the supervision of the Common Council meeting as the Board of Health, shall:
(1) Make an annual sanitary survey and maintain continuous sanitary supervision over
the covered territory.
(2) Make a periodic sanitary inspection of all school buildings, restaurants, dairies,
grocery stores and meat markets, and places of public assemblage and report thereon
to those responsible for the maintenance thereof.
(3) Promote the spread of information as to the cause, nature and prevention of
prevalent diseases and the preservation and improvement of health.
(4) Enforce the health laws, rules and regulations of the Wisconsin Department of
Health and Social Services, the State and the City, including the laws relating to
contagious diseases contained in Chapter 252, Wis. Stats., and Chapter HFS 145,
Wis. Adm. Code.
(5) Take steps necessary to secure prompt and full reports by physicians of
communicable diseases.
(6) Keep and deliver to his successor a record of all his official acts.
(7) Make required reports to the Department of Health and Social Services and an
annual report to the Common Council and such other report as they may request.
(b) MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES. The Public Health Director shall have authority to
procure at the expense of the City all record books, quarantine cards and other materials
needed by the Board of Health, except such as are furnished by the Wisconsin Department
of Health and Social Services.
(c) RECOMMEND SANITARY MEASURES. He shall, from time to time, recommend to
the Mayor such sanitary measures to be executed by the City as he shall deem necessary and
he shall discharge such other duties as may be imposed upon him by ordinance or resolution
of the Common Council.
(d) RULES TO BE OBEYED. The owners, occupants or persons in charge of or responsible
for the condition of any place or premise in the City of Menasha shall observe and obey the
general or special reasonable health rules and regulations as the Public Health Director, the
Common Council or other authorized City official may adopt in the interests of the public
health. No person shall refuse or neglect to obey such general or special rules, regulations
or direction under the provisions of this Chapter.
(e) REPORTS.
(1) To Department of Health and Social Services. The Public Health Director shall
make special reports when required to the Department of Health and Social
Services.
(2) Annual Reports. The Public Health Director shall make an annual report to the
Mayor and Common Council as to the state of health of the City. He shall also from
time to time make such other reports and recommend such sanitary measures to the
Mayor as he may deem necessary.
(3) Assistance from Police and Citizens. The police and all magistrates and other civil
officers and all citizens shall aid, to the utmost of their power, the Public Health
5/24/13
8:2
Director in the discharge of his duties, and on his requisition the Chief of Police
shall serve or detail one or more police officers to serve the notices issued by the
officer and to perform such other duties as he may require.
State Law Reference: Wis. Stats. Ch. 251, 252, 254; and Ch. HFS 145, Wis. Administrative
Code.
SEC. 8-1-2 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Board of Health may make reasonable and general rules for the enforcement of the provisions
of this Chapter and for the prevention of the creation of health nuisances and the protection of the
public health and welfare and may, where appropriate, require the issuance of licenses and permits.
All such regulations shall have the same effect as ordinances, and any person violating any of such
regulations and any lawful order of the Board shall be subject to the general penalty provided for in
this Code.
SEC. 8-1-3 HUMAN HEALTH HAZARDS.
(a) DEFINED. A human health hazard is any source of filth or cause of sickness.
(b) DUTY TO ABATE. The Public Health Director/ Health Officer, and the Board of Health,
shall abate human health hazards pursuant to Ch. 254, Wis. Stats., which is adopted by
reference and made a part of this Section.
State Law Reference: Ch. 254, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 8-1-4 KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK.
(a) SANITARY REQUIREMENTS. All structures, pens, buildings, stables, coops or yards
wherein animals or fowl are kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free
of rodents, vermin and objectionable odors.
(b) ANIMALS EXCLUDED FROM FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS. No
person shall take or permit to remain any dog, cat or other live animal on or upon any
premises where food is sold, offered for sale or processed for consumption by the general
public. This provision shall not apply to dogs trained to lead the visually handicapped.
SEC. 8-1-5 DEPOSIT OF DELETERIOUS SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any public street or on any public ground or on
any private property not his own any refuse, garbage, litter, waste material or liquid or any other
objectionable material or liquid. When any such material is placed on the person's own private
property, it shall be properly enclosed and covered so as to prevent the same from becoming a
public nuisance.
5/24/13
8:3
SEC. 8-1-6 DESTRUCTION OF NOXIOUS WEEDS.
(a) A person owning, occupying or controlling land within the City corporate limits shall
destroy all noxious weeds on the land. All noxious weeds shall be destroyed prior to the
time in which such plants mature to the bloom or flower stage.
(b) The City Clerk shall annually on or before May 15 publish a notice that every person is
required by law to destroy all noxious weeds on lands in the City which he or she owns,
occupies or controls. A joint notice with other towns or municipalities may be utilized.
(c) If the owner or occupant shall neglect to destroy any weeds as required by such notice, then
the Weed Commissioner or designee of the City shall give written notice by hand delivery,
mail or email to the owner or occupant of any lands upon which the weeds shall be growing
to the effect that the said Weed Commissioner or designee after at least twenty-four (24)
hours, will proceed to destroy or cause to be destroyed all such weeds growing upon said
lands and that the cost thereof will be assessed as a tax upon the lands upon which such
weeds are located under the provisions of Sections 66.0517 and 66.0627, Wis. Stats. In
case the owner or occupant shall further neglect to comply with such notice, then the Weed
Commissioner or designee shall destroy such weeds or cause them to be destroyed and the
expense thereof, including the cost of billing and other necessary administrative expenses,
shall be charged against such lots and be collected as a special tax thereon.
(d) Noxious weeds means any weed designated as a noxious weed by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources by rule or by the common council by ordinance or
resolution, including but not limited to the following:
Cirsium Arvense (Canada Thistle)
Ambrosia artemisiifolia (Common Ragweed)
Ambrosia trifida (Great Ragweed)
Euphorbia esula (Leafy Spurge)
Convolvulus arvensis (Creeping Jenny) (Field Bind Weed)
Tragopogon dubius (Goat's Beard)
Rhus radicans (Poison Ivy)
Cirsium vulgaries (Bull Thistle)
Pastinaca sativa (Wild Parsnip)
Arctium minus (Burdock)
Xanthium strumarium (Cocklebur)
Amaranthus retroflexus (Pigweed)
Chenopodium album (Common Lambsquarter)
Rumex Crispus (Curled Dock)
Cannabis sativa (Hemp)
Plantago lancellata (English Plantain)
Sow Thistle
Wild Mustard
Poison Oak
Purple Loosestrife
Multiflora Rose
(e) The Weed Commissioner shall be appointed by the Mayor on or before May 15 in each
year and shall have the powers and duties enumerated in this SEC. and in Section
66.0517, Wis. Stats., except that the person shall receive no compensation for his or her
services other than his or her regular salary.
5/24/13
8:4
SEC. 8-1-7 REGULATION OF LENGTH OF LAWN AND GRASSES.
(a) PURPOSE. This Section is adopted due to the unique nature of the problems associated
with lawns, grasses and weeds being allowed to grow to excessive length in the City of
Menasha.
(b) PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED. The Common Council finds that lawns, grasses
and weeds on lots or parcels of land which exceed eight (8) inches in length adversely
affect the public health and safety of the public in that they tend to emit pollen and other
discomforting bits of plants, constitute a fire hazard and a safety hazard in that debris can
be hidden in the grass, interferes with the public convenience and adversely affects
property values of other land within the City. For that reason, any lawn, grass or weed on
a lot or other parcel of land which exceeds eight (8) inches in length is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance, except for property located in a designated floodplain area and/or
wetland area.
(c) NUISANCES PROHIBITED. No person shall permit any public nuisance as defined in
Subsection (b) above to remain on any premises owned or controlled by the person within
the City.
(d) ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
(1) If the Weed Commissioner or designee shall determine with reasonable certainty
that any public nuisance as defined in Subsection (b) above exists, the Weed
Commissioner or designee shall immediately cause written notice to be given by
hand delivery, mail, or email to the owner or occupant of the property that the
property has been found to be noncompliant with this Section. The notice will
detail the City’s plan to bring the property into compliance with this section and
Section 8-1-6 and the estimated cost of said service to be completed no less than
twenty-four (24) hours prior to the City's or its contractor’s cutting of the lawn,
grass or weeds.
(2) The costs incurred by the City to cut the grass and/or weeds will be charged to the
owner of the property and if left unpaid will be assessed as a tax upon the lands
upon which such grass and/or weeds are located under the provisions of Section
66.0627, Wis. Stats., or such cost may be recovered in an action against the owner
or occupant.
SEC. 8-1-8 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS.
(a) MILK STANDARD. No milk or milk products shall be sold to the final consumer, or to
restaurants, soda fountains, grocery stores or similar establishments, except pasteurized,
certified and Grade A pasteurized. When any milk distributor fails to qualify for one of the
above grades, the Public Health Director is authorized to suspend any milk distributor
permit and/or to institute court action, or, in lieu thereof, to degrade his product and to
permit its sale during a temporary period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or in emergencies
such longer period as he may deem necessary.
(b) QUALITY STANDARDS AND COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS OF FROZEN
DESSERTS.
(1) Milk Standards Used in Frozen Desserts. Milk products used in the manufacture of
frozen desserts shall meet the following standards:
a. Products: Standard Plate Count Not to Exceed:
Raw Milk 1,000,000 per ml
Pasteurized Milk 100,000 per ml
5/24/13
8:5
Raw Cream 1,000,000 per ml
Pasteurized Cream 100,000 per ml
b. Butter, eighty percent (80%) cream, plastic cream, mixtures of butterfat,
sugar or sweetening agent, moisture and flavoring, condensed milk, mixes
and all other similar products shall conform to the following standards:
Standard Plate Count -- Not to exceed 100,000 per gram prior to
pasteurization at the frozen dessert plant.
Coliform Count -- Not to exceed 10 per gram prior to pasteurization at the
frozen dessert plant.
Dry whole milk, powdered non-fat dry milk, dry whey or dry buttermilk,
shall be U.S. Extra Grade or its equivalent.
(2) Finished Products. After pasteurization, frozen desserts or frozen dessert mixes
shall not contain in excess of ten (10) coliform per gram or in excess of fifty
thousand (50,000) plate count of bacteria per gram at any time up to time of sale.
(3) Standard Test Methods. Bacterial plate counts, coliform determinations,
phosphatase tests, and other laboratory tests shall be conducted in accordance with
standard methods and procedures of analysis as prescribed in "Standard Methods for
the Examination of Dairy Products," Thirteenth Edition (1972), copies of which are
on file at the offices of the Department of Agriculture, Secretary of State and
Revisor of Statutes, and which may be obtained from American Public Health
Association, Inc., 1015 Eighteenth Street NW, Washington, D.C.
(4) Enforcement. Regulatory agencies may obtain samples of dairy product ingredients,
frozen desserts and frozen dessert mixes for testing to determine compliance with
bacteriological and coliform standards under this Section. Samples may be taken on
separated days from unopened containers. Whenever two (2) of the last four (4)
consecutive samples tested in any twelve (12) month period fail to conform to
standards prescribed in this Section, the plant operator shall be served with a written
warning notice of this fact. The failure of three (3) of the last five (5) consecutive
samples tested in any twelve (12) month period to conform to such standards, shall
be cause for the suspension of any license or permit or the taking of such other
enforcement action as may be authorized under Chapter 97, Wis. Stats., or other
applicable statutes or rules relating to the processing, sale, or distribution of
adulterated or misbranded foods. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the City's
use of penalty provisions of Section 1-1-7.
SEC. 8-1-9 SMOKING IN CITY BUILDINGS AND VEHICLES.
(a) No person may smoke, carry, or possess a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other lighted
smoking equipment in any City-owned building or motor vehicle.
(b) The prohibition in 8-1-9(a) does not apply to any park pavilion, the recycling center, or any
other open-air structure.
(c) Any violation of Section 8-1-9(a) shall be punishable pursuant to Section 1-1-7.
Updated: 7/30/2012
Title 8 – Health and Sanitation
CHAPTER 2
Weights and Measures
SEC. 8-2-1 FEDERAL STANDARDS, STATE STATUTES AND ADMINISTRATIVE
CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The subsequent federal standards, Wisconsin Statutes, the Sections thereof, and Wisconsin
Administrative Rules are adopted by reference and shall be enforced under this Chapter with
violations of same subject to penalties set forth in Section 1-1-7.
(a) Chapter 98, Wisconsin Statutes, "Weights and Measures."
(b) Chapter ATCP 90, Wisconsin Administrative Code, "Fair Packaging and Labeling."
(c) Chapter ATCP 91, Wisconsin Administrative Code, “Selling Commodities by Weight,
Measure or Count.”
(d) Chapter ATCP 92, Wisconsin Administrative Code, “Weights and Measures.”
(e) Chapter ATCP 93, Wisconsin Administrative Code, “Department of Agriculture, Trade and
Consumer Protection.”
(f) Chapter ATCP 100, Wisconsin Administrative Code, “Marketing; Trade Practices.”
(g) Chapter ATCP 136, Wisconsin Administrative Code, “Mobile Air Conditioners, Reclaiming
or Recycling Refrigerant.”
(h) NIST Handbook 44, 112, 130, 133, U.S. Department of Commerce, "Specifications,
Tolerances and Other Technical Requirements for Commercial Weighing and Measuring
Devices."
SEC. 8-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
(a) WEIGHTS AND MEASUREMENTS. Weights and measures of every kind, instruments
and devices for weighing and measuring, and any appliances and accessories used with any
or all such instruments and devices, except meters for the measurement of electricity, gas
(natural or manufactured) or water when the same are operated in a public utility system.
(b) SELL, SALE, PURCHASE AND SOLD. Includes barter or exchange, and any offering or
exposing for sale or possession with intent to sell or purchase.
(c) SEALER AND DEPUTY SEALER. A Sealer of Weights and Measures in the City of
Menasha.
(d) WEIGHT. Net weight when used in reference to a commodity.
(e) INCORRECT. As applied to weights and measures and commodities includes any failure
to comply with the requirements of this Chapter or rules issued thereunder.
SEC. 8-2-3 SEALER OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
(a) APPOINTMENT. The Sealer of Weights and Measures shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the confirmation of the Common Council. Such person, before entering upon the duties
of his office, shall take and subscribe an oath to faithfully perform his duties.
(b) SALARY. The Sealer of Weights and Measures shall receive a salary to be fixed by the
Common Council.
Updated: 7/30/2012
(c) ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
(1) There is conferred upon the Sealer of Weights and Measures police power. Such
Sealer of Weights and Measures shall be provided with a suitable badge or insignia
of authority and in the exercise of his functions shall exhibit the same, upon demand, to
any person questioning his powers.
(2) The Sealer of Weights and Measures may enter and go into or upon any structure or
premises, and may stop any person or vehicle for the purpose of enforcing this
Chapter. He shall inspect and test any weights or commodities which are sold,
purchased or used commercially as often as necessary to secure compliance with this
Chapter. The Sealer of Weights and Measures shall approve for use and may seal or
mark with appropriate devices such weights and measures as found upon inspection
and test to be correct, and shall reject and mark or tag as rejected such weights and
measures found to be incorrect, but which in his best judgment are susceptible of
satisfactory repair. Weights and measures that have been rejected or condemned may
be confiscated and may be destroyed by the Sealer if not corrected as required by the
Sealer, or if used or disposed of contrary to this Chapter.
(3) The Sealer of Weights and Measures shall have the power to issue stop orders, stopsale
orders, and disposal orders with respect to weights and measures being, or
susceptible of being, commercially used, and to issue stop-sale orders and disposal
orders with respect to packages or amounts of commodities kept, offered, or exposed
for sale, sold, or in process of delivery, whenever in the course of his enforcement of
the provisions of this Chapter he deems it necessary or expedient to issue such
orders. No person shall use, remove from the premises specified, or fail to remove
from the premises specified, any weight, measure, or package or amount of
commodity contrary to the terms of a stop-use order, stop-sale order, or disposal
order issued under the authority of this Chapter.
(4) The Sealer or his designee shall investigate complaints made to him concerning
violations of the provision of this Chapter, and shall, upon his own initiative, conduct
such investigations as he deems appropriate and advisable to develop information on
prevailing procedures in commercial quantity determination and on possible
violations of the provisions of this Chapter, and to promote the general objective of
accuracy in the determination and representation of quantity in commercial
transactions.
(d) REPORT. The City Sealer shall keep a complete record of the work done as required by
law.
SEC. 8-2-4 FIELD STANDARDS AND EQUIPMENT; SPECIFICATIONS AND
TOLERANCES.
(a) There shall be supplied by the City such "field standards" and such equipment as may be
found necessary to carry out the provisions of this Chapter. The field standards shall be
verified by the State of Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer
Protection – Metrology Lab as required by law.
(b) The specifications, tolerances and regulations for commercial weighing and measuring
devices issued by the National Bureau of Standards shall apply in this City except as
modified by rules issued by the State Department of Trade and Consumer Protection.
SEC. 8-2-5 RESPONSIBILITIES OF EQUIPMENT OWNERS OR USERS.
Updated: 7/30/2012
The owner, operator or user of any commercial weights and measures equipment, devices or
associated equipment is responsible for the accuracy and maintenance of same.
(a) It shall be the duty of every owner, operator or user to notify the Sealer in writing of the
acquisition of any commercial weighing device, whether new, rebuilt or used. Said
notification shall be accomplished within seventy-two (72) hours of the introduction into use
of said device.
(b) Commercial weights and measures devices regulated by this Chapter shall bear security seals
appropriately affixed to any adjustment mechanisms designed to be sealed. The security
seals shall bear the mark or imprint of the Sealer, or other weights and measures official, or
service person authorized by the Sealer. Said security seal may only be removed to facilitate
repairs of devices. Any service person who removes a security seal shall replace it and reseal
the device with his own imprint. The Sealer shall be notified of said repairs and
removal of the seal within seventy-two (72) hours of removal, or of the introduction of a
new, rebuilt or used device per Subsection (a) above so that said device may be re-inspected.
SEC. 8-2-6 BULK DELIVERIES SOLD TO AND DELIVERED BY VEHICLE TO THE
ULTIMATE CONSUMER.
All heating oils and motor fuels shall be sold by liquid measure or by net weight. In the case of each
delivery of liquid fuel not in package form, and in an amount greater than ten (10) gallons in the case
of sale by liquid measure or one hundred (100) pounds in the case of sale by weight, there shall be
rendered to the purchaser, either at the time of delivery or within a period mutually agreed upon in
writing or otherwise between the vendor and the purchaser, a delivery ticket or a written statement
on which, in ink or other indelible substance, there shall be clearly and legibly stated:
(a) The name and address of the vendor;
(b) The name and address of the purchaser;
(c) The identity of the type of fuel comprising the delivery;
(d) The unit price (the price per gallon or per pound, as the case may be) of the fuel delivered;
(e) In the case of sale by liquid measure, the liquid volume of the delivery, together with the
print meter readings from which such liquid volume has been computed, expressed in terms
of the gallon and its binary or decimal subdivisions; and
(f) In the case of sale by weight, the net weight of the delivery, together with any scale readings
from which such net weight has been computed, expressed in terms of tons or pounds
avoirdupois.
SEC. 8-2-7 MOTOR FUEL, HEATING OILS AND OTHER SOLVENTS SALES ON
PREMISES OF SELLER.
Every wholesaler, retailer, and every other person selling or distributing motor fuel, heating oil or
solvents in the City of Menasha shall keep posted in a conspicuous place at his place of business, and
on every pump from which delivery is made, a placard, sign or the like clearly stating the identity of
each product dispensed, including the grade, blend or mixture of the product, the net selling price,
and the amount of all taxes per gallon. No such placard shall be required on a computer pump
whereon the aforementioned information is legibly shown on the face. All motor fuel pumps shall be
marked conspicuously to indicate the blend or mixture so contained.
SEC. 8-2-8 PRESUMPTIVE EVIDENCE.
Updated: 7/30/2012
For the purpose of this Chapter, proof of the existence of a weight or measure or a weighing or
measuring device in or about any building, enclosure, stand or vehicle, in which or from which it is
shown that buying or selling is commonly carried on, shall in the absence of evidence to the
contrary, be presumptive proof of the regular use of such weight or measure or weighing or
measuring device for commercial purposes and of such use by the person in charge of such building,
enclosure, stand, or vehicle.
SEC. 8-2-9 FEES FOR WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall operate weights and measures, weighing or measuring
devices and systems and accessories relating thereto, which are used commercially within the
City of Menasha in determining the weight, measure or count unless licensed pursuant to the
provisions of this ordinance. The annual licensing year shall commence July 1 and end June
30 the following year. No license fee shall be refunded if a license or permit is revoked for
cause.
(b) DEFINITIONS. Commercial weighing or measuring devices are those used or employed in
establishing the size, quantity, extent, area or measurement of quantities, things, produce or
articles for sale, hire or award, or in computing any basic charge or payment for services
rendered on the basis of weight or measure. This includes the use of bar code scanning to
determine price.
(c) APPLICATION. The application for a weighing or measuring license shall be made in
writing on a form provided for such purpose by the City Sealer. Such application shall state
the type and number of weighing and measuring devices to be licensed, the business address
where the devices are located, the applicant's full name, signature, and post office address
and whether such person is an individual, firm, corporation, or partnership. The names and
addresses of all officers or partners shall be included.
(d) ISSUANCE AND FEES. The City Sealer shall issue a license to the applicant based on the
total number of weighing and measuring devices operated by the applicant if the
requirements of this ordinance have been complied with and upon payment to the City the
fees required.
(e) PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND FEES. The application for permit or the request for
renewal of permit covered in this Section shall be accompanied with an appropriate fee to be
established annually by the Common Council. A list of fees shall be maintained by the City
Clerk and the Health Department. Items requiring fees are:
Scales, estimate only scales, point of sale systems, prepack scales, weight, rules/tapes, timing
devices, pumps (LMD), vehicle tank and bulk plant meters, scanners, high accuracy scales
(pharmaceuticals, jewelers or precious metals) linear (fabric, wire, rope meters), vehicle
scales, taximeters, electric pill counters, recycling machines, high speed diesel fuel
dispensers, all other non-categorized devices.
(1) Any establishment required by this section to pay any fee may, in addition to any
other penalties, also be required to pay a permit fee equal to twice the amount of the
normal fee if the failure is due to a late payment, insufficient funds or account closed
checks, or for any other reason the City has not received the proper payment.
(2) Any establishment required by this section to pay any fee may, in addition to any
other penalties, also be required to pay a permit fee equal to twice the amount of the
normal fee if such establishment opens for business or installs and uses a new
weighing and measuring device for commercial transactions without submitting the
application, submitting fees and having the equipment tested. The Public Health
Director, or designee, may also order such establishment to close until the fee is paid.
Updated: 7/30/2012
(f) SPECIAL FEES. Notwithstanding the provision for the requirement of an annual license
for weighing and measuring devices, whenever a special request is made for consultation or
the inspection or testing of a non-categorized weighing or measuring device, the actual
expenses may be charged to the person or firm receiving the service. Such payment or
charge shall be based on the current hourly rate.
(g) DISPLAY OF LICENSE. All persons licensed under the provisions of this ordinance shall
immediately post their license upon some conspicuous part of the premises on which the
business is conducted and said license shall remain posted for the period the license is in
force.
(h) SUSPENSION OF LICENSE. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this ordinance,
whenever the City Sealer finds that business on any licensed premises is conducted or
managed in such a manner that there are serious or repeated violations of any ordinances or
regulations of the City of Menasha, the laws of the State of Wisconsin, or regulations of the
National Institute of Standards and Technology relating to weights and measure, the City
Sealer may without warning, notice or hearing, issue a written notice to the license holder,
operator or employee in charge of the licensed premises citing such condition and specifying
the corrective action to be taken. If deemed necessary such order shall state that the license
is immediately suspended and all weighing and measuring operations are to be discontinued.
Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately but upon written
petition to the Board of Health shall be afforded a hearing within 20 days of such petition.
Failure to allow an inspector immediate access to the premises to determine whether such
grounds exist shall be grounds for suspension.
(i) REVOCATION OF LICENSES. For serious or repeated violations of any of the
requirements of this ordinance, or for interference with the City Sealer in the performance of
his/her duties, the City Sealer may permanently revoke the license. Prior to such action, the
City Sealer shall notify the license holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the license
is subject to revocation, and advising that the license shall be permanently revoked at the end
of five (5) days following service of such notice unless a request for a hearing is filed with
the Board of Health by the license holder within such five (5) day period.
(j) TRANSFER OF LICENSES. No license may be transferred unless otherwise provided for
by the ordinances of the City. No license shall be issued to or used by any person acting as
agent for or in the employ of another.
(k) HEARINGS. The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the Board of
Health at a time and place designated by the Health Director. Based upon the record of such
hearing, the City Sealer shall be charged with enforcing the decisions of the Board. A
written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the license holder by the Health
Director.
SEC. 8-2-10 PROHIBITED ACTS; PENALTIES.
(a) Whoever does any of the following acts shall be in violation of this Chapter and shall be
subject to forfeiture as prescribed in Section 1-1-7.
(1) Hinders, obstructs or impersonates a sealer or inspector.
(2) Uses or has in possession for use in buying or selling any commodity or service, or
sells, any incorrect weight or measure.
(3) Represents in any manner a false quantity in connection with the purchase of sale, or
any advertising thereof, or any commodity, thing or service.
Updated: 7/30/2012
(4) Uses or disposes of any rejected weight or measure, or commodity, or removes
therefrom any official tag, seal, stamp or mark, without written authority from a
sealer or inspector working in the State of Wisconsin.
(5) Uses or disposes of any rejected weight or measure or commodity, or removes
therefrom any official tag, seal, stamp or mark, without written authority from the
Sealer.
(6) Uses any weighing or measuring device in determining the quantity of any
commodity or service to be sold or purchased without having said device approved
and sealed by the Sealer and the proper certificate obtained in accordance with
Section 8-2-5.
(7) Deals in or installs new or used weighing or measuring equipment or represents such
equipment to be properly repaired following official rejection, if said equipment is
inaccurate on inspection.
(8) Uses or employs any commercial weighing or measuring device in establishing the
size, quantity, extent, area or measurement of quantities, things, produce or articles
for sale, hire or award, or in computing any basic charge or payment for services
rendered on the basis of weight or measure without first obtaining a license from the
City of Menasha. This section includes the installation and use of price scanning
systems used to compute price for commercial transactions.
Updated: 4/7/2014
CHAPTER 3
Refuse Disposal and Collection
SEC. 8-3-1 TITLE; REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE.
(a) TITLE. This Chapter shall be known as the Solid Waste Management Ordinance of the
City of Menasha, hereinafter referred to as Ordinance or Chapter.
(b) UNDER CONTROL OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. Except as exempted by
this Chapter, the collection, removal and disposal of all garbage and rubbish shall be
under the direction and control of the Director of Public Works and in strict conformity
with the provisions of this Section and with such additional rules and regulations as may
be made from time to time and may be deemed necessary or desirable to carry out the
provisions of this Chapter and which are not inconsistent herewith.
(c) PERIODS OF COLLECTION.
(1) Residential.
(2)
All garbage and rubbish shall be collected once each week in
accordance with a schedule fixed by the Director of Public Works.
Commercial and Industrial Waste
(3)
. Garbage from commercial establishments shall
be collected once each week up to 2 cubic yards per collection. Additional
collections will be charged a fee to be determined by the Director of Public
Works. Such fee shall be approved by the Board of Public Works by motion. No
manufacturing or construction waste shall be collected as part of the City general
garbage collection.
Multi-Familv Residential Collection
(4)
. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected once
each week up to 1/12th cubic yard per dwelling unit per collection. Additional
collections shall be charged a fee to be determined by the Director of Public
Works. Such fee shall be approved by the Board of Public Works by motion.
Industrial Waste
(5) Department of Public Works personnel are directed to immediately report all
violations to their Street/Sanitation Superintendent or his/her designee, who shall
in turn contact the City Attorney for ordinance enforcement.
. No manufacturing or construction waste shall be collected as
part of the City general garbage collection. Waste from offices and lunch rooms
may be collected. No more than five (5) thirty-six (36) gallon containers shall be
taken from any one location in any one pickup.
SEC. 8-3-2 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of this Chapter to enhance and improve the
environment and promote the health, safety and welfare of the City by establishing minimum
standards for the storage, collection, transport, processing, separation, recovery and disposal of
solid waste.
SEC. 8-3-3 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given
herein unless different meanings are clearly indicated by the context.
(a) AGRICULTURAL ESTABLISHMENT -- An establishment engaged in the rearing
and slaughtering of animals and the processing of animal products or orchard and field
crops.
Updated: 4/7/2014
(b) BULKY WASTE -- Items whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by
normal collection, processing or disposal methods.
(c) COLLECTION -- The act of removing solid waste from the storage area at the source of
generation.
(d) COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS -- Items which include but shall not be limited to the
following: domestic garbage, newspapers, books, magazines, cards, wrappings, crates,
leaves, lawn clippings, brush and tree limbs, wood chips, asphalt shingles, old roofing,
boards and old furniture without metal frames, cartons, bottles and tin cans (except
aerosol cans).
(e) COMMERCIAL UNIT -- Commercial units shall be all property other than residential
units and shall include boarding houses, motels and resorts.
(f) CONDOMINIUMS -- A form of individual ownership within a building which may
entail joint ownership and responsibility for maintenance and repairs of the land and other
common property of the building.
(g) CURB -- The back edge or curb and gutter along a paved street or where one would be if
the street was paved and had a curb and gutter.
(h) DEMOLITION WASTES -- That portion of solid wastes consisting of wastes from the
repair, remodeling or reconstruction of buildings, such as lumber, roofing and sheathing
scraps, rubble, broken concrete, asphalt and plaster, conduit, pipe, wire, insulation and
any other materials resulting from the demolition of buildings and improvements.
(i) DISPOSAL -- The orderly process of discarding useless or unwanted material.
(j) DNR -- The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(k) DWELLING UNIT -- A place of habitation occupied by a normal single family unit or a
combination of persons who may be considered as equivalent to a single family unit for
the purpose of this Chapter.
(l) GARBAGE -- Includes every refuse accumulation of animals, fruit or vegetable matter,
liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of
meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables originally used for foodstuffs.
(m) HAZARDOUS WASTE -- Those wastes such as toxic, radioactive or pathogenic
substances which require special handling to avoid illness or injury to persons or damage
to property and the environment.
(n) INDUSTRIAL WASTE -- Waste material, except garbage, rubbish and refuse, directly
or indirectly resulting from an industrial processing or manufacturing operation.
(o) LITTER -- Solid waste scattered about in a careless manner, usually rubbish.
(p) NON-RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE -- Solid waste from agricultural, commercial,
industrial or institutional activities or a building or group of buildings consisting of four
(4) or more dwelling units.
(q) PERSON -- Individuals, firms, corporations and associations, and includes the plural as
well as the singular.
(r) MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT -- A building or group of
buildings consisting of 5 or more dwelling units.
(s) PRIVATE COLLECTION SERVICES -- Collection services provided by a person
licensed to do same by the DNR.
(t) RECYCLABLE WASTE -- Waste material that can be remanufactured into usable
products and shall include, by way of enumeration but not by way of limitation, glass,
plastics, newspapers, cardboard, metals (aluminum, steel, tin, brass, etc.).
(u) REFUSE -- Includes all waste material, including garbage, rubbish and industrial waste.
(v) REGULATED WASTE -- Regulated waste means liquid or semi-liquid blood or other
potentially infectious materials; contaminated items that would release blood or other
potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items that
are caked with dried blood or other potentially infectious materials and are capable of
Updated: 4/7/2014
releasing any materials during handling; contaminated sharps; and pathological and
microbiological wastes containing blood or other potentially infectious materials.
(w) RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE -- All solid waste that normally originates in a
residential environment from residential dwelling units.
(x) RESIDENTIAL UNIT -- Residential unit shall mean an individual household capable of
independent habitation by a family unit. A single family dwelling shall be considered to
be one (1) residential unit; multi-family dwelling shall be considered to be multiple
residential units, the number of residential units to equal the number of family units to be
housed therein. Residential units shall not include boarding houses, motels or resorts.
(y) RUBBISH -- Includes combustible and noncombustible waste material, except rocks,
concrete, bricks and similar solid materials, plaster or dirt, that is incidental to the
operation of a building.
(z) SCAVENGING -- The uncontrolled removal of materials at any point in solid waste
management.
(aa) SOLID WASTE -- Garbage, rubbish and other useless, unwanted or discarded material
from agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial or institutional activities. Solid
waste does not include solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage.
(bb) STORAGE -- The interim containment of solid waste in an approved manner after
generation and prior to collection and ultimate disposal.
(cc) STORAGE AREAS -- Areas where persons place containers during non-collection days
as well as areas where containers are set out on collection day.
(dd) YARD WASTES -- Deciduous materials including, but not limited to, grass clippings,
leaves, garden wastes, prunings, tree trimmings and brush.
SEC. 8-3-4 REFUSE STORAGE AREAS.
Storage areas shall be kept in a nuisance- and odor-free condition. Litter shall not be allowed to
accumulate. Collection crews shall not be responsible for cleaning up loose or refuse materials
from any containers which have become ruptured or broken due to wet conditions, animals,
vandalism or other cause. The occupant and/or owner shall be responsible for cleaning up litter
and maintaining the refuse storage area. Litter not collected shall not be allowed to accumulate.
Any occupant or owner who is notified to clean up a refuse storage area but fails to do so within
14 days shall be in violation of this Chapter. No occupant or owner may store refuse containers in
front of the nearest wall of the house or building to any street.
SEC. 8-3-5 APPROVED WASTE AND REFUSE CONTAINERS.
(a) GENERAL CONTAINER STANDARDS. Suitable containers of a type approved by
the City shall be provided by the property occupant or owner in which to store all refuse
except for bulky or certain yard wastes as provided for herein. Containers, in order to be
approved, shall provide for efficient, safe and sanitary handling of refuse. They shall be
maintained in a nuisance- and odor-free condition and shall be sufficient to prevent the
scattering of contents by weather conditions or animals.
(b) APPROVED CONTAINERS. Approved containers shall consist of the automated
container issued by the City. Those containers shall be either 64 or 96 gallons. Any
overflow shall be placed in a plastic garbage bag not greater than 33 gallons and may not
exceed 30 pounds per bag. The bags must be closed so as to prevent refuse from spilling.
The plastic bag shall be of sufficient strength to allow lifting and loading of contents
without tearing. All other containers not specified shall be illegal.
(c) COMMERCIAL USERS. All commercial users must purchase an approved refuse
container. Ninety-six gallon containers may be purchased from the Public Works Facility
at a cost to be established by the Department of Public Works and approved by the
Updated: 4/7/2014
Common Council. Such fee may be changed from time to time. All containers greater
than 96 gallons must be approved by the Department of Public Works.
(d) VOLUME BASED COLLECTION FEES. To comply with legislative intent it is
declared to be the policy of the City of Menasha that refuse collection fees be established
on a volume basis.
(1) Fees shall be established by the Director of Public Works and approved by the
Common Council for refuse in excess of 64 gallons per week for residential users,
1/12th cubic yard per week per dwelling unit for multi-family residential users,
and 2 cubic yards per week for commercial users. Such fee may be changed from
time to time. A copy of the fee schedule shall be available from the Finance
Department, City Clerk, or Public Works Facility.
(2) Condominiums are allowed a container approved by the Director of Public Works
sufficiently large enough to contain the equivalent of not more than 64 gallons per
dwelling unit per week without an additional fee. In the event that a condominium
exceeds the allowed volume, the billing will be made to the condominium
association.
(3) All residential users, excluding multi-family residential users, may receive up to 6
stickers per year for excess bags or bulky items at no additional cost. Such tags
shall be delivered either to the property owner or resident in a manner determined
by the Director of Public Works. Additional stickers may be purchased at the
Public Works Facility or Public Works/Engineering Department. The cost for
additional bags may differ from the cost for bulky items. This paragraph does not
apply to residential users exempt from the annual refuse and recycling fees under
SEC. 8-3-10.
(4) All fees shall be collected in a manner determined by the Comptroller and
approved by the Common Council. Section 3-1-13 shall apply to any unpaid fees.
SEC. 8-3-6 COLLECTION OF REFUSE.
(a) PLACEMENT FOR COLLECTION.
(1) Residential solid waste shall be accessible to collection crews. Residential refuse
in approved containers shall be placed immediately behind the curb of the public
street for collection. Yard and bulky wastes from residential units shall likewise
be placed in neat, orderly fashion behind the curb. Collection crews will not
collect residential solid waste unless it is placed at the curb of a public street. The
occupant or owner shall bring the solid waste to the public right-of-way for
collection. Should collection crews be unable to discharge contents of refuse
containers into collection vehicles using normal handling procedures, the
containers, including contents, will be left at curb side. The occupant or owner
shall make provisions to assure that the refuse therein can be collected on the next
collection day. Collection crews will not empty refuse containers by means other
than dumping. All containers shall be placed at least 3 feet from any obstruction.
Multiple containers shall be placed side by side, at least three feet apart.
(2) No refuse containers other than those of the City shall be placed, kept, stored or
located within the right-of-way of a street or alley; provided, however, that the
Board of Public Works may authorize the location of such containers within the
public right-of-way at specified places and times when such location is necessary
for the expeditious collection and disposition of refuse.
(b) RESTRICTION ON TIME OF PLACEMENT. All refuse containers shall be placed in
collection locations as designated in Subsection (a) above only after 4:00 p.m. on the
evenings prior to the regular collection time the following day. All bags and containers
for refuse disposal shall be removed from the curbside collection point within twenty-four
Updated: 4/7/2014
(24) hours after the regular collection time. City employees will not enter any structures
to remove any solid waste or refuse, except by written agreement with the property
owner.
(c) YARD WASTES. All yard wastes shall be separated from other refuse and placed or
disposed of in such locations and at such times as established by the Director of Public
Works. There will be no curbside collection of yard wastes other than prunings, tree
trimmings and brush, except when the Director of Public Works declares there will be a
special collection for leaves; then the leaves shall be placed in bulk within the terrace
section of the street right-of-way. It is a violation of this section to place yard wastes or
leaves in the street or curb.
(d) BRUSH.
(1) All prunings, tree trimmings, brush, shrubbery, and tree limbs shall be placed at
the curb and may not exceed ten (10) inches in diameter. Any prunings, tree
trimmings, brush, shrubbery, and tree limbs in excess of five (5) inches in
diameter may not exceed six (6) feet in length.
(2) Prunings, tree trimmings, brush, shrubbery, and tree limbs shall be collected once
per month on a date to be established by the Public Works Director. No prunings,
tree trimmings, brush, shrubbery, or tree limbs may be placed on the curbside or
public right-of-way more than forty-eight (48) hours before the pickup time.
(3) Any collection of prunings, tree trimmings, brush, shrubbery, and tree limbs at
any time other than the date designated will require the payment of a fee. Such fee
will be established from time to time by the Board of Public Works to reflect the
actual cost of pickup, including administrative costs, as close as possible. The
method of collection of said fee shall be determined by the Comptroller.
(4) The Department of Public Works may declare an emergency and waive these
regulations as circumstances require.
(5) The Department of Public Works shall not collect any prunings, tree trimmings,
brush, shrubbery, and tree limbs which have been placed on the curbside as the
result of the work of a contractor or other commercial activity.
(6) Brush resulting from clearance of a lot for construction shall not be collected by
the City.
SEC. 8-3-7 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES AND NON-COLLECTIBLE MATERIALS.
(a) DEAD ANIMALS. It shall be unlawful to place any dead animal, or parts thereof in a
refuse container for collection provided, however, this Section shall not apply to animal
parts from food preparation for human consumption.
(b) ASHES. Ashes placed for collection shall be extinguished and completely cold. Ashes
shall be wrapped and secured in a bag and then placed in an appropriate container to
preclude the leakage of ashes and/or the rupture of the bag during handling.
(c) IMPROPER PLACEMENT. It shall be unlawful to place, or allow to be placed, any
solid waste upon the roads, streets, public or private property within the City contrary to
the provisions of this Chapter.
(d) COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER. It shall be unlawful to store, collect, transport,
transfer, recover, incinerate or dispose of any solid waste within the boundaries of the
City contrary to the provisions of this Chapter.
(e) IMPROPER TRANSPORTATION. It shall be unlawful to transport any solid waste in
any vehicle which permits the contents to blow, sift, leak or fall there from. If spillage
does occur, the collection crew shall immediately return spilled materials to the collection
Updated: 4/7/2014
vehicle and shall properly clean, or have cleaned, the area. All vehicles used for the
collection and transportation of solid waste shall be durable, easily cleanable and leak
proof, if necessary, considering the type of waste and its moisture content. Collection
vehicles shall be cleaned frequently to prevent nuisances and insect breeding and shall be
maintained in good repair.
(f) INTERFERENCE WITH AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR. No person other than an
authorized collector shall collect or interfere with any refuse after it shall have been put
into a refuse container and placed in the proper area for the collector, nor shall any person
molest, hinder, delay or in any manner interfere with an authorized refuse collector in the
discharge of his/her duties.
(g) PRIVATE DUMPS. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a dump.
(h) BURNING OF WASTE. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste in any
manner, except as provided elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances.
(i) NON-COLLECTIBLE MATERIALS. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for
collection any of the following wastes:
(1) Hazardous waste;
(2) Toxic waste;
(3) Chemicals;
(4) Explosives or ammunition;
(5) Drain or waste oil or flammable liquids;
(6) Large quantities of paint;
(7) Tires.
(j) HOSPITAL WASTES. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection any
pathogenic hospital, medical waste, or regulated waste. Such items as needles and
syringes may be disposed of as long as they are packaged and contained to eliminate
injury to collection crews.
(k) BUILDING WASTE. All waste resulting from remodeling, construction or removal of a
building, roadway or sidewalk shall be disposed of by the owner, builder or contractor,
unless arrangements have been made with the Director of Public Works.
(l) ANIMALS INTERFERING WITH COLLECTION. Dogs must not be tied within
reach of refuse containers.
(m) UNAUTHORIZED DISPOSAL.
(1) Refuse and yard waste disposal, either at curb side or designated areas shall be for
City residents only. Any other person, partnership or corporation who violates this
section shall be subject to the penalties of this ordinance, as well as any other
person who knowingly permits non-residents to do so.
(2) Any person, partnership or corporation dumping yard waste, solid waste, rubbish
or refuse at any place other than an authorized drop-off site, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of this ordinance.
(3) Any person, firm or corporation mixing household refuse with yard waste or other
defined recyclables, or any person permitting same to be done, shall be subject to
the penalties of this ordinance.
(4) No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in or near any private dumpster,
trash can, recycling container, or other private trash receptacle, any refuse, trash,
recyclable materials, or other items without the consent of the owner, designated
agent or authorized user of such dumpster, trash can, trash receptacle or recycling
container.
(n) TIRE DISPOSAL FEES.
(1) Residents disposing of tires at the authorized site (s) are subject to a fee which
will be established by the Board of Public Works to reflect the actual cost of tire
disposal.
Updated: 4/7/2014
(2) Method of collection of the fee established under section 8-3-7 (n)(2) shall be
determined by the Board of Public Works. These fees may be changed from time
to time as may be determined by the Board of Public Works, but not more than
once each calendar year.
(3) Tires prohibited. No tires used by commercial or manufacturing establishments
are permitted in the disposal areas.
(o) FREON CHARGED GOODS.
(1) Any occupant or owner who places items that contain freon for collection and
disposal shall be charged a fee which shall be established by the Board of Public
Works to reflect the actual cost of freon disposal.
(2) The fee established in Section 8- 3- 7( 0)( 1) shall not be levied if the occupant or
owner provides evidence to the Public Works Superintendent that freon has
already been removed by a Department of Natural Resources certified vendor.
(3) The method of collection of the fee established under Section 8-3-7(0)(1) shall be
determined by the Board of Public Works.
(p) MICROWAVES.
(1) Any occupant or owner who places a microwave for collection and disposal shall
be charged a fee which shall be established by the Board of Public Works to
reflect the actual cost of microwave disposal.
(2) The method of collection of the fee established under Section 8-3-7(p)(1) shall be
determined by the Board of Public Works.
(q) PENALTIES.
(1) The Department of Public Works shall place a tag on all refuse placed in violation
of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Failure to comply with any lawful directive of the Department of Public Works
within 24 hours shall constitute a further violation. Each day of non-compliance
shall constitute a new violation. Should the Department of Public Works be
required to collect refuse which has been placed in violation of this chapter, the
actual costs of collection, separation, and/or disposal shall be deemed to be a
special charge and collected under Section 3-1-13. At least 48-hour actual notice,
written or telephonically, shall be given to the occupant and/or property owner
prior to City collection and billing.
(3) The provisions of Section 1-1-7 shall apply to any violations of this chapter.
SEC. 8-3-8 REFUSE FROM OUTSIDE THE MUNICIPALITY.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, deposit or cause to be deposited, for
collection, any waste or refuse not generated within the corporate limits of the City of Menasha.
SEC. 8-3-9 COMPOST BOXES.
(a) No occupant or owner may keep a compost box larger than 5 cubic yards.
(b) No compost box may be placed in front of the nearest wall or the house or structure to
any street.
(c) All compost boxes must be maintained in such a fashion so as to not become unsightly
nor to emit or cause any foul, offensive, nauseous, noxious, or other disagreeable odor,
effluvia or stench.
(d) Any violation of this section shall constitute a public nuisance whose abatement shall be
subject to Sec. 11-7-5.
SEC. 8-3-10 REFUSE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION FEE.
Updated: 4/7/2014
An annual refuse and recycling collection fee shall be established by the Director of Public
Works and approved by the Common Council for each additional residential dwelling unit in
excess of one for each property parcel. All fees shall be collected in a manner determined by the
Comptroller and approved by the Common Council. Section 3-1-13 shall apply to any unpaid
fees. This fee shall not apply to multi-family residential development. An owner-occupant of a
two dwelling unit property parcel may apply to the City for an exemption from this fee, provided
one of the units has been vacant for more than two years, by signing an affidavit to that effect and
returning the refuse and recycling bins for the vacated unit. A $100.00 charge will be incurred in
order to reestablish service.
CHAPTER 4
Recycling Materials and Collection
SEC. 8-4-1 TITLE; RECYCLING MATERIALS AND COLLECTION SERVICE.
(a) TITLE. This Chapter shall be known as the Recycling Materials and Collection
Ordinance of the City of Menasha, hereinafter referred to as Ordinance or
Chapter.
(b) PURPOSE. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote recycling, composting,
and resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling
program, as provided in s. 159.11, Wis. Stats., and Chapter NR 544, Wis. Adm.
Code.
(c) STATUTORY AUTHORITY. This ordinance is adopted as authorized under s.
l59.09(3)(b), Wis. Stats.
(d) ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. It is not intended by this
ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing rules,
regulations, ordinances or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
However, whenever this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of
this ordinance shall apply.
(e) INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes. Where any terms or requirements of this ordinance may be inconsistent
or conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply.
Where a provision of this ordinance is required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by a
standard in Chapter NR 544, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the ordinance
provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wisconsin
Statutes and the Chapter NR 544 standards in effect on the date of the adopted
of this ordinance, or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to
this ordinance.
(f) SEVERABILITY. Should any portion of this ordinance be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
this ordinance shall not be affected.
(g) APPLICABILITY. The requirements of this ordinance apply to all persons within
the City of Menasha and to all waste, refuse or recyclable materials generated
within the City of Menasha.
(h) ADMINISTRATION. The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by
the Department of Public Works.
(i) EFFECTIVE DATE. The provisions of this ordinance shall take effect on January
1, 1995.
SEC. 8-4-2 DEFINITIONS.
(a) "Bimetal container" means a container for carbonated or malt beverages that is
made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
(b) "Container board" means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
(c) "Foam polystyrene packaging" means packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
(1) Is designed for serving food or beverages.
(2) Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
(3) Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
(d) "HDPE" means high density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #2.
(e) "LDPE" means low density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI code #4.
(f) "Magazines” means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
(g) "Major appliance" means a residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, oven, refrigerator, or stove,
residential and commercial furnaces, boilers, dehumidifiers, water heaters and
microwave ovens with intact capacitors.
(h) "Multiple-family dwelling" means a property containing 5 or more residential units,
including those which are occupied seasonally.
(i) "Newspaper" means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
(j) "Nonresidential facilities and properties" means commercial, retail, industrial,
institutional and governmental facilities and properties. This term does not
include multiple family dwellings.
(k) "Office paper" means high grade printing and writing papers from offices in
nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This term
does not include industrial process waste.
(l) "Other resins or multiple resins" means plastic resins labeled by the SPI code #7.
(m) "Person" includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, local
governmental unit, as defined in s. 66.299(1)(a), Wis. Stats., state agency or
authority or federal agency.
(n) "PETE" means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code # 1.
(o) "Plastic container" means an individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar or
carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a product that is
the subject of a retail sale.
(p) "Post-consumer waste" means solid waste other than solid waste generated in
the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in s. 144.61(5), Wis.
Stats., waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles,
or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in s. 144.44(7)( a) 1., Wis. Stats.
(q) "PP" means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code #5.
(r) "PS" means polystyrene, labeled by the SPI code #6.
(s) "PVC" means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code #3.
(t) "Recyclable materials" includes lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste oil;
yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container board;
foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines, newspaper; office
paper; rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC,
LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple resins; steel containers; waste tires;
and bimetal containers.
(u) “Single-stream collection” means a system for commingled collection of
recyclable fibers, containers or other recyclable materials in which the materials
are separated from solid waste at the point of collection and are transported to a
processing facility to be sorted into marketable commodities.
(v) "Solid waste" has the meaning specified in s. 144.01 (15), Wis. Stats.
(w) "Solid waste facility" has the meaning specified in s. 144.43(5), Wis. Stats.
(x) "Solid waste treatment" means any method, technique or process which is
designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition
of solid waste. "Treatment" includes incineration.
(y) "Waste tire" means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
(z) "Hard waste" means leave, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material no greater than 6 inches in diameter.
This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root balls.
SEC. 8-4-3 SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
All occupants or owners of single-family residences, 2-4 unit residences, multifamily
residences and nonresidential facilities and properties shall separate the following
recyclable materials from post-consumer waste:
(a) LEAD ACID BATTERIES. Lead acid batteries shall be taken to the City of
Menasha dropoff site on Baldwin Street.
(b) MAJOR APPLIANCES. Major appliances shall be collected curbside in
accordance with Ordinance 0-24-92.
(c) WASTE OIL. Waste oil shall be taken to the City of Menasha dropoff site on
Baldwin Street.
(d) YARD WASTE. Yard waste shall be collected curbside in accordance with
Ordinance 0-22-90, or at times specified by the Director of Public Works, or taken
to the City of Menasha dropoff site on Baldwin Street.
(e) WASTE TIRES.Waste tires shall be taken to the City of Menasha dropoff site on
Baldwin Street in accordance with Ordinance 0-1-90.
(f) RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Recyclable materials enumerated in Section 8-4-4.
The separation requirements of this section do not apply to any recyclable material
specified in
Sec. 8-4-4 for which a variance has been granted by the Department of Natural
Resources under
s. 159.11(2m), Wis. Stats., or s. NR 544.14, Wis. Adm. Code.
SEC. 8-4-4 SINGLE-STREAM RECYCLABLE WASTE COLLECTION.
The City of Menasha hereby adopts a single-stream recyclable waste curbside
collection system, minimally once per month with a schedule fixed by the Director of
Public Works, for the following recyclable materials:
(a) Aluminum containers.
(b) Corrugated paper or other container board.
(c) Foam polystyrene packaging.
(d) Glass containers.
(e) Magazines or other material printed on similar paper.
(f) Newspaper or other material printed on newsprint.
(g) Office paper.
(h) Plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and other resins
or multiple resins.
(i) Steel containers.
(j) Containers for carbonated or malt beverages that are primarily made of a
combination of steel and aluminum.
SEC. 8-4-5 PREPARATION AND CARE OF SINGLE-STREAM RECYCLABLE
WASTE.
To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials shall be clean and kept free
of contaminants such as food or product residues, oil or grease, or other nonrecyclable
materials, including, but not limited to, household hazardous waste, medical waste or
agricultural chemicals. Occupants or owners of single-family residences, including
condominiums, and 2 to 4 unit residences shall prepare recyclable materials as follows:
(a) Aluminum, bimetal and steel containers shall be clean, rinsed and free of product
residue.
(b) Rigid plastic containers shall be rinsed and free of product residue. Caps shall be
removed and discarded.
(c) Foam polystyrene packaging shall be clean, rinsed and free of product residue.
(d) Glass containers shall be clean, rinsed and free of product residue.
(e) Corrugated paper or other container board shall be free of debris.
SEC. 8-4-6 APPROVED RECYCLING CONTAINERS.
(a) RECYCLING CONTAINER STANDARD. An approved recycling container shall
be provided by the City in which to store all single-stream recycling materials.
Approved containers shall be provided by the City to all single family, including
condominiums, and up to four family unit residences.
(b) RECYCLING CONTAINER FEE.
(1) An annual recycling container fee shall be established by the Director of
Public Works and approved by the Common Council.
(2) All fees shall be collected in a manner determined by the Comptroller and
approved by the Common Council Section 3-1-13 shall apply to any
unpaid fees.
SEC. 8-4-7 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR DESIGNATED AGENTS OF
MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLINGS.
(a) Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of the
following to recycle the materials specified in Section 8-4-4:
(1) Provide containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling and at
least semi-annually thereafter about the established recycling program.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid waste
by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility.
(4) Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which
materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet the
processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and hours
of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address
and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in (1) do not apply to the owners or designated
agents of multiple-family dwellings if the post-consumer waste generated within
the dwelling is treated at a processing facility licensed by the Department of
Natural Resources that recovers for recycling the materials specified in Section
8-4-4 from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
SEC. 8-4-8 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR DESIGNATED AGENTS OF
NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES.
(a) Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties shall do
all of the following to recycle the materials specified in Section 8-4-4:
(1) Provide adequate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify in writing, at least semi-annually, all users, tenants and occupants
of the properties about the established recycling program.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid waste
by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the materials to a
recycling facility.
(4) Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle,
which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in order to meet
the processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and
hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a name,
address and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to the owners or designated
agents of nonresidential facilities and properties of the post-consumer waste
generated within the facility or property is treated at a processing facility licensed
by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for recycling the materials
specified in Section 8-4-4 from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically
feasible.
SEC. 8-4-9 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF RECYCLABLES.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other form of business entity unless
under contract with or licensed by the City of Menasha, to collect or remove any
recyclable material that has been deposited or placed at the curb or in a container
adjacent to a home or nonresidential building for the purpose of collection of recycling.
Recyclable materials, upon placement at the curb, shall become the property of the City
of Menasha.
SEC. 8-4-10 PROHIBITIONS ON DISPOSAL OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
SEPARATED FOR RECYCLING.
No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid waste
treatment facility any of the materials specified in s. (j)(5) through (15) which have been
separated for recycling, except waste tires may be burned with energy recovery in a
solid waste treatment facility.
SEC. 8-4-11 AUTHORIZED DISPOSAL SITES FOR RECYCLABLES.
Hours of disposal at authorized sites shall be Saturdays from 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.,
except legal holidays; and the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on weekdays, except
legal holidays, or other hours as designated by the Board of Public Works based on the
needs of the City. Disposal on unauthorized days or disposal at unauthorized hours
shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
SEC. 8-4-12 ENFORCEMENT.
(a) For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this ordinance,
any authorized officer, employee or representative of the City of Menasha may
inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling, post-consumer waste
intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles,
collection areas of multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and
properties, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall be kept
confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No person may
refuse access to any authorized officer, employee or authorized representative of
the City of Menasha who requests access for purposes of inspection, and who
presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere
with such an inspection.
(b) Any person who violates a provision of this ordinance may be issued a citation by
the Director of Public Works or his/her designee or the Menasha Police
Department to collect forfeitures. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude
proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other
matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any
other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under the paragraph.
(c) Penalties for violating this ordinance may be assessed as follows:
(1) Any person who violates Section 8-4-9 may be required to forfeit $50 for a
first violation, $200 for a second violation, and not more than $2,000 for a
third or subsequent violation.
(2) Any person who violates a provision of this ordinance, except Section 8-4-
9 may be required to forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $1,000 for
each violation.
Title 8 – Health and Sanitation
CHAPTER 5
Removal of Salvageable Non-Structural Materials from Vacated Buildings
SEC. 8-5-1 REMOVAL OF SALVAGEABLE NON-STRUCTURAL MATERIALS FROM
VACATED BUILDINGS.
(a) PURPOSE. The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the removal of scrap and salvageable
equipment and materials from Vacated Buildings without immediate functional replacement thereof.
The phrase “immediate functional replacement thereof” does not include replacement that occurs as
part of a remodeling project pursuant to valid and subsisting building, heating, plumbing, or electrical
permits. The Council finds the regulation of scrap and salvage activities is necessary in order to:
prevent the complete abandonment of property, which reduces the chance that such property will, in
the future, be devoted to any productive or enjoyable public or private use; prevent conditions that
will create health and safety hazards and aggravate blight; prevent interference with the enjoyment of
and reduction of the value of private property; and ensure salvage activities are completed in a timely
manner and in such a fashion that prevents health and safety hazards, nuisances, and environmental
pollution.
(b) INTERPRETATION. In its interpretation and application the provisions of this ordinance shall be
held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where any terms or requirements of this ordinance may be
inconsistent or conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply.
(c) ADMINISTRATION. The Community Development Director shall have general supervision of the
administration and enforcement of this Chapter.
(d) APPLICABILITY. The requirements of this ordinance apply to all persons within the City of
Menasha and to all waste, refuse, or recyclable materials generated within the City of Menasha.
SEC. 8-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
(a) “Owner” means the title holder(s) to real property on which stands any Vacated Building or structure
from which any Salvageable Material is removed or proposed to be removed.
(b) “Operator” means any person, including a corporation or other business entity or holder of a security
interest, that undertakes, directs, or allows the removal of Salvageable Material from a Vacated
Building within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Menasha.
(c) "Salvageable Material" means real or tangible personal property that:
1. is man-made;
2. is affixed to real property or any improvement to real property;
3. is detachable from real property or any improvement to real property; and/or
4. is proposed to be removed or has been removed for potential or intended resale value, re-use, or
scrap or recycling purposes.
Salvageable Materials shall include any such materials detached from real property or any
improvement to real property without a permit after the effective date of this ordinance.
(d) “Salvaging” shall mean the removal of fixtures, equipment, or building materials from a residential,
commercial, or industrial structure following cessation of residential use or business operations,
unless such removal is for the purpose of continuing a previous or similar use.
(e) “Tenant” means a person or entity entitled by agreement to occupy the building or structure, or
portion thereof, from which any Salvageable Material is removed.
(f) "Vacated Building" means a building or structure, or portion thereof, which had a principal nonresidential
use as its most recent use, of which principal use has ceased. The cessation of the primary
activities constituting the principal use shall be determinative of whether the principal use has ceased.
The presence of personnel in the building or structure is not determinative of whether the use has
ceased.
SEC 8-5-3 EXCLUSIONS.
This Ordinance does not apply to the following:
1. Salvaging operations at structures where the most recent allowable use by law was residential;
2. Salvaging operations at non-residential structures under ten thousand square feet (10,000 sq. ft.);
3. Items/materials removed where replacement will occur as part of a remodeling process over time
pursuant to a valid and subsisting building, heating, plumbing, or electrical permit;
4. Salvaging operations that occur as part of an approved demolition plan, pursuant to a valid
demolition permit or otherwise, in which the Permit Holder/Owner/Operator is obligated to
complete said demolition within a specified time frame;
5. Equipment, items, or supplies removed by the Owner for personal re-use; and/or
6. Equipment, items, or supplies owned and removed by the Tenant during the term of a written
lease.
SEC 8-5-4 RECYCLING.
(a) The Permit Holder shall cause to be salvaged, reused, or recycled all of the following material/items
removed and debris produced on-site as part of the salvaging permit activities:
1. Concrete, brick, and/or wood, unless it has been rendered non-recyclable or non-re-useable by the
application or attachment of paint, stains, varnish, or other liquids or solids;
2. Non-toxic metals; and
3. Non-asbestos containing shingles.
(b) The City of Menasha maintains the right to suspend requirements of this section if the market for
above materials changes, making compliance unattainable, or if the condition of the material(s) and/or
proximity to recycling/re-use facilities makes compliance impracticable, as determined by the Code
Official.
SEC 8-5-5 PARTIAL EXEMPTION.
A partial exemption is allowed under this Ordinance for items and materials removed for the sole purpose
of historical or cultural preservation. A request for exemption shall be filed in the Community
Development Department. The request for exemption shall include documentation of historical or cultural
significance acceptable to the Code Official, which may include written request for preservation by a
historic society or equivalent.
SEC. 8-5-6 PERMIT.
(a) No person, corporation, or other business entity or holder of a security interest may remove, direct the
removal of, or allow to be removed any Salvageable Material from a Vacated Building unless such
removal is performed pursuant to a valid permit issued pursuant to this ordinance. The Owner and
Permit Holder shall be jointly and severally responsible for complying with the terms of any permit
issued pursuant to this ordinance.
(b) PERMIT FEES. No permit shall be issued or renewed without the payment of the applicable fee
having been received by the Community Development Department. Permit fees shall be established
by the Common Council.
SEC. 8-5-7 PERMIT APPLICATION.
(a) The applicant may be the Owner, a Contractor hired by the Owner, Tenant, or the holder of a security
interest in the property, Vacated Building, or the Salvageable Material. Under all circumstances, the
applicant, if other than the Owner, shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the
terms of this Ordinance.
(b) Application for permit, whether initial or renewal, shall be made in writing and filed in the
Community Development Department on forms provided by the City of Menasha. The application
shall include the following items.
1. Location and square footage of building(s) or structure(s).
2. Name, address, and contact information of the Owner of the building(s) or structure(s).
3. Names, addresses, and contact information for contractors engaged to carry out the activity.
4. Plan for removal of Salvageable Material including the following details:
i. Project schedule and budget;
ii. Inventory and projected quantities (by weight or volume) of materials to be removed
from the building for salvage purposes;
iii. Proposed disposition of Salvageable Materials;
iv. Dust, noise, and odor control;
v. Hours of operation;
vi. Fire suppression;
vii. Traffic safety and public infrastructure protection;
viii. Site security;
ix. Building and grounds management and restoration; and
x. Proposed post-salvage property ownership and use, if known.
5. Plan for removal of hazardous wastes/materials.
i. Hazardous materials inventory including raw materials, waste materials, asbestos
containing materials, and (with respect to any portion of the building, structure, or
Salvageable Material to be altered in the course of the work) lead painted surfaces and
PCB-containing materials.
ii. Hazardous materials handling, management, and disposal prior to salvaging.
iii. Proposed environmental monitoring or remediation.
6. Plan for removal of recyclable materials.
i. Inventory and estimate (by weight or volume) of materials to be recycled.
ii. Proposed disposition, ownership, and use of materials to be recycled, if known.
iii. Percentage of material to be recycled. This percentage should only include nonsalvageable
material not identified as hazardous material or waste.
7. Proof of required demolition/renovation notifications to the appropriate State regulatory
agency(ies).
8. The Code Official, or other entities of the City of Menasha, may require additional information of
a specific applicant.
SEC 8-5-8 INVESTIGATION.
The Community Development Director, or designee of, shall notify the Building Inspector, Director of
Public Works, Public Health Officer, and Fire Chief, of each new application or request for renewal.
These officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected each application and the premises, together with
such other investigation as shall be necessary to determine whether a permit shall be issued taking into
consideration all applicable regulations, ordinances, and laws. These officials shall furnish to the
Community Development Director, in writing, the information derived from such investigation,
accompanied by a recommendation as to whether a permit should be granted or denied. No permit shall
be renewed without a re-inspection of the premises and report as originally required.
SEC 8-5-9 PERMIT GRANT.
(a) The Community Development Director shall consider such permit applications only after receiving
the recommendations as required under Section 8-5-8 above.
(b) Consideration shall be given to the following: the application; the reports received under Section. 8-5-
8; the expertise of the applicant; the effect of the proposed operation on the surrounding
neighborhood; the effect on the community of having a stripped structure remain if the structure is not
proposed to be immediately razed or immediately renovated; the presentation, if any, of the applicant;
the comments of the public; and other such matters germane to the decision.
(c) In granting a permit, the Community Development Director shall address the following matters: proof
of insurance; the amount of the Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit to be required of the Permit
Holder as a condition of issuance of the permit and as a requirement of operation; the justification for
drawing against and content of the presentment required to draw against the Irrevocable Standby
Letter of Credit; other State or local permits as required by law, rule, or regulation that must be
obtained as a condition of issuance of the permit or as a requirement of operation; reporting period for
submittal of required reports pursuant to Section 8-5-17 herein; percentage of non-salvageable
materials required to be recycled; reasonable special operating requirements to be required of the
Permit Holder in addition to those listed in Subsection 8-5-7 herein; and such other matters or
limitations as the Community Development Director determines necessary to protect the public
interest.
SEC 8-5-10 IRREVOCABLE STANDBY LETTER OF CREDIT.
(a) As a condition of issuance of the permit, the Permit Holder shall provide and maintain in effect an
Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit naming the City of Menasha as beneficiary in an amount
required by the Administrative Services Director and in a form approved by the City of Menasha
Attorney. The City Attorney shall also approve the form and content of the draw order and all
necessary presentment required to compel payment by the issuer to the City of Menasha of all funds
subject to the Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit.
(b) The Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit shall be the guarantee of performance by the Permit Holder.
The Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit must be issued by a financial institution certified by the
State to conduct such business within the State of Wisconsin, allowing for direct draw by the City of
Menasha upon presentment to the issuing bank, without court action or approval by Permit Holder, to
complete work or repair damage that was the obligation of the Permit Holder. The Irrevocable
Standby Letter of Credit must contain as part of its provisions that it will be maintained constantly in
force as an obligation to the City of Menasha for no less than one year after project completion as
reasonably determined by the Community Development Director or one year after the expiration of a
permit issued under this section to the Permit Holder, whichever is later.
(c) In determining the required amount of the Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit the Administrative
Services Director shall consider: the recommendations, if any, of the reports of city officials; the
expertise of the applicant; the capitalization of the applicant; the scope of the proposed project; the
cost of rectifying the possible environmental hazards that could be created; the effect of the proposed
operation on the surrounding neighborhood; the cost of remediation of the City of Menasha; and
potential inability of the Permit Holder to fulfill its obligations. Annually, upon documented request
of the Permit Holder, the Administrative Services Director may review the pertinent facts and decide
to reduce the amount of the required Letter of Credit in accordance with work completed or threats
mitigated. In the circumstance that the Administrative Services Director determines the requirements
to obtain an Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit are unreasonable, the Administrative Services
Director may, in the exercise of his or her discretion, authorize one or more alternate forms of
security in lieu of an Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit.
SEC 8-5-11 PERMIT TERM.
(a) The initial term for a permit under this section shall be for a period of one (1) year from the date of
issue. Renewals and renewal term shall be at the discretion of the Director of Community
Development.
(b) ASSIGNMENT. No permit issued pursuant to this ordinance is assignable or transferable without the
advance written permission of the Director of Community Development, which shall not be granted
unless the Permit Holder and prospective assignee demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director of
Community Development that assignee is capable of completing the project and all required forms of
insurance and financial assurance are made effective prior to the assignment.
SEC 8-5-12 GENERAL OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
(a) The following general operating requirements shall apply to the Permit Holder and those working for
Permit Holder subject to terms of the permit in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance:
1. The valid permit issued pursuant to this ordinance shall be plainly displayed on the premises upon
which the building is located.
2. The building and premises shall, at all times, be maintained in as clean, neat, and sanitary of a
condition as such premises will reasonably permit.
3. No garbage, refuse, or other waste likely or susceptible to give off a foul odor or attract vermin
shall be kept on the premises, except for domestic garbage kept in rodent-proof covered
containers, which are removed from the premises as often as necessary to provide a sanitary, odor
free, and vermin free environment.
4. Work done under this permit shall be performed in accordance with the permit and any plans
approved by the Community Development Director and is subject to inspection by the Code
Official and other inspectors as provided in this ordinance. Any violation of the permit shall be
deemed a violation of this ordinance.
5. As a condition of issuing the permit, a Permit Holder shall maintain insurance policies during the
life of the permit in the following minimum amounts. These policies shall be primary and provide
coverage work performed on the property or associated with the work under the permit and shall
provide certificates issued by the carriers as proof of all required coverages:
i. Automobile Liability (Owned, non-owned, leased): Twenty-five Hundred Thousand
Dollars ($250,000) each person/Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000) each
accident for Bodily Injury and One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000) for Property
Damage
ii. Bodily Injury: One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) each occurrence.
iii. Property Damage: One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) each occurrence.
iv. Pollution Legal Liability: Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000) each loss where risk is
presented of exacerbation of existing environmental pollution or discharge of any
hazardous waste to the environment or asbestos removal, abatement, remediation, or
dumping/disposal in a Federal or State regulated facility is required; the Community
Development Director may require a greater or lesser minimum amount down to and
including zero ($0) of Pollution Legal Liability insurance policy, depending on the
circumstances of the project that is the subject of the permit.
v. Workers’ Compensation: Statutory Limits.
vi. Umbrella Liability: Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000) over the primary insurance
coverages listed above.
6. No scrap salvage or debris, which is temporarily stored on the premises, shall be allowed to rest
or protrude over any public rights-of-way or public property or become scattered about or blown
off the premise.
7. No mechanized process whatsoever shall be utilized on premises to reduce the volume of
salvageable material or debris after such salvageable material has been detached from the real
property, unless a special exception is provided by the Community Development Director in
conjunction with a specific permit. Such prohibited mechanized processes include, but are not
limited to, crushing and shredding.
i. There shall be strict compliance with SEC. 11-7-3 subsection P.
ii. There shall be strict compliance with SEC. 11-7-8 subsection O.
8. No premises or building subject to a permit shall be allowed to become a public nuisance or be
operated in such a manner as to adversely affect public safety, health, or welfare.
9. There shall be full compliance with the City of Menasha City Code, as well as any city, county,
state, or federal regulations which may be applicable. These include, but are not limited to Title
15; Title 5, Section 3; and Title 8, Section 1.
10. The Permit Holder shall, during the salvage process, maintain the work site in a safe and secure
condition.
11. The Permit Holder shall keep a log of all shipments to and from the work site during the project,
including the date, time, transport company, vehicle license number, and description of type and
amount of material transported.
12. The Permit Holder shall identify, handle, manage, store, and dispose of all wastes, lead, asbestos,
waste oils, hazardous materials, and hazardous substances as provided in the plan submitted as
part of the application and permitting process. In the event of any changed conditions or plans,
the Permit Holder is required to promptly notify the Director of Community Development in
order to pursue an amended permit.
13. The Permit Holder shall dispose of building debris in a licensed landfill except for salvaged and
recycled materials. At any time, the Permit Holder shall produce to the Community Development
Director receipts and/or an itemized list of debris disposed of by dumping, recycling, or salvage.
14. The Permit Holder shall meet all recycling requirements as provided in the approved permit.
15. The Permit Holder shall be responsible for disconnections of utilities, including plumbing and
electrical, necessary for safe conduct of the salvaging process and shall provide evidence that the
necessary disconnections have been accomplished.
16. The Permit Holder shall restore the site and/or Vacated Building to the conditions set forth in the
approved plans in the permit.
17. The Permit Holder shall comply with all orders of the Community Development Director
imposed upon granting of the permit.
18. The Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit imposed as a condition of issuance of the permit shall be
maintained in full force and effect at all times until one year following the Community
Development Director’s finding project completion.
19. Permit Holder must provide to the City of Menasha, and must maintain current, a list of
contractors doing work that is subject to a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance, which shall
include proof of valid and subsisting policies of insurance in satisfaction of the General Operating
Requirements specified herein. As used herein, the phrase “maintain current” means that the list
filed with the City of Menasha is updated by the Permit Holder as necessary to comply with the
ordinance prior to each contractor commencing work pursuant to the permit.
20. Permit Holder shall also ensure that subcontractors have appropriate insurance as determined by
the Community Development Director. This may include coverage under the Permit Holder’s
policy, individual coverage, or a combination thereof. The Community Development Director
may also require subcontractors to obtain separate permits pursuant to this Ordinance based on
the type of proposed activities or extent or complexity of the salvaging activities proposed.
SEC 8-5-13 INSPECTIONS.
(a) Permit Holders and property owners shall allow inspection by representatives of the City of Menasha
having enforcement powers to inspect the premises subject to the permit, as often as may be required
to allow said representatives to perform their duties and assure compliance with this ordinance, as
well as state and federal laws. Inspections shall be made during normal hours of business operation
except when the presence of emergency circumstances which require prompt action to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare or to preserve evidence of noncompliance with this ordinance or
state or federal laws.
(b) Inspection may include inspection of the entire property subject to the permit, including buildings,
structures, basement, sub-basements, vaults, and other areas of the property.
(c) The unreasonable failure to allow inspections shall be grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of
the permit.
(d) Inspections may include but are not limited to: taking wipe samples; waste, structural or product
sampling; sampling of pits; the logging, gauging, and sampling of existing wells; videotaping;
preparing site sketches; taking photographs; and/or testing or sampling the groundwater, soil, surface
water, sediments, air, soil vapor, or other material.
SEC 8-5-14 NON-RENEWAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
(a) If in the opinion of the Community Development Director, the public is subject to imminent danger
due to violation of any one or combination of the General Operating Requirements, the Community
Development Director may issue an order to the violator or the Permit Holder requiring immediate
cessation of those operations giving rise to the imminent danger. The recipient of any such order shall
cause such operations to cease as directed by the Code Official. Failure to maintain insurance, a
Letter of Credit as required, or to permit inspection as required are each per se violations implicating
imminent danger to the public necessitating an order to cease all operations.
(b) There is no right or expectation of permit renewal. The permit may be renewed at the discretion of the
Community Development Director upon application of a Permit Holder as described in Section 8-5-7
of this ordinance.
(c) If the Community Development Director decides not to renew, suspends, or revokes a permit, a
written report of such action shall be made, which shall include findings of fact, conclusions, and
reasons for the action taken with respect to the permit.
(d) The Permit Holder shall be provided with a copy of the report and may make a written appeal of the
decision to the Common Council to be considered at its next regular meeting following the issuance
of the report. The Common Council, after considering the Community Development Director’s report
and any arguments presented by the Community Development Director or the Permit Holder, may
sustain, modify, or overrule the suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal.
SEC 8-5-15 VIOLATIONS AND LIABILITY.
(a) It shall be a violation of this ordinance to perform, conduct, direct, or allow removal of Salvageable
Material except in conformance with a valid permit issued pursuant to this ordinance.
(b) It shall be a violation of this ordinance to disobey or act contrary to any order issued pursuant to this
ordinance.
(c) The Owner and Permit Holder shall be jointly and severally liable for any violation of this ordinance
and any violation of any condition of the permit pursuant to this ordinance, whether caused by act or
omission, including applicable fines and penalties together with the City of Menasha’s costs of
enforcement, including attorneys’ fees.
SEC 8-5-16 ENFORCEMENT, FINES, AND PENALTIES.
The Community Development Director shall have the primary responsibility to enforce this ordinance.
Violations of this ordinance shall be subject to the general provisions of Section 1-1-7. For the purpose of
calculating fines and penalties, each day of continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense. Any
violation of this ordinance constitutes a public nuisance and in addition to any other remedies provided or
allowed the City of Menasha may apply to a court of competent and local jurisdiction for injunctive relief
and the assessment of damages including attorneys’ fees and costs.
SEC 8-5-17 REPORTING.
(a) Permit Holders shall provide reports to the Community Development Director in accordance with the
reporting requirements specified in the permit as approved by the Community Development Director.
The following reports are required.
1. Salvageable Materials report that identifies the type, quantity, and disposition of Salvageable
Materials removed from the property during the reporting period.
2. Hazardous wastes/materials report that identifies the type, quantity, and disposition of hazardous
wastes/materials removed from the site during the reporting period. This report should be
accompanied by supporting documentation of disposal, name and contact information of haulers,
and copies of any applicable permits/exemptions.
3. Waste report that identifies the type, quantity, and disposition of non-salvageable waste materials
removed from the site.
4. Any instances of environmental monitoring performed during the reporting period and results of
the same.
(b) Upon demand of the Community Development Director the following reports must also include:
1. Supporting documentation of removal and disposition of materials which shall include weigh
tickets, bills of lading, sales receipts, and chain of custody logs or equivalent documentation.
2. A statement by the Permit Holder that documentation supporting compliance with this ordinance
will be maintained for two years from submission of the reports.
3. A statement from the Permit Holder that documentation supporting the information in the reports
is truthful and accurate.
120294
9:1
CHAPTER 1
Cable Television
9-1-1 General Provisions -- Cable Television
9-1-2 Statement of Intent and Purpose
9-1-3 Award Fees and Franchising Costs
9-1-4 Short Title
9-1-5 Defini tions
SEC. 9-1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS -- CABLE TELEVISION.
Cable television systems within the City shall be permitted pursuant to contract(s) between the
operator(s) and the City of Menasha; such contract(s) are adopted and incorporated herein by
reference.
SEC. 9-1-2 STATEMENT OF INTENT AND PURPOSE.
The City intends, by the adoption of this Franchise, to bring about the continued development and
operation of a System. Such a development can contribute significantly to meeting the
communications needs and desires of many individuals, associations, and institutions.
SEC. 9-1-3 AWARD FEES AND FRANCHISING COSTS.
Grantee shall reimburse the City for all costs, including attorney's fees and publication fees,
expended in the soliciting, processing, and awarding of the Franchise; provided, however, Grantee's
obligation shall not exceed Ten Thousand Dollars and 00/100 ($10,000.00). Payment shall be made
by Grantee at the time of acceptance of this Franchise as set forth in Section 13.01 hereof.
SEC. 9-1-4 SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "City of Menasha Cable Television Franchise
Ordinance." Within this document it shall also be referred to as "this Franchise" or "the Franchise."
SEC. 9-1-5 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Franchise, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall
have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future tense and words in the future tense include the present tense, words in the
plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
120294
9:2
(a) Basic Service means that level of service regularly provided to all subscribers which
includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and the access channels
required herein.
(b) Cable Mile means a mile of cable bearing strand.
(c) Channel means a six (6) Megahertz (MHz) frequency band, which is capable of carrying
either one standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or other non-video signals, or
some combination of such signals.
(d) City means City of Menasha, Wisconsin, a municipal corporation in the State of Wisconsin
or its delegations. The Common Council is the authority of the City.
(e) Completion of the System Rebuild means that the System will be rebuilt, as needed, and
activated in accordance with Section 5.02 hereof. Specifically, all strand will be put up and
all necessary cable lashed or buried; trenches refilled and landscaping replaced; amplifiers
and power supplies installed and grounded; and all other necessary construction will be
completed so that the System when rebuilt, will be capable of distributing a signal to any
subscriber and ready for testing by the City pursuant to Section 7.01(d) hereof.
(f) Converter means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible
to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber and by an appropriate channel
selector also permits a subscriber to view all signals included in the service level delivered at
designated converter dial locations.
(g) Drop means the cable that connects the subscriber terminal at a point in the subscriber's
home, designated by the subscriber, to the nearest feeder cable of the System.
(h) Extension means a required increase in the trunk or feeder cable in order to facilitate
installation of a drop.
(i) Dwelling Unit means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or
designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more individuals or families.
The term Dwelling Unit is not limited to units occupied by persons as their usual place of
residence and includes houses rented periodically or used only as seasonal homes.
(j) FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or a designated representative.
(k) Grantee means Warner Cable Communications Inc., its agents, employees, lawful
successors, transferees or assignees.
(l) Gross Revenues means the annual gross revenues of Grantee from all sources of operations
of the System within the City including, but not limited to, Basic Service monthly fees, pay
television fees, installation and re-connection fees. This term does not include any sales,
excise or other taxes collected by Grantee on behalf of the state, city, or other governmental
unit, or any local advertising revenues. Gross revenues shall not include subscriber or
customer made debts which the Grantee is not able to collect. Revenues generated from
per-program audio-visual signals shall not be included in the definition of Gross Revenues
until August 1, 1989.
(m) Installation means the act of connecting the System from the feeder cable to the subscriber
terminal so that cable service may be received by the subscriber.
(n) Pay Television means the delivery over the System of per-channel or per-program
audio-visual signals to subscribers for a fee or charge, in addition to the charge for Basic
Service.
(o) Person means any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, or organization authorized to do
business in the State of Wisconsin, or any natural person.
(p) Public Property means any real property other than a Street owned by any governmental
unit.
(q) Street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, public road,
120294
9:3
public highway, public freeway, public lane, public path, public way, public alley, public
court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive, or any public
easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by the City which shall, within its proper use
and meaning in the sole opinion of the City, entitle Grantee the use thereof for the purpose of
installing or transmitting over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily
necessary and pertinent to a System.
(r) Subscriber means any person or entity who subscribes to a service provided by Grantee by
means of or in connection with the System whether or not a fee is paid for such service.
(s) System means facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable television
service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers
within the City, but such term does not include:
(1) A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more
television broadcast stations;
(2) A facility that serves only subscribers in one (1) or more multiple unit dwelling
under common ownership, control or management, unless such facility or facilities
uses any public right-of-way;
(3) A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions
of Title II of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, except that such facility
shall be considered a System to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of
video programming directly to subscribers; or
(4) Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility
systems.
(t) System Rebuild means that process which will be commenced in November 1990, and will
be completed year end 1991, which is more fully described in Section 9-1-7(b) hereof by
which Grantee will undertake certain steps to provide a System with sixty (60) channel
capacity and upper bandwidth of 450 MHz.
(u) System Upgrade means that process which will make certain physical improvements to the
System, more fully described in Section 9-1-7(a).
(v) Normal Business Hours, as applied to the Grantee, shall mean those hours during which
similar businesses locally are open to serve customers. In all cases, Normal Business Hours
must include some evening hours at least one night per week, and/or some weekend hours.
(w) Normal Operation Conditions shall mean those service conditions which are within the
control of the Grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the Grantee
include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone
network outages, and sever or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are
ordinarily within the control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, special
promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods,
and maintenance or upgrade of the Cable System.
120294
9:4
SEC. 9-1-6 GRANT OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISION
(a) GRANT OF FRANCHISE. This Franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and conditions
contained herein. Such terms and conditions shall be subordinate to all applicable provisions
of state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
(b) CRITERIA OF SELECTION. The Grantee's technical ability, financial condition and
legal qualifications were considered and approved by the City in full public proceedings and
affording reasonable notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
(c) AUTHORITY FOR USE OF STREETS.
(1) For the purpose of operating and maintaining a System in the City, Grantee may
erect, install, construct, repair, replace, relocate, reconstruct, and retain in, on, over,
under, upon, across, and along the Streets within the City such lines, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals,
attachments, and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to
the operation of the System; provided, however, that all applicable permits are
applied for and granted, all fees paid and all other City Codes and Ordinances are
otherwise complied with.
(2) Grantee shall construct and maintain the System so as not to interfere with other uses
of Streets. Grantee shall wherever possible make use of existing poles and other
facilities available to Grantee. Grantee shall provide reasonable public notice to
residents affected by proposed work; provided, however, Grantee shall make a good
faith effort to individually notify affected residents where the proposed work is not
on public property prior to commencement of that work.
(3) Notwithstanding the above grant to use Streets, no Street shall be used by Grantee if
the City, in its sole opinion, determines that such use is inconsistent with the terms,
conditions, or provisions by which such Street was created or dedicated, or presently
used.
(d) FRANCHISE TERM. This Franchise shall commence upon acceptance of this agreement
and shall expire on December 31, 2001, unless renewed, revoked, or terminated sooner as
herein provided.
(e) AREA COVERED. This Franchise is granted for the territorial boundary of the City. In
the event of annexation by the City, any new territory shall become part of the area covered.
(f) POLICE POWERS. Grantee's rights are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt
and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Grantee
shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to that
power.
(g) USE OF GRANTEE FACILITIES. The City shall have the right to install and maintain,
free of charge, within the underground pipes and conduits of Grantee, any wires and fixtures
desired by the City to the extent that installation and maintenance does not interfere with
existing and future operations of Grantee.
(h) WRITTEN NOTICE. All notices, reports, or demands required to be given in writing
under this Franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered personally to the person
designated below, or on the delivery date documented by the U. S. Postal Service, or express
courier service, as follows:
120294
9:5
If to the City: City of Menasha
140 Main Street
Menasha, WI 54952
Attn: City Clerk
If to the Grantee: Warner Cable Communications Inc.
304 High Avenue
P.O. Box 240
Oshkosh, WI 54901
Warner Cable Communications, Inc.
400 Metro Place N.
Dublin, OH 43017
Attn: Government Relations
Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party given as
provided in this section.
(i) FRANCHISE NON-EXCLUSIVE. The Franchise granted herein is non-exclusive. The
City specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, additional franchises for a System in
accordance with the state and federal law and on the same material terms and conditions as
contained in this Franchise.
SEC. 9-1-7 DESIGN PROVISIONS.
(a) SYSTEM UPGRADE. Grantee shall undertake an upgrading of the System; such upgrade
to be performed in conjunction with the rebuild provided herein. This System upgrade shall,
at a minimum, include the following:
(1) A complete readout and inspection and electronic monitoring in order to identify
areas and specific locations of defective cable, connectors, traps, and passive devices
which may cause signal leakage.
(2) Upon identification of problems in accordance with paragraph (1) above, Grantee
shall correct the deficiencies. Corrective measures will include, but not be limited to,
repair, or replacement of all defective cable, replacement of defective connectors
with state-of-the-art integral mandral-type connectors, and replacement of all
defective drops, traps, and passive devices.
(3) A second complete readout of the System using electronic monitoring equipment to
insure that all deficiencies have been corrected.
(b) SYSTEM REBUILD. Grantee shall commence a rebuild of the system as needed, as
provided in Sec. 9-1-5.
(1) Minimum general design specifications shall be as follows:
a. The System will include all necessary electronic equipment, power supplies,
connectors, and other parts, components, and equipment necessary to provide
a complete and operational System with the frequency range of Fifty (50) to
Four Hundred Fifty (450) MHz.
b. The System will be rated for continuous twenty-four (24) hour service in an
environment of up to One Hundred (100%) percent humidity and of
temperature extremes typical of the City.
c. The System will be designed not to interfere with radio and/or television
120294
9:6
reception of non-subscribers.
d. All active circuitry in the equipment used shall be solid state and shall be
equipped with electronic components for lighting and surge protection.
e. Lighting arresters will be installed on One Hundred Ten (110) VAC lines of
AC power suppliers along with surge arresters and time delay relays on the
Sixty (60) volt secondary.
f. Remote power supply for powering of electronic equipment will be so
regulated that AC output voltage does not vary by more than plus or minus
Two percent (2%) with an input voltage range of Ninety (90) to One
Hundred Thirty (130) volts AC. The power location will not generate
transients when energized that may prove harmful to the Systems equipment
and components.
g. All outdoor equipment shall be housed in protective housings which offer
full protection against local environmental conditions.
h. All equipment will be equipped with coaxial fittings of positive moisture
protection and effective electrical connection. Trunk line amplifiers,
bridging amplifiers and line extender amplifiers will be contained in a
weatherproof housing capable of strand mounting.
i. The head-end shall be equipped with stand-by emergency generation
capability.
(2) Minimum specifications for the transportation system shall be as follows:
a. The transportation system shall be single trunk, single feeder cable type.
b. The transportation system shall be capable of transmitting a minimum of
Sixty (60) channels plus the complete FM band in the forward direction in
the frequency band of Fifty (50) to Four Hundred Fifty (450) MHz.
c. All amplifiers shall be solid state equipment and designed to plug in Five (5)
to Thirty (30) MHz reverse modules and filters.
d. All passive equipment shall have a passband from Five (5) to Four Hundred
Fifty (450) MHz.
(3) Minimum specifications for the subscriber system shall be as follows:
a. There shall be no active equipment in underground vaults or apartment lock
boxes unless conditions warrant and no other alternatives are feasible.
b. There shall be no more than two line extenders in a cascade as a general
design practice.
(4) Minimum specifications for subscriber System shall be as follows:
a. All subscriber taps will be of the directional couplet type with either 1, 2, 4,
or 8 outputs.
b. In the forward distribution system, at balanced temperature, a minimum level
of Zero (0) dBmv shall be maintained at the back of the subscriber's
television set at the input of the subscriber's converter.
c. Plant shall be designed for dedicated facilities to cause a tap to be located for
each possible subscriber shown on subscriber maps at the time of System
design. Additional taps will be handled on a field change work order
following design approval.
d. Terminating resistors and weather proofing will be provided on all outputs of
each subscriber tap.
e. The System will be designed to allow a directional coupler to be located at a
point capable of supplying a signal to apartments, hospitals, institutions,
multiple dwellings and nonstandard residential subscribers at Zero (0) dBmv
120294
9:7
minimum at the back of the subscriber's television set or at the input of the
subscriber's converter.
(5) The coaxial cable used in the System will be the latest field-proven type suitable for
local environmental conditions.
(c) INSTITUTIONAL LOOP.
(1) Grantee shall continue to provide for control and use by the City a separate twelve
channel broadband closed circuit transmission loop. The loop shall both originate
and terminate at the present location and shall continue to serve the locations
presently served. Grantee shall also provide service to Menasha Library and City
Hall locations within thirty (30) days upon request of the City.
(2) As a part of the System Rebuild Grantee shall upgrade the institutional loop to a
Three Hundred (300) MHz mid-split, bi-directional system.
(3) Grantee shall continue to maintain the return capabilities in order that programming
can be originated at the current sites.
(d) SERVICE AREA.
(1) Grantee shall continue to serve those areas of the City currently served as of March
15, 1987.
(2) Grantee shall extend the System to unserved areas requiring an extension, within a
reasonable period of time, when such areas achieve a density equivalent to thirty (30)
Dwelling Units per aerial cable mile or Sixty (60) Dwelling Units per underground
cable mile as measured from the nearest point of existing useable cable trunk.
(3) Subscribers requiring a drop of One Hundred Fifty (150) feet or less shall be
provided service upon payment of a standard installation fee. Installations requiring
underground drops or aerial drops in excess of One Hundred Fifty (150) feet shall be
considered non-standard installation to be charged at the excess cost of installation,
beyond One Hundred Fifty (150) feet.
(4) Service will be provided to any other residential or non-residential unit upon
agreement of the property owner to pay the excess cost of the required extension
and/or installation. For purposes of this section, excess cost shall be calculated as a
prorated amount, based upon the number of dwelling units in the proposed extension
area, compared to the density standard set forth in Sec. 9-1-7(d)(2).
(e) PROVISIONS OF SERVICE.
(1) After service has been established by activating trunk and distribution cable for any
area, Grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that area
Thirty (30) days from the date of request.
(2) Grantee shall inform the subscriber that it will install at a reasonable charge, a
switching device so as to permit a subscriber to continue to utilize that subscriber's
own television antenna as the subscriber determines.
(f) TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
(1) For purposes of compliance with this agreement, Grantee shall, at all times, operate
its system, at a minimum, in conformance with the technical specifications contained
in the FCC regulations, or any applicable federal statute or administrative regulation
which may supersede such rules. Grantee shall endeavor to operate its system in
conformance with the standards set forth below:
120294
9:8
Minimum Carrier to Noise 43.5 dB
Minimum Composite Triple Beat (CW)
60 Channel Load 51.5 dB
Minimum Cross Mod Synchronous
60 Channel Load 51.5 dB
Signal level at the back of the
subscriber's television set
or at converter input 0 dBmv (minimum)
(2) In the event special testing after the System Rebuild reports that Grantee is not
meeting the technical parameters set forth in paragraph One (1) above, Grantee shall
report in writing to the City what corrective measures are being taken or why
corrective measures are not necessary to meet FCC standards.
(3) In no event shall the failure to meet the technical parameters set forth in paragraph
One (1) above be grounds for the imposition of penalties or the revocation of this
Franchise unless so allowed under state or federal law.
(g) SPECIAL TESTING.
(1) At any time after commencement of service to subscribers, the City may require or
may retain an independent third-party with industry recognized credentials to
perform reasonable additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test
procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's drop. Such additional tests will
be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating an
unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance, and such tests will be limited
to the particular matter in controversy.
(2) The City shall endeavor to so arrange its requests for such special tests so as to
minimize hardship or inconvenience to Grantee or to the subscriber.
(3) Grantee shall bear all expenses incurred by the City as a result of special testing if
such testing after the System Rebuild is completed finds the System not to be in
compliance with those standards set forth by FCC in Section 9-1-7(f) unless the
independent third-party reports that such non-compliance is due to reasons beyond
the control of Grantee.
(4) If such testing finds the System to be in compliance with those standards set forth by
FCC in Section 9-1-7(f) after the System Rebuild is completed, or the
noncompliance is due to reasons beyond the control of Grantee, then the City shall
bear all expenses incurred by the City as a result of special testing.
(5) Any special testing ordered by the City prior to the Completion of the System
Rebuild shall be borne by the City unless the independent third-party reports ongoing
fault on the part of Grantee, in which case Grantee shall bear the cost of the special
testing.
SEC. 9-1-8 SERVICE PROVISIONS.
(a) BASIC SERVICES. Grantee shall continue to offer programming services in the following
categories:
(1) Local network broadcast.
(2) Local independent broadcast.
(3) Satellite news service.
(4) Satellite entertainment services.
120294
9:9
(5) Public broadcasting service.
(6) Weather service.
(7) Premium pay services.
(8) Satellite sports service.
(9) Children's programming.
All programming decisions shall be that of Grantee; provided however, Grantee shall
maintain the category of services listed herein.
(b) EMERGENCY SERVICES. Grantee shall provide the City with an emergency alert
override system, accessible via telephone security code. Grantee shall, at its own expense,
install, maintain, and make the system fully operational. This system shall be capable of
overriding the audio on all channels of the subscriber System in order that the Winnebago
County Emergency Government may deliver emergency messages.
(c) PUBLIC ACCESS.
(1) The parties to this Franchise agree that, at the inception of this Franchise agreement,
no public access channel shall be required. The parties further agree that, during the
term of this Franchise, if the City, at its sole option, determines that a public access
channel would serve the public interest, the Grantee, within three (3) months of
written notification of said determination by the City, shall provide said public access
channel. The election to mandate a public access channel may be made by the City
at anytime during the term of this Franchise.
(2) In the event the City requires the public access channel above mentioned, the
Grantee and the City jointly agree to establish rules for the administration of the
designated public access channel. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, Grantee
shall not exercise any editorial control over any access channel.
SEC. 9-1-9 CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS.
(a) CONSTRUCTION TIMETABLE.
(1) The System Upgrade, as described in Section 9-1-7(a), shall be completed as
provided in that section.
(2) Grantee shall give notice to the City at such time as Grantee has completed the
System Rebuild. The notice that the System Rebuild has been completed shall
include a description and reasonable detail of those improvements made as a result of
the System Rebuild. The notice of completion of the System Rebuild shall include
the results of the proof of performance tests conducted by the Grantee in accordance
with the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.
(3) Upon receipt of notice and any test results pursuant to paragraph two (2), the City
may accept the notice and deem the rebuilding complete or determine, at its sole
discretion, to pursue additional independent testing at the City's expense and by an
independent third-party selected by the City. If the City pursues additional testing it
shall have sixty (60) days from receipt of Grantee's notice to receive a written report
from an independent third-party; provided, however, if the City fails to receive such
a written report within the sixty (60) days the System rebuilding shall be deemed
completed, unless the failure to receive such a report is due to unforeseen events, acts
of God, or events beyond the reasonable control of the City.
(4) The completion of the System Rebuild shall be deemed to have taken place on:
(1) of the date specified in Grantee's notice of actual completion, subject to
120294
9:10
positive confirmation in the independent third party's report or;
(2) if such report is not positive, on the date on which the independent
third-party reports positive confirmation, whichever is later. In rendering
such a report, the independent third-party shall report on the following:
a. All improvements contemplated by the System Rebuild have been
made or otherwise satisfactorily resolved;
b. Test results at up to ten (10) widely separated subscriber drops and
using the following tests:
1. Signal level
2. Hum
3. Bandpass response of the System
4. Carrier to noise of the System
5. TASO picture quality of two (2) or better
c. Compliance with all applicable codes and standards.
(5) The cost of any independent third-party so retained by the City shall be the
responsibility of the City if such testing finds the System is in compliance with those
standards set forth in Section 9-1-7(f); provided, however, if such testing finds the
System not to be in compliance with Section 9-1-7(f), then the costs of the City's
independent third-party shall be the responsibility of Grantee unless the independent
third-party reports that such noncompliance is due to reasons beyond the control of
Grantee.
(b) CONSTRUCTION DELAY. Grantee shall notify the City of any delay in the completion
of the System Upgrade or the System Rebuild. The City may extend the scheduled
completion date for delays which result from occurrence of unforeseen events or acts of God.
(c) REBUILD PROGRESS REPORTS. Grantee shall furnish the City, upon request of the
City, written reports, detailing the progress of the System Rebuild. Grantee shall provide
any reasonable additional information which the City may desire as a part of such progress
reports.
(d) CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
(1) All construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and any amendments thereto as well as
all state and local codes where applicable.
(2) All installation of electronic equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable and
installed in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical and Safety
Code and National Electrical Code as amended.
(3) Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be designed for the proper loading as
specified in Electronics Industry Association's R.S. 3-22A Specifications.
(4) Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected, and
maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal
Aviation Administration and all other applicable state or local codes and regulations.
(5) All of Grantee's plant and equipment, including but not limited to the antenna site,
headend and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire,
cable, coaxial cable, fixtures, and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained, and operated in
accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance
and construction personnel so as not to endanger or interfere with improvements the
City may deem appropriate to make, or to interfere in any manner with the rights of
any property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
120294
9:11
(6) Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use
commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which
are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public.
(e) CONSTRUCTION CODES AND PERMITS.
(1) Grantee shall obtain all necessary permits from the City before commencing any
upgrading or rebuilding of the System, including the opening or disturbance of any
Street, or private or public property within the City. Grantee shall strictly adhere to
all building and zoning codes currently or hereafter applicable to construction,
operation or maintenance of the System in the City.
(2) The City shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work
performed pursuant to the provisions of this Franchise and to make such tests as it
shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the Franchise and
applicable provisions of local, state, and federal law.
(f) REPAIR OF STREETS AND PROPERTY. Any and all Streets or public property or
private property which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, repair,
replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance, or reconstruction of the System shall be
promptly repaired by Grantee, at its expense, and to condition as good as that prevailing
prior to Grantee's construction.
(g) USE OF EXISTING POLES. Grantee shall not erect, for any reason, any pole on or along
any street in an existing aerial utility system without the advance written approval of the City
(acting through its Electric and Water Commission--Menasha only) which approval shall not
be unreasonably withheld.
(h) UNDERGROUNDING OF CABLE. Cable shall be installed underground at Grantee's
expense where both the existing telephone and electrical utilities are already underground.
Previously installed aerial cable shall be placed underground in concert with other utilities
when both the telephone and electrical utilities convert form aerial to underground
construction. Grantee shall place cable underground in newly platted areas in concert with
both the telephone and electrical utilities, unless this requirement is waived by the City.
(i) RESERVATION OF STREET RIGHTS.
(1) Nothing in this Franchise shall be construed to prevent the City from construction,
maintaining, repairing, or relocating sewers; grading, paving, maintaining, repairing,
relocating and/or altering any Street; constructing, laying down, repairing,
maintaining or relocating any water mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating,
or repairing any sidewalk or other public work.
(2) All such work shall be done, insofar as practicable in such manner as not to obstruct,
injure, or prevent the free use and operation of the poles, wires, conduits, conductors,
pipes, or appurtenances of Grantee.
(3) If any such property of Grantee shall interfere with the construction or relocation,
maintenance or repair of any Street or public improvement, whether it be
construction, repair, maintenance, removal, or relocation of a sewer, public sidewalk,
or watermain, Street or any other public improvement, thirty (30) days notice shall be
given to Grantee by the City and all such poles, wires, conduits, or other appliances
and facilities shall be removed or replaced by Grantee in such manner as shall be
directed by the City so that the same shall not interfere with the said public work of
the City, as determined by the City, and such removal or replacement shall be at the
expense of Grantee herein.
(j) STREET VACATION OR ABANDONMENT. In the event any Street or portion thereof
used by Grantee shall be vacated by the City or the use thereof discontinued by Grantee,
during the term of this Franchise, Grantee shall, at Grantee's expense, forthwith remove its
120294
9:12
facilities therefrom unless specifically permitted by the owner to continue the same, and on
the removal thereof restore, repair or reconstruct the Street area where such removal has
occurred and place the Street area where such removal has occurred to a condition similar to
that existing before such removal took place. In the event of failure, neglect or refusal of
Grantee, after thirty (30) days notice by the City to remove the facilities or to repair, restore,
reconstruct, improve or maintain such Street portion, the owner may do such work or cause
it to be done, and the cost thereof as found and declared by the City shall be paid by Grantee
as directed by the City and collection may be made by any available remedy.
(k) MOVEMENT OF FACILITIES. In the event it is necessary temporarily to move or
remove any of Grantee's wires, cables, poles, or other facilities placed pursuant to this
Franchise, in order to lawfully move a large object, vehicle, building, or other structure over
any Street of the City, upon two (2) weeks notice by the City to Grantee, Grantee shall move,
at the expense of the person requesting the temporary removal, such of his facilities as
maybe required to facilitate such movements. Any service disruption provisions of this
Franchise shall not apply in the event that the removal of Grantee's wires, cables, poles, or
other facilities results in temporary service disruptions.
(l) TRIMMING OF TREES. Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property
and within utility easements at its own expense, as it may be necessary to protect its wires
and facilities, consistent with all ordinances of the City. Trimming of trees on private
property shall require prior affirmative written consent of the property owner.
SEC. 9-1-10 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
(a) OPEN BOOKS AND RECORDS. The City shall have the right to inspect, or audit, upon
twenty-four (24) hours written notice on a confidential basis, consistent with applicable law,
at any time during normal business hours, all books, records, maps, plans, financial
statements, service complaint records, performance tests results, record of requests for
service and other like materials of Grantee which are reasonably necessary for the
administration or enforcement of this Franchise. Such notice shall state the purpose of the
inspection or audit and contain a description, to the best of the City's ability, of the books,
records, and documents the City wants to inspect or audit.
(b) COMMUNICATIONS WITH REGULATORY AGENCIES. Copies of all petitions,
applications, communications, and reports submitted for the System by Grantee or on behalf
of or relating to Grantee to the FCC, Securities and Exchange Commission or any other
federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to the System
authorized pursuant to this Franchise shall also be submitted upon request to the City.
Copies of responses from the regulatory agencies to Grantee shall likewise be furnished to
the City, upon request in an expeditious manner.
(c) ANNUAL REPORTS. Within one hundred twenty (120) days of the end of its fiscal year,
including the year in which the Franchise becomes effective, Grantee shall file with the City
a legible copy of the following information regarding the System.
(1) A financial statement including a statement of income, operating expenses, balance
sheets with a schedule of property, plant, and equipment, and a statement of sources
and uses of funds prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles and certified by a financial officer of Grantee.
(2) A summary of the previous year's activities in the development of the System,
including, but not limited to, construction and services began or discontinued during
the reported year.
120294
9:13
(3) A current copy of its subscriber service agreement.
(4) A summary of service repair complaints complied from service work orders.
(d) PERIODIC INSPECTION. Upon request of the City, the City and Grantee shall
undertake an inspection of the System to ascertain the System performance at subscriber
drops randomly selected by the City. In the absence of any City action taken to further
exercise this right, the City and Grantee shall be subject to at least the procedures set forth
below.
(1) The City shall give written notice to Grantee of the City's intention to undertake an
inspection of the System and the name of that person who will participate for the
City representative shall be the Mayor or Council member designated by the Mayor.
The person so designated need not be trained in cable television technology.
(2) Grantee shall, within ten (10) days of receipt of the City notice, select one person
who will participate for Grantee and so notify the City. The person so designated
need not be trained in cable television technology.
(3) The representatives of the City and Grantee shall, within ten (10) days of the
selection of the Grantee representative, select a third representative who need not be
trained in cable television technology.
(4) Within fifteen (15) days after the appointment of all representatives shall commence
an inspection of the System in accordance with the following procedures:
a. The representatives shall commence the inspection of the System at the
head-end by viewing all programmed channels and, by a decision of the
majority, assign a rating of one (1) to five (5) for each channel of
programming.
b. The representatives shall then view the System performance at ten (10)
subscriber drops selected at random by the City. At least five (5) of these
locations shall be at the far end of the System. The representative shall view
each location and, by a decision of the majority, assign a rating of one (1) to
five (5) for each channel of programming so viewed.
c. In assigning a rating for each channel of programming so viewed, the
representative shall use the following scale:
1 - Excellent picture, no visible impairment
2 - Very good picture, small amount of impairment noticeable
3 - Good Picture, degradation noticeable
4 - Fair, degradation a problem
5 - Poor picture, unusable
(5) The representative shall prepare and submit to the City and Grantee a written report
of its findings and any appropriate recommendation.
(6) Upon request of the City, Grantee shall report to the City, at a regular or specially
scheduled meeting of the City, what steps are being taken to correct deficiencies
noted in the report or why corrective measures are not necessary. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary, the City may use the report submitted by the representatives
as a basis for ordering special testing of the System pursuant to Section 9-1-7(g)
hereof; however, the procedures specified in the Section, the results of those
procedures and/or the report submitted by the representatives shall not be utilized by
the City as a basis for Franchise noncompliance by the Grantee or as a basis for
nonrenewal of the Franchise Agreement. If formalized testing shows noncompliance
such information may be used as supporting documentation.
120294
9:14
(e) ADDITIONAL REPORTS. Grantee shall prepare and furnish to the City, at the times and
in the form prescribed, such additional reports with respect to its operation, affairs,
transactions, or property, which are reasonably necessary for the administration and
enforcement of this Franchise.
(f) SUBSCRIBER COMPLAINT PRACTICES.
(1) Grantee shall maintain an office within the City which shall be open during all usual
business hours. Grantee shall have a publicly listed telephone number and be so
operated as to receive subscriber complaints and requests on a twenty-four (24)
hour-a-day, seven (7) days-a-week basis. For purposes of this agreement, the
Grantee shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirement to provide an
office if the Grantee continues to provide the current toll-free number for telephone
contact, local drop-off point for equipment, and local payment center.
(2) Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service
only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as
possible shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use
of the System. A written log available for public inspection shall be maintained for
all service interruptions, except for those interruptions related to routine repair and
maintenance activities.
(3) Subscribers requests for maintenance or repairs received prior to 12:00 (noon)
Monday through Friday, shall be performed the same day.
(4) Subscribers requests for maintenance or repairs received after 12:00 (noon) shall be
performed within twenty-four (24) hours of the request or by the end of the next
business day unless the request involved an outage subject to paragraph (5).
(5) Grantee shall respond within twenty-four (24) hours, seven (7) days a week to any
subscriber complaint reporting a complete outage of all channels on Basic Service,
an outage of any Pay Television channel or the outage of one or more channels
System Wide. Grantee shall exercise its best effort to respond to any outage within
the same day.
(6) Maintenance personnel shall be on duty eight (8) hours a day, Monday through
Friday. Maintenance personnel shall be on-call to respond to System outages, as
described in paragraph (5) above, which may occur outside normal business hours.
(7) If Grantee fails to correct an outage of Basic Service or any Pay Television channel
within twenty-four (24) hours, Grantee shall, upon request of the subscriber, credit
1/30th of the monthly charge to the subscribers for each twenty-four (24) hours or
fraction thereof during which the subscriber was without service, except to the extent
that restoration of service is prevented by strike, injunction or other cause beyond the
control of Grantee.
(8) Requests for maintenance or repair of Grantee equipment shall be performed at no
charge to the subscriber. If such maintenance or repair is required as a result of
damage caused by the subscriber, Grantee may charge the subscriber according to its
actual cost for time and material.
(g) SUBSCRIBER INFORMATION. Grantee shall provide in plain language and in an easily
readable format written comprehensive information to all subscribers. The information to be
provided shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) The procedure for investigation and resolution of subscriber service complaints;
(2) Programming services and rates for such services;
(3) Billing practices;
(4) Service termination procedures;
(5) Converter/subscriber terminal equipment policy; and
120294
9:15
(6) Refund policy.
Grantee shall provide a copy of any proposed subscriber information packet to the City for
review and comment prior to the use of such an information packet.
(h) SUBSCRIBER BILLING PRACTICES AND REFUND POLICIES.
(1) Grantee shall notify each of its subscribers, in writing, of its billing practices. The
notice shall describe Grantee's billing practices including, but not limited to, the
following: frequency of billing, time periods upon which billing is based, advance
billing practices, security deposit requirements, charges for late payments, or
returned checks, payments required in order to avoid account delinquency,
availability of credits for service outages, procedures to be followed to request
service deletions including the notice period a subscriber must give to avoid liability
for such services, and procedures to be followed in the event of a billing dispute.
(2) Prior to changing one of its billing practices, Grantee shall notify all affected
subscribers of the change and include a description of the changed practice.
(3) The Subscriber bill shall contain the following information presented in plain
language and format:
a. Name of Grantee and telephone number;
b. The period of time over which each chargeable service is billed including
prorated periods as a result of establishment and termination of service;
c. The date of which individually chargeable services were rendered;
d. Each rate or charge levied;
e. The amount of the bill for the current billing period separate from any
balance due;
f. Any applicable credits on the date which they were applied;
g. The balance due;
h. The date on which payment is due from the subscriber.
(4) The account of a subscriber shall not be considered delinquent until at least five (5)
days have elapsed from the due date of the bill, which shall be a date certain and in
no event a statement that the bill is due upon receipt, and payment has not been
received by Grantee. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the account of a
subscriber being billed bi-monthly shall not be considered delinquent if one-half
(1/2) of the balance due is paid by the stated due date and the subscriber shall be
billed for the second month of that period.
(5) There shall be no charge for termination or disconnection of any service. If any
subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee, or any other properly
due fee or charge, Grantee may terminate the subscriber's service, provided,
however, that such termination shall not be effectuated until after the later of:
(1) thirty (30) days after the due date of said delinquent fee or charge; or,
(2) ten (10) days after delivery to subscriber of written notice of the intent to
terminate.
If a subscriber pays the delinquent fee or charge before expiration of the later of (1)
or (2), Grantee shall not terminate. After termination, upon payment in full of the
delinquent fee or charge and the payment of a re-connection charge, Grantee shall
reinstate the subscriber's service.
(6) Refunds to subscribers shall be made or determined in the following manner:
a. If Grantee fails, upon written request by a subscriber, to provide any service
then being offered by Grantee, Grantee shall refund within thirty (30) days of
a written request for refund by the subscriber, all deposits or advance charges
paid for such service by said subscriber. This provision does not alter
120294
9:16
Grantee's responsibility to subscribers under any separate contractual
agreement or relieve Grantee of any other liability.
b. If any subscriber terminates any monthly service because of the failure of
Grantee to render the service in accordance with this Franchise, Grantee shall
refund within thirty (30) days to such subscriber the pro-rated share of the
charge paid by the subscriber for the services not received. This provision
does not relieve Grantee of liability established in other provisions of this
Franchise.
(7) If any subscriber terminates, for any reason not set forth above, any monthly service
prior to the end of a prepaid period longer than one month, a prorated portion of any
prepaid subscriber service fee over one month using the number of unexpired prepaid
days as a basis, shall be refunded to the subscriber within thirty (30) days by Grantee.
(i) NOTICE OF RATE CHANGE. Prior to implementing any rate increase for Basic Service,
Grantee shall give the following notice:
(1) At least thirty (30) days advance written notice to the City; and
(2) At least thirty (30) days advance written notice to subscribers of Basic Service.
(j) CONSUMER SERVICE STANDARDS. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to
prevent or prohibit: (i) the Grantor and the Grantee from agreeing to exceed the customer
service standards set forth herein; (ii) the Grantor from enforcing, through the franchise term,
pre-existing customer service requirements that exceed the requirements set forth herein and
are contained in the current Franchise Agreements; (iii) the establishment or enforcement of
any State or municipal law or regulation concerning customer service or consumer
protection that imposes customer service or consumer protection requirements that exceed,
or address matters not addressed herein.
The Grantee shall maintain a local office to provide the necessary facilities, equipment and
personnel to comply with the following consumer standards under normal conditions of
operation. This requirement is met if the local office is within ether the Cities of Menasha,
Appleton, Neenah, Kaukauna, or the Villages of Kimberly, Little Chute or Combined Locks.
(1) Service Standards. The Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs
promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible. Scheduled Service Interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by
notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. A written log
or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction,
shall be maintained for all Service Interruptions and requests for cable service as
required by this Ordinance.
(2) Telephone Lines. Local toll-free or collect call telephone line capacity shall be made
available by grantee to customers 24 hours per day, seven days a week, including
holidays. The Grantee shall use best efforts under Normal Operating conditions
during Normal Business Hours to ensure that a minimum average of ninety percent
(90%) of all callers (measured on a quarterly basis) for service will not be required to
wait more than thirty (30) seconds before being connected to a trainer customer
service representative, and shall receive a business signal less than three percent
(3%) of the time (measured on a quarterly basis). If the call needs to be transferred,
the transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. Inquiries received after normal
business hours may be answered by a service or an automated response system, and
such calls must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next
business day.
(3) Local Office. A business and service office conveniently located locally as described
120294
9:17
above, open during Normal Business Hours, and adequately staffed to accept
subscriber payments and respond to service requests and complaints.
(4) Installation Staff. An installation staff shall install service to any subscriber located
up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system within seven (7) days after
receipt of a request This Standard shall be met no less than ninety-five percent
(95%) of the time, measured on a quart
(5) Installation, Outages and Service Call Scheduling. Grantee shall schedule, either at a
specific time, or, at maximum, within a specified four (4) hour time period, all
appointments with subscribers for installation or service. Grantee may not cancel an
appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to
the scheduled appointment. If a Grantee representative is running late for an
appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as
scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as
necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. These Standards shall be
met no less than ninety-five (95%) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly
basis.
(6) Repair Standards. The Grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians who,
under Normal Operating conditions, are capable of responding to subscriber requests
for service within the following time frames:
a. System Service Interruption. Under Normal Operation Conditions, within
two (2) hours, including weekends, of receiving subscribers calls which by
number identify a system Service Interruption of sound or picture on one (1)
or more channels, affecting all the subscribers of the system or two percent
(2%) thereof.
b. Isolated Service Interruption. Within twenty-four (24) hours, including
weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated Service
Interruption (less than 2 percent of subscribers) of sound or picture for one
(1) or more channels. This Standard shall be met no less than ninety-five
percent (95%) of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.
c. Inferior Reception Quality. Within forty-eight (48) hours, including
weekends, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem
concerning picture or sound quality.
Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the
provisions of this Section when a technician arrives at the service location
and begins work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being home
when the technician arrives, response shall be deemed to have taken place if
the technician leaves written notification of arrival.
(7) Notification of Service Interruption to Municipal Administrator. The Grantee shall
promptly notify the Municipal Administrator, in writing, or, if appropriate, by oral
communication, of any significant interruption in the operation of the system. For
the purposes of this section, a "significant interruption in the operation of the system"
shall mean any interruption of sound or picture on one 91) or more channels a
duration of at least one (1) hour to at least five (5) percent of the subscribers, or an
interruption of sound or picture on at least one 91) or more channels initiated by the
Grantee of at least four (4) hours to any single subscriber.
(8) Subscriber Credit for Service Interruption. Upon notification by a subscriber or
when otherwise aware, whichever is earlier, of a Service Interruption of subscriber's
cable service, the following shall apply.
120294
9:18
a. For Service Interruptions of over four (4) hours and up to seven (7) days, the
Grantee shall provide, at the subscriber's request, a credit of one-thirtieth
(1/30) of one month's fees for affected services for each 24-hour period
service is interrupted for four (4) or more hours for all affected subscribers.
b. For interruptions of seven (7) days or more in one month, the Grantee shall
provide, at the subscriber's request, a full month's credit for affected services
for all affected subscribers.
SEC. 9-1-11 GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS.
(a) PAYMENT TO THE CITY.
(1) Menasha. Grantee shall pay to the City an annual amount equal to five percent (5%)
of its Gross Revenues. The foregoing payment shall be compensation for use of
streets and other public property but not pole rentals which shall be paid to the
Menasha Utilities.
(2) In the event Grantee is prohibited by the state or federal law from paying a fee based
on gross revenues or the City is prohibited by state or federal law from collection
such a fee, then Grantee shall pay to the City, as a rental for use of streets and other
public property, an amount equal to Seven Hundred Thirty-three Dollars ($733.00)
per cable mile of the System, including trunk and distribution cable, then installed, to
be increased annually by an amount equal to the percentage increase in the U.S.
Consumer Price Index - all items, issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S.
Department of Labor, or its equivalent, for the greater metropolitan Milwaukee area,
as determined by the City. Any amount so collected shall not exceed any maximum
payment then allowed under federal or state law.
(3) Payments due the City under this Section shall be computed at the end of each
quarter year for that quarter year. Payments shall be due and payable for each
quarter or a portion of a quarter year forty-five (45) days after the close of that
quarter or a portion of a quarter year. Each payment shall be certified as true and
correct by a financial officer of Grantee and accompanied by a brief report showing
the basis for the computation together with such other relevant facts as may be
required by the City.
(4) No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid
is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a
release of any claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable under
the provisions of this Franchise. All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation
by the City.
(5) In the event any payment is not made on the due date, interest on the amount due
shall accrue from such date at the prime commercial lending rate established by any
bank in the City at the time the delinquency occurs.
(b) PERFORMANCE BOND.
(1) Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the Franchise agreement, Grantee
shall furnish and file with the City a performance bond in the sum of Two Hundred
Fifty Thousand Dollars ($250,000.00). The bond shall be conditioned upon the
faithful performance of Grantee of all terms and conditions of the System Rebuild.
Upon completion of the System Rebuild as determined by the City in accordance
with Sec. 9-1-9(4), the requirement to maintain said bond referred to in (1), shall be
extinguished.
120294
9:19
(2) Within thirty (30) days of the granting of this Franchise agreement, Grantee shall
furnish and file with the City a surety bond in the sum of One Hundred Thousand
Dollars ($100,000.00). The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance
of all terms and conditions of this agreement.
(3) The rights reserved by the City with respect to any bond or letter of credit are in
addition to all other rights the City may have under the franchise or any other law.
(4) Each bond shall be subject to approval of the City and shall contain the following
endorsement:
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled without the
consent of the City until sixty (60) days after receipt by the City by registered mail,
return receipt requested, of a written notice of intent to cancel or not to renew."
(c) SECURITY FUND.
(1) At the time this Franchise is accepted, Grantee shall deposit into a bank account,
established by the City, and maintain on deposit through the term of this Franchise,
the sum of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) as a common security fund for the
faithful performance by it of all the provisions of this Franchise and compliance with
all orders, permits and directions of the City and the payment by Grantee of any
claim liens, and taxes due the City which arise by reason of the construction,
operation or maintenance of the System. Interest accrued on this deposit shall be
paid to Grantee on an annual basis provided that all requirements of this Franchise
have been complied with by the Grantee.
(2) Provisions shall be made to permit the City to withdraw funds from the security fund.
Grantee shall not use the security fund for other purposes and shall not assign,
pledge or otherwise use this security fund as security for any purposes.
(3) Within ten (10) days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn by the
City from this security fund, Grantee shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to
restore such security fund to the required amount.
(4) If Grantee fails to pay to the City any taxes due and unpaid; or, fails to repay to the
City, any damages, costs, or expenses which the City shall be compelled to pay by
reason of any act or default of the Grantee in connection with this Franchise; or fails,
after twenty (20) days' notice of such failure by the City to comply with any
provision of the Franchise which the City reasonably determines can be remedied by
an expenditure of the security, the City may then withdraw such funds from the
security fund in accordance with those procedures set forth in Section 9-1-11(e)
hereof.
(d) PENALTIES FROM SECURITY FUND. In addition to any other remedies provided
herein, penalties for violations of this Franchise are set forth below. As a result of any acts
or omissions by Grantee pursuant to the Franchise, the City may charge to and collect from
the security fund the following penalties:
(1) For failure to provide data, documents, reports, or information required by this
Franchise or reasonably requested by the City, the Penalty shall be One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) per day.
(2) For failure to comply with any provisions of this Franchise, for which a penalty is
not otherwise specifically provided, the penalty shall be One Hundred Dollars
($100.00) per day.
(e) PROCEDURE FOR IMPOSITION OF PENALTIES.
(1) Whenever the City finds that Grantee has violated one (1) or more terms, conditions
or provisions of this Franchise, a written notice shall be given to Grantee informing it
120294
9:20
of such violation or liability. The written notice shall describe in reasonable detail
the specific violation so as to afford Grantee an opportunity to remedy the violation.
Grantee shall have twenty (20) days, or such longer period of time as may be
required under the circumstances, subsequent to receipt of the notice which to correct
the violation before the City may resort to the security fund. Grantee may, within ten
(10) days of receipt of notice, notify the City that there is a dispute as to whether a
violation or failure has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by Grantee to the City shall
specify with particularity the matters disputed by Grantee.
a. The City shall hear Grantee's dispute at its next regularly or specially
scheduled meeting of the Administration Committee. The City shall
supplement the decision with written finding of fact.
b. If after hearing the dispute the claim is upheld by the City, Grantee shall have
twenty (20) days from such a determination to remedy the violation or
failure. At any time after that twenty (20) day period, the City may draw
against the security fund all penalties due it.
(2) The security fund deposited pursuant to this Section shall become the property of the
City in the event that the Franchise is canceled by reason of the default of Grantee or
revoked for cause. Grantee, however, shall be entitled to the return of such security
fund, or portion thereof, as remains, on deposit at the expiration of the term of the
Franchise.
(3) The rights reserved to the City with respect to the security fund are in addition to all
other rights of the City whether reserved by this Franchise or authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall
affect any other right the City may have.
(f) DAMAGE AND DEFENSE.
(1) Grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the City for all damages and penalties, at
all times during the term of this Franchise, as a result of Grantee's exercise of this
Franchise. These damages and penalties shall include, but shall not be limited to,
damages arising out of personal injury, property damage, copyright infringement,
defamation, antitrust, errors and omission, theft, fire, and all other damages arising
out of Grantee's exercise of this Franchise, whether or not any act or omission
complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Franchise.
(2) In order for the City to assert its right to be indemnified and held harmless, the City
must:
a. Promptly notify Grantee of any claim or legal proceeding which gives rise to
such right.
b. Afford Grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully control any
compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of such claim or
proceeding unless the City and Grantee shall have reasonably concluded, that
Grantee cannot properly represent the City's interest because of the
availability of different or additional legal defenses to the City, then the City
shall have the right to select separate counsel to participate in the defense of
such action on its behalf, at the expense of Grantee.
c. Fully cooperate in the defense of such claim and make available to Grantee
all pertinent information under its control relating thereto but shall be entitled
to be reimbursed for all costs and expenses incurred by the City.
(3) All notices required under this Section 9-1-11(f) shall be given prior to the time by
which the interests of the party to be notified will be materially prejudiced as a result
of the failure to have received such notice. The failure to give such notice shall not
120294
9:21
relieve any party of any liability which it may have.
(g) LIABILITY INSURANCE.
(1) Grantee shall maintain, throughout the term of the Franchise, liability insurance
insuring Grantee and naming as a co-insured the City, its officers, boards,
commissioners, agents, and employees, with regard to all damages mentioned in
paragraph 1 of Section 9-1-11 hereof, in the minimum amounts of:
a. Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury or death to
any one person;
b. One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death resulting from
any one accident;
c. One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for all other types of liability.
(2) At time of acceptance, Grantee shall furnish to the City satisfactory evidence that an
insurance policy has been obtained. The insurance policy shall require that the City
be notified thirty (30) days prior to any expiration or cancellation.
(h) CITY'S RIGHT TO REVOKE. In addition to all other rights which the City has pursuant
to law or equity, the City reserves the right to revoke, terminate or cancel by ordinance this
Franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, in the event that:
(1) Grantee violates any material provision of this Franchise; or,
(2) Grantee practices any fraud upon the City or subscriber; or,
(3) Grantee becomes insolvent, unable, or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged
bankrupt; or,
(4) Grantee misrepresents a material fact in the application for negotiation of, or
renegotiation of, or renewal of, the Franchise.
(5) The renewal or revocation of the Franchise or sale of the ownership of the System,
shall be consistent with Sections 626 and 627 of the Cable Communication Policy
Act.
(i) REVOCATION PROCEDURES.
(1) The City shall provide Grantee with a written notice of the cause for termination and
its intention to terminate or revoke the Franchise and shall allow Grantee a minimum
of thirty (30) days after service of the notice in which to correct the violation.
(2) Grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing before
the City prior to the termination of the Franchise. The City shall hear any persons
interested therein, and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure,
refusal or neglect by Grantee has occurred.
(3) Any revocation of this Franchise shall be by formal action of the City.
(4) If the City successfully revokes this Franchise, as provided in Section 9-1-11(i), the
Grantee shall pay the City up to Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000,00) for the cost of
such revocation.
SEC. 9-1-12 FORECLOSURE, RECEIVERSHIP, AND ABANDONMENT.
(a) FORECLOSURE. Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of the System, Grantee shall
notify the City of such fact and such notification shall be treated as a notification that a
change in control of Grantee has taken place, and the provisions of this Franchise governing
the consent to transfer or change in ownership shall apply without regard to how such
transfer or change in ownership occurred.
(b) RECEIVERSHIP. The City shall have the right to cancel this Franchise subject to any
applicable provisions of Wisconsin Law, including the Bankruptcy Act, one hundred twenty
120294
9:22
(120) days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the
business of Grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or
proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the
expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless:
(1) Within one hundred twenty (120) days after his election or appointment, such
receiver or trustee shall have the fully complied with all the provisions of this
Franchise and remedied all defaults thereunder; and,
(2) Such receiver or trustee, within said one hundred twenty (120) days, shall have
executed an agreement, duly approved by the Court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each
and every provision of this Franchise.
(c) ABANDONMENT. Grantee may not abandon the System or any portion thereof without
having first given three (3) months written notice to the City. Grantee may not abandon the
System or any portion thereof without compensating the City for damages resulting from the
abandonment.
SEC. 9-1-13 REMOVAL, TRANSFER, AND PURCHASE.
(a) REMOVAL AFTER REVOCATION OR EXPIRATION.
(1) At the expiration of the term for which the Franchise is granted, or upon its
revocation, as provided for, the City shall have the right to require Grantee to
remove, at Grantee's expense, all or any portion of the System from all Streets and
public property within the City. In so removing the System, Grantee shall refill and
compact at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made and shall leave all
Streets, public property and private property in as good a condition as that prevailing
prior to Grantee's removal of the System, and without affecting altering, or disturbing
in any way electric, telephone, or utility, cables, wires or attachments. The City shall
have the right to inspect and approve the condition of such Streets and public
property after removal. The security fund, insurance, indemnity and penalty
provision of the Franchise shall remain in full force and effect during the entire term
of removal.
(2) If, in the sole discretion of the City, Grantee has failed to commence removal of the
System, or such part thereof as was designated, within thirty (30) days after written
notice of the City's demand for removal is given, or if Grantee has failed to complete
such removal within one (1) year after written notice of the City's demand for
removal is given, the City shall have the right to exercise one of the following
options:
a. Declare all right, title, and interest to the System to be in the City with all
rights of ownership including, but not limited to, the right to operate the
System or transfer the System to another for operation by it; or
b. Declare the System abandoned and cause the System, or such part thereof as
the City shall designate, to be removed at no cost to the City. The cost of
said removal shall be recoverable from the security fund, indemnity and
penalty section provided for in the Franchise, or from Grantee directly.
(b) SALE OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
(1) This Franchise or the System hereunder shall not be sold, assigned, or transferred,
either in whole or in part, or leased or sublet in any manner, nor shall title thereto,
either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in
120294
9:23
any person without full compliance with the procedure set forth in this Section.
(2) The provisions of this Section shall apply to the sale or transfer of all or a majority of
Grantee's assets, merger (including any parent and its subsidiary corporation),
consolidation, creation of a subsidiary corporation or sale or transfer of stock in
Grantee so as to create a new controlling interest in the System. The term
"controlling interest" as used herein is not limited to majority stock ownership, but
includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised.
a. The parties to the sale or transfer shall make a written request to the City for
its approval of a sale or transfer.
b. The City shall reply in writing within thirty (30) days of the request and shall
indicate approval of the request.
(3) In reviewing a request for sale or transfer pursuant to paragraph (2)(a) above, the
City may inquire into the technical, legal, and financial qualifications of the
prospective controlling party, and Grantee shall assist the City in so inquiring. The
City may condition and transfer upon such reasonable terms and conditions as it
deems appropriate. In no event shall a transfer or assignment of ownership or control
be approved without the transferee becoming a signatory to this Franchise
Agreement.
(4) The requirements of this Section shall not apply when the sale or transfer of the
System is to an entity which is under the same ultimate control as the Grantee.
(c) At the expiration or revocation of this Franchise, the City may in a lawful manner,
consistent with the Cable Communication Act of 1984, and upon the payment of fair market
value as determined on the basis of the system as valued as a going concern, lawfully
purchase the system of Grantee.
120294
9:24
SEC. 9-1-14 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
(a) CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY. Upon expiration or the termination of
this Franchise, the City may require Grantee to continue to operate the System for an
extended period of time, not to exceed six (6) months. Grantee shall, as trustee for its
successor in interest, continue to operate the System under the terms and conditions of this
Franchise. In the event Grantee does not so operate the System, the City may take such steps
as it in its sole discretion, deems necessary to assure continued service to subscribers.
(b) FRANCHISE RENEWAL. This Franchise may be renewed in accordance with the
applicable state and federal law.
(c) EFFECT OF STATE AND LOCAL LAW. If any term, condition or provision of this
Franchise or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall, to any extent, be
held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof and the application of such term,
condition, or provision to persons or circumstances other than those as to whom it shall be
held invalid or unenforceable shall not be affected thereby, and this Franchise and all the
terms, provisions, and conditions hereof shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective
and to be complied with.
(d) CAPTIONS. The paragraph captions and headings in this Franchise are for convenience
and reference purposes only and shall not affect in any way the meaning or interpretation of
this Franchise.
(e) CALCULATION OF TIME. Where the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter,
payment, or thing is required hereunder and the period of time or duration for the
performance or during thereof is prescribed and fixed herein, the time shall be computed so
as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period or duration of
time. When the last day of the period falls on Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, that day
shall be omitted from the computation.
(f) CABLE THEFT.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, without the expressed consent of Grantee to make
any connection, extension, or division whether physically, acoustically, inductively,
electronically or otherwise with or to any segment of the System for any purpose
whatsoever.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct, or
damage any part, segment or content of the System for any purpose whatsoever.
This paragraph shall in no way impair or infringe upon rights presently enjoyed by
utilities in the City.
(3) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a forfeiture of not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00)
nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), and in default of payment thereof, by
imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. Each day
of violation shall constitute a separate offense. Violations of this section shall be
referred to the District Attorney for prosecution pursuant to Wisconsin Law.
(g) FORCE MAJEURE. If for any reason a force majeure, either party is unable in whole or in
part to carry out its obligations under the terms of this Franchise Agreement, said parties
shall not be deemed in violation or default of such agreement during the continuance of such
inability to perform or comply with the terms of this Franchise Agreement. The term "force
majeure" as used herein shall have the following meaning: strikes, acts of God, acts of
public enemies, orders of any kind of the government of the United States of America or the
State of Wisconsin, or the departments, agencies, political subdivisions, riots, landslides,
lightning, earthquakes, fires, hurricanes, volcanic activity, storms, floods, washouts,
120294
9:25
droughts, arrests, civil disturbances, explosions, partial or entire failure of utilities, inability
to secure equipment, replacement parts, unique or nonrecurring events which temporarily
affect Grantee's normal business operations, or any other cause or event not reasonably
within the control of either party.
Updated: 10/23/2018
CHAPTER 2
Water Utility Regulations
SEC. 9-2-1 CONTROL OF MAINS.
The water mains, supply pipes, curb-stops, stop-boxes, meters and service pipes shall be under the
exclusive control of the Commission and its authorized agents and employees, and all other persons
are forbidden to disturb, tamper with, injure, tap, change, obstruct access to or interfere with said
water mains, supply pipes, curb-stops, stop-boxes, meters and/or service pipes in any way.
SEC. 9-2-2 USE OF HYDRANTS LIMITED.
Fire hydrants are to be opened and used only by the Water and Fire Departments of the City, or by
such persons as may be specially authorized by the Commission.
SEC. 9-2-3 OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
No person shall in any manner obstruct or prevent free access to, or tamper with, or injure, or
damage, by causing or permitting a vehicle to come in contact with any fire hydrant, or place or store
temporarily or otherwise any object, vehicle, material, snow, debris or structure of any kind within
five (5) feet of any hydrant. Any such obstruction, when discovered, may be removed at once by the
Commission at the expense of the person responsible for the obstruction, and he shall be liable to a
fine as herein provided.
SEC. 9-2-4 CURB STOP OPERATED ONLY BY DEPARTMENT; EXCEPTIONS.
Under no circumstances shall curb-stops be opened or closed by any person not an authorized
employee of the Commission, except that a licensed plumber may open or close a curb-stop to test his
work, or to make necessary repairs. In all cases where a licensed plumber tests his work, or makes
repairs in unoccupied premises, he shall, on completion of his work, leave the curb-stop closed and,
upon failure to do or neglect to do so, shall be liable for all damages occasioned thereby, and be liable
to a fine as herein provided.
SEC. 9-2-5 SUPPLY AND SERVICE PIPES.
(a) (1) Application for water service must be made at the Commission's office on contracts
provided for that purpose. The applicant must state the name, location of property and
pay a fee for a three-fourths inch (3/4") supply pipe and fittings, which shall be a
privilege charge for connection.
(2) All supply pipes larger than three-fourths inch (3/4") internal diameter will be
furnished by the Commission, and a deposit will be required before work is
connected, or commenced, to cover the actual cost of materials and labor, plus twelve
percent (12%) to cover incidental charges.
Updated: 10/23/2018
(b) The Commission shall tap the water main, furnish all pipes, fittings, labor, etc., and install the
service up to and including the curb-stop. Such service and connection shall remain the
property of the City of Menasha at all times, and the said applicant shall acquire no interest,
right and title to same by virtue of the fact that he has paid a fee giving him the privilege to
receive water through such supply pipe, but he agrees to accept water through such supply
pipe, subject to all the conditions set forth in this Chapter.
(c) Water supply and service pipes of all sizes shall not be laid less than six (6) feet below the
surface on the street and not less than five (5) feet on the premises. Every service pipe where
it enters the cellar shall be furnished with a stop-washer so situated below the action of frost
that the water can be completely shut off and drained from the pipes, when necessary, to
prevent freezing. Service pipes between cellar walls and meter likely to be exposed to
freezing temperature must be effectively protected to avoid freezing.
(d) The supply pipes from the main to the curb-stop shall be maintained and kept at repair at the
expense of the Commission and by the Commission. It is the duty of the owner of premises
to maintain the service pipes from the curb-stop to the meter. Notice shall be given the owner
or agent to make necessary repairs, and if same are not completed within ten (10) days after
such notice, water will be shut off until such repairs are made, or the Commission will repair
same at the expense of the property owner.
(e) (1) The owner or agent wishing to have service discontinued shall make an application at
the office of the Commission before water will be shut off and when service is again
resumed, a charge of Two Dollars ($2.00) will be made and collected before service
will be again turned on.
(2) The owner or agent of the premises shall protect the stop-box in the street and shall
keep same free from dirt and other obstructions. The Commission shall not be liable
for failure to locate the stop-box and shut off water in case of a leak on the premises.
(f) The Commission will thaw out frozen service pipes and piping between meter and main
without charge once during each year. If such service pipe freezes again during the winter
season, the same may be thawed out at the expense of the owner under the direction of the
Commission at cost, based upon the unique characteristics of the street.
(g) All service pipes, which are connected to private supply pipes which have pumps attached
thereto, whereby water may be pumped into City mains, shall have double checks provided on
such private supply lines; such double check valves shall be of approved design and installed
according to and as provided in applicable Codes.
(h) All supply and service lines installed for private fire protection and sprinkler service shall
have a weighted check valve of approved design and of the full size of the supply or service
pipe, to be furnished and installed by the Commission at the expense of the owner of the
premises, and shall be installed in such location that a bypass and meter connection of suitable
size approved by the Commission can be placed so as to detect any loss of water in the fire
protection system, and to be installed at the expense of the owner of the premises.
SEC. 9-2-6 PROVISIONS, CARE AND PROTECTION OF METERS.
(a) (1) All premises using City water shall be provided with proper type and size of water
meters as shall be determined by the Commission, properly attached as to measure
correctly all water used. The Commission shall furnish such meters to all applicants
using City water at actual cost together with the cost of installation. No water shall be
turned on any service pipe until a meter has been properly installed on the premises.
All meters shall be so located that they shall be preserved from all obstructions and so
Updated: 10/23/2018
as to allow easy access thereto for reading and inspection; the location shall be
designated by proper employee of the Commission.
(2) If more than one (1) family occupies a dwelling, other than a hotel, each single or
family unit shall have separate meters, or the account shall be carried in the name of
the landlord. Combined residential and commercial buildings where a building
contains both commercial and residential uses each shall be separately metered.
Whenever an owner of a building that has combined residential and commercial uses
finds that it is prohibitive for him to install separate meters, he may apply to the Water
and Light Commission for an exemption. However, then the entire building will be
billed at the commercial rate.
(b) No by-pass or other connection between the meter and main shall be made or maintained,
except in special cases under the lock and seal in charge of the Commission.
(c) Where a building is in process of construction and where the Commission finds it impossible
to install a meter due to cold weather or other causes, a nipple the length of the meter shall be
inserted between the meter connections until such time as a meter can be set. The water used
in this case shall be billed on the average basis. Additional meters shall be installed on
request of any property owner who so arranges the water pipe on his premises, so as to allow
a meter being set with a separate stop-waste valve, making such consumer independent of the
others.
(d) In case a service pipe is to be metered and there is no basement or cellar, or where it is
impossible to properly set a water meter in the premises, the Commission will provide, at the
expense of the owner of the premises, the proper frost-proof box of approved design (to be
used and located outside of owner's buildings) at a cost of labor and materials expense, plus
fifteen percent (15%) to cover overhead expenses.
(e) All water which has gone through the meter must be paid for; if, however, there is a sound of
running water, the consumer shall notify the Commission office, and an expert will be sent to
examine the pipes and fixtures, and will give advice free of charge.
(f) Repairs caused by ordinary wear and tear will be borne by the Commission. Any damage
which a meter may sustain, resulting from the carelessness of the owner or agent of the
premises, or from the neglect of either of them to properly secure and protect same, including
any damage that may result from allowing said meter to become frozen, or to be injured from
hot water or from steam backing up from behind the boiler, or otherwise, shall be charged to
the owner of the premises, and may be charged and collected as a special tax against the
property.
(g) Where meters have been installed prior to the passage of these rules, in places interfering with
the reading inspection and reading of same, such meters shall be located as may be directed
by the Commission.
(h) All water meters will be tested as prescribed by the rules and orders of the Public Service
Commission.
(i) Water meters in service shall be put under seal fixed by an authorized employee of the
Commission and shall only be broken by such employee with authority of the Commission.
Violation of this rule shall subject the guilty party or parties to the penalty provided in a
succeeding paragraph of this Chapter, and the party or parties responsible for the water bills
for water supplied through a meter whose seal has been tampered with or broken shall be
deemed guilty of the offense.
(j) No water meter shall be removed, impaired or otherwise disturbed, except by the Commission
employees.
(k) It shall be the duty of all persons using City water supplied by the Commission to ascertain
and to satisfy themselves that it is being supplied through a meter furnished by the
Updated: 10/23/2018
Commission. Any neglect so to do will not relieve any person and/or premises from any
liability therefor, and the Commission shall determine the amounts of water so used and the
rates and charges therefor. Any person who shall turn on a supply of water to the service pipe
from which the supply has been turned off by the City on account of non-payment of water
rents or for any other reason, without first having obtained a permit to do so from the proper
City officers, shall be subject to a forfeiture as specified in
Section 1-1-7.
SEC. 9-2-7 FAILURE OF SUPPLY.
Consumers using water for supplying boilers or generating steam or other domestic or commercial
uses, and depending on the water main pressure for supply, will do so at their own expense and the
Commission shall not be liable for any damages because of lack of pressure or failure of supply.
SEC. 9-2-8 REPAIRS TO MAINS.
The Commission reserves the right to shut off the supply in the main temporarily to make repairs,
alterations or additions to the works or pipes. When circumstances will permit of sufficient delay, the
Commission will give notice by the official newspaper, or by other means, of the discontinuance of
the service and the approximate length of time the service will be off. No rebate or damage will be
allowed to consumers for such temporary suspension of supply.
SEC. 9-2-9 RECORDS.
A record of the location of all parts of the water works which are underground shall be made on
computer records, tracings or cards by the Director of Public Works, and all such records will be the
property of the City of Menasha.
SEC. 9-2-10 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF BADGE OR CREDENTIALS.
No person not an authorized officer or employee of the Commission shall have, wear or exhibit any
badge or credentials of the Commission. It shall be the duty of each and every officer and employee
of the Commission, upon resignation or dismissal, forthwith to surrender and deliver at the office all
badges and credentials.
SEC. 9-2-11 FREE ACCESS TO PREMISES FOR INSPECTION.
No person shall hinder or refuse to admit any officer, inspector, foreman or other authorized
employee of the Commission, upon the presentation of the badge or other credentials provided by the
Commission at all reasonable hours to any premises supplied with City water, for the purpose of
making inspection thereof, including the examination of the entire water supply and plumbing system
upon said premises. No person shall harbor a vicious dog or other animal on his premises that is
inclined to attack any meter-reader or other employee who is authorized by the Commission to enter
said premises. Such premises shall be subject to disconnection of water supply pending notice being
Updated: 10/23/2018
given to the Commission that the premises are safe for employees to enter.
SEC. 9-2-12 MISREPRESENTATION IN APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
Applicants for City water or any service in connection therewith shall not make any misstatement or
misrepresentation of facts with respect to such application and shall be governed and bound by all the
rules of this Chapter.
SEC. 9-2-13 PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
The Mayor or, in his absence, the President of the Council, may issue a proclamation prohibiting the
use of water during emergency periods. Violations of such orders shall be subject to the penalties in
this Code provided in Sec. 1-1-7.
SEC. 9-2-14 WATER SERVICES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
Based upon a survey of the outside area now served, the City of Menasha herewith acts pursuant to
Section 66.069(6) of the Wisconsin Statutes to restrict its holding out to provide water service in
unincorporated areas to the territory specifically set forth as follows: All properties located within the
corporate city limits of Menasha and the properties outside the corporate limits being served on
January 1, 1988.
(a) The Southerly 180 feet of the following described property, the West on-half of the SE 1/4 of
the SE 1/4 Sec. 10 Town 20 N rage 17 East-lying Southeasterly of the Railroad right-of-way
excepting the East 320 feet, and excepting the South 153 feet of West 66 feet.
(b) Part East 1/2 of the South East 1/4 of the South East 1/4 Section 10 Town North range 17
East-commencing at the southwest corner of said East 1/2 of the SE 1/4 x SE 1/4 x SE 1/4 -
North 373 feet; thence East to the centerline of County Trunk Highway P as presently laid out
- thence southerly along the centerline of said County Trunk Highway P to the South line of
said Section 10; thence Westerly to point of beginning.
(c) Part of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 Section 10 Town 20 North range 17 East - commencing at a
point 323 feet west of the Southeast corner of said Section 10; thence Northerly 153 feet;
thence easterly 110 feet; thence Northeasterly to point 218 feet North and 193 feet west of the
Southeast corner of Section 10; thence West 200 feet to the centerline of County Trunk Hwy.
P; thence southerly along said Highway centerline to the South line of said Section 10; thence
east 110.7 feet to the point of beginning.
(d) Part SE 1/4 SW 1/4 Section 11 Town 20 North range 17 East - commencing at the west line
of the northerly extension of Manitowoc Street in the City of Menasha and the South line of
said Section 11; thence North 153 feet West 120 feet, South 153 feet; East 120 feet to the
point of beginning.
(e) The east 762.5 feet of the South 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 Section 11 Town 20 North range 17
East except the South 183 feet lying east of the east line of Manitowoc Street in the City of
Menasha extended Northerly and except that part of said SE 1/4 of SW 1/4 Section 11 -
Commencing at the southwest corner Lot 10 Block 1 Suburban Heights Addition, thence
West 50 feet; thence North 120 feet; thence east 50 feet to Northwest corner Lot 11 Block 1
Suburban Heights Addition; thence South 120 feet to the point of beginning.
(f) That part of the South east 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of Section 11 Town 20 North range 17
Updated: 10/23/2018
east - commencing at a point on the South line of said Section 11, 260 feet east of the easterly
line of Manitowoc Street in the City of Menasha extended northerly; thence North 183 feet;
thence East 140 feet; thence South 183 feet; thence West to point of beginning.
(g) That part of Southwest 1/4 of the SE 1/4 Section 11 Town 20 North range 17 East -
commencing at the Southwest corner of said Southwest 1/4 Southeast 1/4 Section 11; thence
North 155.5 feet; thence East 191.3 feet; thence Southeasterly at right angles to Appleton
Road as presently laid out 143 feet to the centerline of said Appleton Road; thence
Southwesterly along said centerline of Appleton Road to the South line of said Southwest 1/4
Southeast 1/4 Section 11; thence West to point of beginning.
SEC. 9-2-15 CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL.
(a) A "cross connection" shall be defined as any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the Menasha Water
Utility, and the other, containing water from a private source, water of unknown or
questionable safety, or steam, gases, or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one
system to the other, the direction of flowing depending on the pressure differential between
the two systems.
(b) No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained
any cross connection. No interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the
City of Menasha may enter the supply or distribution system of the City unless such private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply
shall have been approved by the Menasha Water Utility and by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources in accordance with Section NR 810.15, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(c) The Menasha Water Utility shall cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the
public water system where cross connections with the public water system are deemed
possible. If the Menasha Water Utility is not able to perform the inspection, the property
owner must, at the property owner’s expense, have the plumbing inspected for cross
connections by a State of Wisconsin Certified Cross-Connection Inspector/Surveyor or by a
State of Wisconsin licensed plumber. The frequency of inspections and reinspection based on
potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the Menasha Water Utility Cross
Connection Program and as approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
Upon inspection, if a potential cross connection involving a health hazard exists, the Menasha
Water Utility’s inspector or authorized representative may order that an approved cross
connection control device be installed, tested, maintained and repaired for containment from
the public water system.
(d) Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the Menasha Water Utility shall have
the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine any property served by a
connection to the public water system of the City of Menasha for cross connections. If entry is
refused, such representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant under Sec. 66.0119, Wis.
Stats. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the
Menasha Water Utility any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on
such property.
(e) The Menasha Water Utility is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service to
any property wherein any connection in violation of this Section exists and to take such other
precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the
public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and
Updated: 10/23/2018
opportunity for hearing under Chapter 68, Wis. Stats., except as provided in Subsection (f).
Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been
eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this Section.
(f) If it is determined by the Menasha Water Utility that a cross connection or an emergency
endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate action and a written finding
to that effect is filed with the Clerk of the City of Menasha and delivered to the customer's
premises, service may be immediately discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity
for hearing under Chapter 68, Wis. Stats., within ten (10) days of such emergency
discontinuance.
(g) The provisions of State Plumbing Code of Wisconsin, Comm 81-87, Wisconsin
Administrative Code and any amendments thereto are adopted by reference. This Section
does not supersede the State Plumbing Code and the Menasha Plumbing Code, but is
supplementary to them.
(h) Fees and charges for effectuating this Section may be established by the Administration
Committee or the Water and Light Commission.
SEC. 9-2-16 WATER TAPS.
It is hereby the policy of the City of Menasha that all water mains tapped shall be charged as an
ongoing service to the customer. Such charge shall be payable at the time of the request for the water
main tap. Water tap fees shall be as established by the Commission. The Commission shall also
establish fees for fire service laterals. "Fire service lateral" shall be defined as that line which serves
one (1) particular business or industry and whose principal purpose is fire protection.
SEC. 9-2-17 WATER SERVICE LATERALS.
Every water service lateral connected to the Utility shall be made of suitable material as
determined by the Water and Light Commission. No lead or galvanized service line will be
allowed to connect to a Utility line once replaced.
SEC. 9-2-18 LEAD & GALVANIZED WATER SERVICE REPLACEMENT PROGRAM.
(a) Intent and Purpose. The Common Council of the City of Menasha finds that it is in the
public interest to establish a comprehensive program for the removal and replacement of
lead and galvanized water service laterals in use within both the Menasha Utilities Water
system (Utility) and in private systems and to that end declares the purposes of this
ordinance to be as follows:
(1) To ensure the water quality at every tap of Utility customers meets the water quality
standards specified under the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act; and
(2) To reduce the lead in City drinking water to meet Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) standards and ideally to reduce lead contaminant level to zero in City
drinking water for the health of City residents; and
(3) To eliminate the constriction of water flow caused by mineral rich surface water
flowing through lead and galvanized water service pipes and the consequent buildup
of mineral deposits inside lead and galvanized pipes; and
(4) To meet the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resource (WDNR) requirements for
local compliance with the Lead and Copper Rule (see 56CFR6460; Title 40 CFR
part 141.80-141.91 and Chapter NR 809.54-809.55 Wisconsin Administrative
Code).
Updated: 10/23/2018
(b) Owner to Replace Lead and Galvanized Service. Existing lead and galvanized water service
laterals connected to the Utility shall be replaced with water service laterals made of
suitable material and at the owner’s expense. Replacement shall be completed either before
or in conjunction with the next Utility project in the area of the affected property. Except,
any property tested by the Utility in accordance with Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources lead and copper monitoring that exceeds the lead level established by the
Environmental Protection Agency’s lead and copper rule, will be required to replace the
lateral in one hundred twenty (120) days .
(1) Affected property owners may contract with a licensed contractor to complete the
replacement. If the property owner selects this option, the lead or galvanized water
service lateral shall be replaced before the start of or during construction of the
Utility project; or,
(2) If available, affected property owners may have the Utility contractors complete the
replacement.
A. The Utility may, as part of any water project, add an alternative to the
Utility’s contract requesting unit bid prices for the calculation of the cost for
private lead or galvanized water service lateral replacement. This will
include removing the entire lateral from the main to the inside of the house
and replacing all lead or galvanized piping with suitable material.
B. If available, and should the property owner select this option, the property
owner will be charged the entire cost of the removal and replacement. In
addition, all restoration will be the responsibility of the property owner (for
example, top soil, concrete, steps, asphalt, bushes, and porches).
(c) Utility Water System Construction Requirements.
(1) Notification to Property Owners. Property owners in the project area will be
notified, in writing, of capital improvement projects involving public water mains
or replacement of lead services on the Utility side. The notification shall be at least
30 days prior to commencement of the construction.
(2) Inspection Required. The Water Utility Manager or their designee shall inspect all
private connections to the public water mains for the presence of lead or galvanized
pipe prior to, if possible, or at the time that the Utility system is to be reconstructed
and if unable to gain access for inspection, may pursue an inspection warrant.
A. In the event that a private water service lateral is found to contain lead or
galvanized pipe the Water Utility Manager or designee shall immediately
notify the owner, in writing, of that fact along with information about the
Utility’s Lead or Galvanized Water Service Lateral Replacement Program.
B. The affected property owner shall provide proof of arrangements for
replacement of the lead or galvanized water service lateral to the Water
Utility Manager or their designee within 30 days of the date of the
notification letter.
(d) Utility Financial Assistance.
(1) The Utility may provide financial assistance to the owner of the property to which
water utility service is provided for the purpose of assisting the owner in replacing
customer-side water service lines containing lead. The financial assistance must
satisfy all the following conditions:
A. Any loan provided may not be forgiven by the Utility or the City;
B. Grants that are provided by the Utility are limited to no more than one-half
of the total cost to the owner of replacing the lead service;
C. The amount of financial assistance must be the same for each owner in a
Updated: 10/23/2018
customer class, be it a fixed amount or a percentage of the replacement cost;
and
D. The financial assistance program must be approved by the Public Service
Commission of Wisconsin.
120294
9:1
CHAPTER 3
Sewer Utility Regulations
ARTICLE A
General Regulations
SEC. 9-3-1 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES ESTABLISHED.
(a) The Ordinance-Contract, numbered 0-33-82, to jointly reorganize the Neenah-Menasha
Sewerage Commission and to contractually jointly establish the operation and administration of
sewerage collection, treatment and disposal facilities is adopted by reference and is on file with
the City Clerk, except for those provisions printed herein.
(b) There is hereby assessed and levied upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises, having
connection with the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage System and wastewater treatment plant within
the City of Menasha, a sewerage service charge as follows:
(1) There shall be a sewerage service charge for all users being served by the Menasha
Water Utility, with the exception of those users being serviced by Sanitary District No.
4, based on a metered number of gallons of water each month and billed monthly with
no penalty provisions for non-payment; however, nothing in this Section will prohibit
penalty payments to be added at the end of the year where applicable by state law and
nothing in this Section will prohibit unpaid bills at the end of the year from being
forwarded to the County Treasurer for collection and adding same as a lien on the
property served.
(2) Commencing in 1972, the charge in Subsection (b)(1) shall be determined semiannually
based on the capital and operational needs of the treatment plant, as
determined through a user fee study and its implementation.
(3) Rate charges for industrial users may be changed other than annually after verification
by the Commission as otherwise provided in this Chapter. Review of all rate charges
shall take place at least semi-annually, based on annual operational and capital outlay
requirements of the treatment plant.
(c) The charge to the Neenah-Menasha Wastewater Treatment Plant for handling and treating
wastes of any particular industrial plant shall be computed by the owner, subject to verification
by the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission. The Commission shall forward the verified
information to the City Comptroller for billing. (For appropriate methods of metering industrial
flow into the sanitary system, see Section 9-3-6(c).)
SEC. 9-3-2 SEWER USER CHARGE SYSTEM.
(a) PURPOSE. It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection of
the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the City of Menasha to collect charges
from all users who contribute wastewater to the City treatment works. The proceeds of such
charges so derived will be used for the purpose of operating and maintaining the public
wastewater treatment works and paying the annual debt service for capital expense constructing
said treatment works.
120294
9:2
(b) DEFINITIONS. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this Section shall be as follows:
(1) Normal Domestic Wastewater shall mean wastewater that has a biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD) concentration of not more than two hundred ten (210) mg/l and a
suspended solids concentration of not more than five hundred ninety (590) mg/l.
(2) Operation and Maintenance shall mean those functions that result in expenditures
during the useful life of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities and other items
which are necessary for managing and for which such works were designed and
constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement as defined in
Subsection (b)(3).
(3) Replacement shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed
and constructed.
(4) Residential User shall mean any contributor to the City's treatment works whose lot,
parcel or real estate, or building is used for domestic dwelling purposes only.
(5) Commercial User shall mean all retail stores, restaurants, office buildings, laundries and
other private business and service establishments.
(6) Industrial User shall mean any non-residential User of the Regional System (after
allowance for an exclusion granted by the Commission pursuant to Section 205(k))
which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary
wastes and which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972,
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under one of the
following divisions:
Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
Division B - Mining.
Division D - Manufacturing.
Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary
Services.
Division I - Services.
After applying the sanitary waste exclusion in Section 205(k) hereof (if the Commission
chooses to do so), dischargers that have a volume exceeding 25,000 gpd or the weight
of BOD or suspended solids equivalent to that weight found in 25,000 gpd of sanitary
waste are considered Industrial Users. Sanitary wastes are the wastes discharged from
residential users.
(7) Institutional User shall include social, charitable, religious and educational activities
such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes, penal institutions and similar
institutional users.
(8) Governmental User shall include legislative, judicial, administrative and regulatory
activities of federal, state and local governments.
(9) Significant Sewer User shall mean any sewer user that discharges wastewater that has a
BOD concentration and/or suspended solids concentration greater than domestic
wastewater.
(10) Treatment Works shall mean any devices and systems for the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or liquid industrial
wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems,
pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions,
improvement, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to
provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well
120294
9:3
facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land, that will be an integral
part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from
such treatment (including land for composting sludge, temporary storage of such
compost and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment systems
before land application); or any other method or system for preventing, abating,
reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of municipal waste or industrial
waste, including waste in combined storm water and sanitary sewer systems.
(11) Useful Life shall mean the estimated period during which a treatment works will be
operated.
(12) User Charge shall mean that portion of the total wastewater service charge which is
levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation, maintenance and
replacement of the wastewater treatment works.
(13) Water Meter shall mean a water volume measuring and recording device, furnished
and/or installed by a user and approved by the City Water Utility.
(c) FUNDS; ADMINISTRATION OF FUNDS.
(1) All revenues collected, as a result of the user charge levied, shall be deposited into two
(2) separate nonlapsing funds. The first fund shall be for operation and maintenance
monies. The second fund shall be a segregated, interest-bearing account for the
replacement fund monies.
(2) Fiscal year-end balances in the operation, maintenance and replacement fund shall be
used for no other purposes than those designated.
(d) USER CHARGE BASES. Each user shall pay for the services provided by the City
wastewater plant based on his use of the treatment works as determined by water meter readings
(or other appropriate methods) acceptable to the Common Council.
(e) RATE REVIEW; NOTICE.
(1) The Common Council will review the user charges at least bi-annually and revise the
rates as necessary to ensure that adequate revenues are generated to pay the costs of
operation and maintenance, including replacement, and that the system continues to
provide for the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance, including
replacement costs, among users and user classes.
(2) The City Comptroller will notify each user, at least annually, of the rate being charged
for operation and maintenance, including replacement of the treatment works.
SEC. 9-3-3 CREDIT SYSTEM FOR SUMMER WATER USAGE.
(a) SUMMER TERM DEFINED. The summer term will be the six (6) month period from the
normal meter reading date by the Menasha Electric and Water Utilities personnel in the month
of April to the normal reading date in the month of October. The remaining six (6) months will
be defined or known as the winter term.
(b) PROVISIONS FOR NEW SUMMER CUSTOMERS. New summer customers will be
given an average based on a City-wide average approved by the utility. A minimum of three (3)
winter months will be required to establish such an average.
(c) HOW ACCOUNTS SERVICED. Only City residential accounts will be included on a
computerized basis. All other accounts will be handled manually.
(d) CREDITS GIVEN. Credits will be based on the sewer user fee and will apply on
consumptions in excess of one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the winter averages. Said one
hundred twenty percent (120%) will be at least one thousand (1,000) gallons since meter
readings are read in one thousand (1,000) gallon increments.
120294
9:4
SEC. 9-3-4 PLACE OF PAYMENT AND METHOD THEREOF.
(a) Payment for all service charge bills shall be payable within thirty (30) days following mailing
for which such bill is rendered and shall be payable at such places as shall be determined from
time to time by the Common Council and Water and Light Commission. There shall be a one
and one-half percent (1-1/2%) per month late payment charge added to all sewer user fees
commencing with the due date.
(b) All utility bills for sewer for all customers shall be paid by the Menasha Utility to the City of
Menasha each month. Any and all service may be disconnected as a means to enforce
collection of the entire utility bill. Once per year, the General Manager of the Utility shall
certify to the City Treasurer those bills deemed by him as uncollectible with administrative
reasons therefor. After it has been made, the same shall be placed on the tax roll.
(c) Should inspection by the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission, Director of Public Works of
the City of Menasha or their duly constituted agents reveal that any statement filed by an owner
of an industry does not accurately represent actual conditions, the Sewerage Commission shall
redetermine the charge due and forward the new computation to the City Comptroller in order
that a new bill for the deficiency be sent to the industrial owner. This deficiency billing shall be
retroactive to the last inspection date of the metering facilities of the industrial plant, by the duly
authorized agents of the City of Menasha or the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission.
Interest charges shall be applied to the deficiency as provided for by law.
(d) Any overpayment made by the owner will be refunded without interest on the owner's written
application.
(e) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Subsection, whenever, through no fault of a sewer
user, a water pipe breaks or advance permission is given by the Electric and Water Utilities to
permit water to run due to adverse weather conditions so that a substantial and excessive
amount of clear water is run through the meter, said user may petition the Manager of the
Electric and Water Utilities for an adjustment on his sewer user fee based on the same criteria
that the Public Service Commission uses when permitting adjustments for excessive water
users.
SEC. 9-3-5 LIENS.
Each sewerage charge levied by and pursuant to this Chapter shall be a lien upon the corresponding
premises served by the sewerage systems as provided by Sections 66.076 and 66.071, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 9-3-6 INDUSTRIAL WASTE REQUIREMENTS.
(a) PURPOSE. The purpose of the Section is to delineate the requirements for accurate control of
industrial wastewater contributions to the Neenah-Menasha Wastewater Treatment Plant from
industries located in the City of Menasha.
(b) CRITERIA.
(1) Sewer users regulated under these requirements shall be determined by the Neenah-
Menasha Sewerage Commission and the City of Menasha.
(c) MEASUREMENT OF WASTES.
120294
9:5
(1) Total Quantities. The total quantities of industrial wastes to be measured and certified
by the owner shall be:
a. Liquid in gallons.
b. Five (5) day BOD in pounds.
c. Suspended solids in pounds, on a dry solids basis.
(2) Sampling Chamber. In order to provide for accurate sampling of industrial wastes,
commencing in January of 1972, each industrial plant involved with industrial wastes
shall provide on each of its industrial waste outlet sewers a large manhole or sampling
chamber to be located inside, outside or near its plant boundary line where feasible. If
inside a plant fence, there shall be furnished a key to the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage
Commission. There shall be ample room in or near each sampling chamber in order to
accurately sample and composite the samples for analysis.
(3) Liquid Quantity Measurements. Any industrial plant shall have the options as follows
for measuring liquid quantity:
a. Each outflow pipe from the plant into the sanitary system shall have a sampling
chamber that shall also contain a partial flume, accurate weir or similar device,
with a recording and totalizing register for measurement of the liquid quantity;
or,
b. The metered water supply to the industrial plant from the Menasha Water Utility
where established that the metered water supply and waste quantities are
approximately the same, plus or minus five percent (5%) or where a measurable
adjustment can be made in the metered supply to determine the liquid quantity;
or
c. The metered supply of water to the industrial plant from the Menasha Water
Utility, along with the metered supply from lines that are drawing additional
water from wells and waterways, where established that these metered water
supplies and the waste quantities are approximately the same, plus or minus five
percent (5%) or where a measurable adjustment can be made in the metered
supply to determine the liquid quantity.
d. In no case may water intake metered by the Menasha Utility be used solely
where there is water intake from wells and waterways.
e. Nothing in this Chapter or any contract will require an industry to install
metering devices of a sophisticated and expensive nature merely because other
industries are required to do so. Authority is delegated to the Neenah-Menasha
Sewerage Commission in order to require installation meters of which the sole
purpose is to accurately reflect the effluent flow and the mandatory requirement
by the cities or the Commission that uniform meters be required in all industries
is prohibited.
(4) Sampling. Industrial plants with wide fluctuations in qualities of wastes, plus or minus
fifteen percent (15%), will require an automatic sampler paced automatically by the
flow measuring device with analysis every day of the year to maintain an accurate
accounting. Minimum requirements for representative quantities shall include
re-evaluation during each twelve (12) month period. The determination of
representative quantities shall be set forth in individual contracts, together with
acceptable flow measurements, as required by the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage
Commission for verification and certification. The frequency of sampling, sampling
chamber, metering devices, refrigeration system, collection system, sampling methods
and analysis of samples shall be subject at any time to the inspection and verification of
duly constituted agents of the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission.
120294
9:6
(5) Reporting. The owner shall submit monthly to the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage
Commission, on forms provided and supplied by the Sewerage Commission, a certified
statement of the quantities of its industrial wastes discharged. Such documents shall be
filed with the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission not later than the fifteenth (15th)
day of the following month. A separate statement must be filed for each industrial plant
for each metering system.
(6) Unlawful Discharge. It shall be unlawful, except as provided for through individual
contracts between the owners and the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission, along
with the City of Menasha, for any user to discharge waste in excess of the provisions of
Section 9-3-6(c)(3) of this Chapter into the sanitary sewerage systems of the City of
Menasha and the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission or into any sewer connected
therewith.
(7) Control Manhole and Metering Installations.
a. All control manhole and metering devices, along with any water meters installed
at well or waterway intakes, shall be installed and maintained at the expense of
the owner. Metering systems shall be subject to the approval of the Neenah-
Menasha Sewerage Commission or its duly constituted agents and the
Commission shall have the authority to bring improperly maintained systems up
to required standards, and the owner shall pay for any cost incurred.
b. All meters must remain installed unless authorization to remove the meter is
approved by the joint action of the Director of Public Works and the
Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission.
c. All control manhole and metering devices mentioned herein shall be purchased,
installed, owned and maintained by the owner, except those meters under the
control of the Menasha Utility.
SEC. 9-3-7 BAKERIES, LAUNDROMATS, CAR WASHES, LAUNDRIES AND OTHER
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
Bakeries, laundromats, car washes, laundries and other commercial establishments within the City of
Menasha who have liquid quantities, BOD or suspended solid waste discharges shall be evaluated on
an individual case basis by the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission and the City of Menasha to
determine if they shall be subject to all industrial requirements of this Chapter.
120294
9:7
SEC. 9-3-8 REVENUES.
All revenues derived from any sewerage service charges shall be used solely for budgeted and approved
capital outlay, all debt retirement, operational expenditures, administrative costs or fines assessed
against the Neenah-Menasha Wastewater Treatment Plant and the City of Menasha, one of the financial
supporters of the plant, as a result of sewerage treatment.
SEC. 9-3-9 POWERS AND AUTHORITIES OF INSPECTORS.
(a) The Director of Public Works, the Building and Plumbing Inspector, the Superintendent of the
Sewerage Plant and the duly authorized agents of the City or Commission, including those of
the Electric and Water Utilities bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. They shall have no authority to
inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or
other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
into the sewerage systems of the City of Menasha and the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage
Commission or into any connection therewith.
(b) While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to above, the inspectors or
the duly authorized employees of the City or the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City employees and the City or the Neenah-
Menasha Sewerage Commission shall indemnify the Company against loss or damage to its
property by the City of Menasha or Sewerage Commission employees and against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and
growing out of the measuring and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the Company to maintain safe conditions. However, such inspectors
may only make this inspection for the purpose of seeing that the provisions of this Chapter are
complied with; provided, however, that no inspection shall be made without a warrant in the
event that the occupant of the premises shall fail to give his consent to such inspection.
SEC. 9-3-10 NON-SEVERABILITY OF FUNDS.
All funds received from the sewer user fee by all users within the corporate limits of the City of
Menasha shall be placed in a separate fund and used solely for that purpose. The City Treasurer is
hereby authorized and empowered to carry out the provisions in the spirit of this Chapter with any
implementation he may deem necessary.
SEC. 9-3-11 PRETREATMENT REQUIRED.
(a) If any sewerage shall be discharged or shall be proposed to be discharged, directly or indirectly,
into the public sewers, and which shall either be prohibited by or shall not meet the standards
set out in this Chapter, or which, in the judgment of the City, may have a harmful effect upon
the public sewers, the treatment plant or any public waters, or which otherwise creates a hazard
to health or life or constitutes a public nuisance, the City may take any or all of the following
steps:
120294
9:8
(1) Reject the discharge; or
(2) Require pretreatment; or
(3) Require control over quantities or rates of discharge; or
(4) Impose surcharges to cover the added cost of measuring, analyzing, handling and
treating the discharge; or
(5) Discontinue water service.
(b) The design and installation of any plant or equipment for pretreatment or control of quantities
or rates of discharge shall be subject to the review and approval by the City. Grease, oil and
sand traps shall be provided when necessary for the proper transmission and treatment of
sewerage containing grease, any flammable waste, sand or any other harmful ingredient. Any
trap required under this Section shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City and shall be
located at a place easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Any facilities for pretreatment
or the control of quantities or rate of discharge, or interceptors, shall be operated and maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective condition by the owner at his expense and shall be
available for inspection by the City and Commission at all reasonable times.
SEC. 9-3-12 GARBAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
Any garbage shredder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or greater shall be
installed or used in any building connected directly or indirectly to a public sewer only upon prior
written approval of the Commission. The Commission shall not approve any garbage shredder which
does not shred garbage to a degree of fineness so that no particle is greater than one-half (1/2) inch in
any dimension or which otherwise results in the discharge of sewerage prohibited by this Chapter.
SEC. 9-3-13 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES AND SURCHARGES; BILLING.
(a) Every owner from whose property sewerage is discharged to a public sewer, either directly or
indirectly, shall be charged for the use of the sewerage system and the treatment plant. Charges
for such use shall consist of a service charge for the collection, treatment and disposal of normal
sewerage, and surcharges for the treatment and disposal of waste components appearing in
concentrations greater than those in normal sewerage, or for the treatment and disposal of
prohibited substances, or for sampling, measurement and analysis performed by the City or the
Commission. Service charges shall be based on the volume of sewerage discharged by an
owner into the sewerage system as hereinafter provided. Surcharges for excessive
concentrations of waste components shall be based on the quantity of waste components
discharged into the sewerage system in excess of those appearing in normal sewerage and shall
be determined by the methods prescribed by this Chapter. Other surcharges shall be based on
the actual cost to the City and the Commission, as estimated by them.
(b) (1) The volume of sewerage discharged into the sewerage system during any period shall be
determined either by [a] measurement of such discharge during such period by a meter
installed and maintained by the owner at his expense and in a manner satisfactory to the
City, or [b] by measurement of the quantity of water generated by or delivered to the
owner from all sources during such period, less the quantity of any such water which
shall not be discharged into the sewerage system during such period. The quantity of
water delivered to the owner by the City shall be measured by the City's water meter.
The quantity of water generated by or delivered to the owner from any source other than
the City shall be measured by a meter installed and maintained by the owner at his
120294
9:9
expense and in a manner satisfactory to the City.
(2) Any quantity of such water not discharged into the sewer system may be excluded in
computing the service charge if the quantity thereof shall be measured as hereinafter
provided upon written application for such exclusion reviewed by the Finance
Committee of the Common Council and approved by the Common Council.
Measurement of water not discharged into the sewerage system shall be by a meter
purchased from the City and installed and maintained at the expense of the owner and in
a manner satisfactory to the City, served by the Menasha Electric and Water Utilities.
Such meter shall be read, tested and repaired by the City's duly constituted agency, the
Menasha Electric and Water Utilities. During any period in which such meter shall fail
to register or shall fail to register properly, the amount of discharge during such period
shall be estimated by the City's agent aforementioned. The owner shall pay a quarterly
charge for the reading, testing and repairing of such meter, which charge shall be based
on the meter size, as follows:
Meter Size Quarterly Charge
5/8" $
3/4" $
1" $
1-1/2" $
2" $
4" $
6" $
8" $
(c) Service charges shall be $ per one thousand (1,000) gallons of normal sewerage
discharged into the sewerage system.
(d) Surcharges during any period for excessive concentrations of waste components shall be
determined as follows, concentrations being expressed in milligrams per liter:
(1) For B.O.D.: $ x (actual concentration - ) per each 1,000 gallons of
sewerage discharged into the sewerage system during such period.
(2) For suspended solids: $ x (actual concentration - ) per each 1,000 gallons
of sewerage discharged into the sewerage system during such period.
(e) If an owner shall disagree with the analysis, measure or estimate on which a charge or surcharge
is based, he may request, in writing, an additional sampling, analysis or measurement which
shall be conducted at his expense in a manner acceptable to the City and Commission.
(f) The provisions of Section 9-3-11 shall not be applicable to any owner which shall have entered
into a contract with the City for the treatment of industrial wastewater.
(g) Subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this Section as pertaining to rates may, by an enabling resolution,
be changed no more than twice each year and when passed by resolution by the Common
Council have the effect and force of law.
(h) Industrial metering and sampling of all contract users shall begin as of December 26,
1973, as approved by the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission and in the event this
Ordinance is passed and approved beyond that date the industrial metering and sampling
procedures as approved by the Commission shall be retroactive to December 1, 1973. Billing
for metering and sampling charges shall be based on actual individual metering and sampling.
(i) The City may impose a surcharge to the sewer bill to any sewer service user
who violates any provision of this ordinance relating to:
120294
9:10
a. Allowing authorized City representatives to enter on private
property for the purpose of inspections to insure compliance
with the terms of sec. 9 – 13.
b. Failing to remove, replace, or repair any improper connections
to the sanitary sewer system.
c. Compliance with the scheduling of any testing procedure designed
to implement the intent of sec. 9 - 13.
(j) The surcharge imposed pursuant to sec. 9 – 13 – 11 (i) shall be:
a. For residential properties of two or less dwelling units - $50/month.
b. For commercial properties less than 2000 square feet - $300/month.
c. For residential properties three or four dwelling - $300/month
d. For residential properties greater than four dwelling units - $1000/month.
e. For commercial properties 2000 square feet or greater - $1000/month.
f. For industrial sewer use properties – as determined by the Board of Public Works
upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Works.
g. The Director of Public Works is empowered to determine the sewer user category.
(k) a. The Director of Public Works shall notify the Finance Department to levy the
surcharge when necessary.
b. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall notify the property owner and
resident that such surcharge will be levied. At least one such notice shall be by
registered mail, return receipt requested. A signed receipt and/or notice that delivery
has been refused shall constitute notice sufficient to impose the surcharge.
c. Prior to imposing a surcharge for failure to remove, replace, or repair any improper
connection, the Director of Public Works shall give the owner and /or resident at least
60 days for such removal, replacement or repair. Additional time may be granted at the
discretion of the Director of Public Works.
(l) The provisions of sec. 9-13-11 (i) – (k) are in addition to any other enforcement
provisions provided for in sec. 9-13.
SEC. 9-3-14 PROVISIONS OF INDUSTRIAL USER FEE AGREEMENT INCORPORATED
PERTAINING TO COLLECTION AND TREATMENT.
(a) To permit the accurate measurement and sampling of the sewerage of the company being
discharged to the sewerage system, the company, at its expense, shall install the facilities,
equipment and devices and shall utilize such methods as are specified in Exhibit 1 of the User
Fee Contract dated October 17 and 18, 1972, which is incorporated by reference.
(b) The quantity, quality and composition of the sewerage of the Industrial Fee User discharged to
the sewerage system shall be measured, sampled and tested by the Commission. All measuring,
sampling and testing shall be conducted in a manner so as to accurately reflect the quality,
quantity and composition of the sewerage of said user being discharged to the sewerage system
and shall be conducted in accordance with uniform procedures as may be specified from time to
time in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the
American Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation or in accordance with other procedures as may be agreed upon by the City,
the Commission and the User.
(c) The Commission shall, on or before the 10th day of each month, submit to the Company a
statement of the quantity, quality and composition of the sewerage of the Industrial User as
discharged into the sewerage system during the preceding month.
120294
9:11
(d) The City and Commission shall have the right of free access subject to reasonable safety
regulations of the Industrial Fee User to the measuring, metering and sampling facilities,
equipment and devices specified herein, and may inspect and approve or reject said facilities,
equipment and devices used by said User for measuring, metering and sampling the quantity,
quality and composition of the sewerage of the Industrial Fee User being discharged into the
sewerage system. The Commission shall maintain and repair flow meters and wastewater
samplers only and shall calibrate said components to operate within reasonable limits of
accuracy.
(e) The Commission shall keep accurate records of all costs incurred which are directly related to
the determination of Service Charges and Rent for the company, including but not limited to:
(1) Maintenance and repair of flow meters and wastewater sampling devices used as
specified herein.
(2) Collection of data indicating the quantity, quality and composition of a user's sewerage
such as flow, BOD or SS, or other factors as may subsequently be adopted.
(3) Laboratory testing of an Industrial Fee User's sewerage to determine the quality and
composition of that User's sewerage such as BOD or SS, or other factors as may
subsequently be adopted;
and such costs shall be paid to the Commission annually by the Industrial Fee User on a basis to
be determined by dividing said total annual costs accrued as described above, by the number of
metering and sampling installations whose Service Charges and Rent are computed as provided
in the Agreement.
SEC. 9-3-15 DUMPING DELETERIOUS SUBSTANCES INTO SEWER PROHIBITED.
(a) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage may be discharged to such sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the Director of Public Works; industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged on approval of the Director of Public Works to a sewer or natural
outlet.
(b) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following-described waters or
wastes to any public sewers:
(1) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewerage treatment process constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters
of the sewerage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two
(2) mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
(2) Waters or wastes having any corrosive property capable of causing hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewerage works.
(3) Solid or viscous substances in quantities of such size capable of causing obstruction to
the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage works
such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair
and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground
by garbage grinders.
(c) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following-described substances,
material, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the reasonable opinion of the Superintendent
that such wastes can materially harm either the sewers, sewerage treatment process or
equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb,
public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these
120294
9:12
wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials or construction of the sewers,
pretreatment of the wastes, nature of the sewerage treatment process, capacity of the sewerage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewerage treatment plant and other
pertinent factors. The substances are:
(1) Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or
gas.
(2) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in
excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150)
degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees celsius).
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp
metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent.
(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating
solutions whether neutralized or not.
(5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable
or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree
that any such material received in the composite sewerage at the sewerage treatment
works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials.
(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances,
in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Superintendent
as necessary after treatment of the composite sewerage, to meet the requirements of the
State, Federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving
waters.
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed
limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with applicable Federal or State
regulations.
(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 10.0 or a pH lower than 5.5.
(d) (1) The substances which may be prohibited are:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to,
fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but
not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
b. Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewerage treatment works.
c. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as
defined herein.
(2) If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in
Subsection (c), the Commission may:
a. Reject the wastes;
b. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public
sewers;
c. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
d. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not
covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
(e) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided and properly maintained when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
120294
9:13
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(f) Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his
expense. The Superintendent or his authorized agent shall have the duty to inspect such
facilities at least once a year and at such other times as he shall find reasonably necessary to
insure proper operation.
(g) When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any properties serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial waste shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary
meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Said manhole, meters and other appurtenances shall be in
accordance with the standards established by the Commission or as established by agreement
between the Commission and any person. The manhole, meters and other appurtenances shall
be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
(h) All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried
out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewerage
works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property.
(i) No statement contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the City, Commission and any industrial concern whereby an industrial
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Commission for treatment,
subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern.
(j) It shall be the duty of the Superintendent to enforce the provisions of the Chapter and he shall
make or cause to be made periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to insure that
such provisions are not violated. The Superintendent may request the City Attorney or
Commission Attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain,
correct or abate such violations or commence an action for collection of forfeiture or penalty as
provided in the penalty chapter of the Code.
(k) Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall, in addition to the penalty
hereinbefore provided, be liable at the suit of the City for the City's costs of removing such
obstruction and of repairing any injury resulting therefrom.
SEC. 9-3-16 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
(a) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or
disturb any public interceptor sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the Director of Public Works.
(b) All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be
borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City or the Commission from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(c) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building except where
120294
9:14
one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway. The
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one (1) building sewer.
(d) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found,
on examination and test by the Director of Public Works, to meet all requirements of this
Chapter.
(e) The size, slope alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be
used in excavation, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and back-filling the trench shall all
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the City.
(f) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below
the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sewerage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.
(g) No person shall make connection of roof down spouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain
which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer.
(h) The connection of the building into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. All such
connections shall be made gas-tight and watertight.
(i) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director of Public Works when the
building sewer is ready for inspecting and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall
be made under the supervision of the Director of Public Works or his representative.
(j) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
City.
(k) If the condition of a sewer lateral is found to have major defects during the City’s normal
sewer inspection process, the owner shall repair or cause to be repaired the sewer lateral
within 30 days of written notification from the Department of Public Works. If the owner
does not repair the damaged lateral, the City shall repair the lateral at the owner’s expense.
Major defects include, but are not limited to:
(1) Cracks greater than ¼” wide;
(2) Offset joints of greater than ½”;
(3) Any location where ground is exposed;
(4) Excessive infiltration of greater than an estimated 1 gallon per minute;
(5) Holes in the pipe;
(6) Severe sags in the pipe where greater than ½ of the pipe is full of water.
(l) Sewer Lateral Repair Program
(1) Purpose. The City of Menasha finds it necessary and in the public interest to offer
owners whose building sewer lateral is found to have major defects financial
assistance in the form of an installment repayment plan in an effort to ensure sewer
laterals are quickly repaired. Sewer laterals with major defects allow groundwater to
illicitly enter the city sewer which can overwhelm the sanitary sewer system resulting
in basement backups or sanitary sewer overflows. The infiltration of groundwater into
the sanitary sewer system also leads to significant excess costs incurred by the City of
Menasha from the Neenah Menasha Sewerage Commission. In addition, it is in the
best interest of the City and resident to have all major defects within a sanitary sewer
120294
9:15
lateral repaired prior to any paving work being completed.
(2) Application. Application and programs procedure details can be found at the Public
Works Department at Menasha City Center, 100 Main Street, 2nd Floor. Two
estimates from a licensed professional must accompany the application when it is
filed.
(3) Requirements. The program is available to property owners whose building sewer
lateral has been identified by the Director of Public Works or designee to have major
defects in need of immediate repair due to its detrimental effect on the City’s sewer
system or potential effect on upcoming paving projects.
(4) Installment Repayment Plan. Under the installment repayment plan an amount up to
Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) may be applied for to pay for building sewer
lateral repair. (1) Repayments less than or equal to Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00)
shall be paid to the City Treasurer without interest within thirty (30) days of billing.
(2) Repayments greater than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) but less than or equal to
Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) may be paid in five equal
installments due and payable on or before November 1 commencing with the year
during which the repair occurred and each November 1, thereafter, together with the
interest as assigned. Interest shall accrue at the rate the City has borrowed the money
plus 1% for administrative expenses. Alternatively, interest shall be set at a rate
established by the Common Council. (3) Repayments greater than Two Thousand
Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) may be deferred for the initial five years after
which the repair occurred. Thereafter repayment shall be made in five equal
installments due and payable on or before November 1 commencing with the sixth
year after the billing date for the repair and each November 1 thereafter, together with
the interest as assigned. Interest shall accrue at the rate the City has borrowed the
money plus 1% for administrative expenses. Alternatively interest shall be set at a
rate established by the Common Council. The City Comptroller shall enter the first
installment due on the subsequent year's tax roll as a special tax on the property on
which the special assessment was levied, and thereafter this tax shall be treated in all
respects as any other City tax, and one of the subsequent installments shall be
included in like manner and with like effect in each of the annual tax rolls thereafter
until all are collected. (4) If any installment so entered in the tax roll shall not be paid
to the City Treasurer with the other taxes it shall be returned to the county as
delinquent and accepted and collected by the county in the same manner delinquent
general taxes on real estate.
SEC. 9-3-17 DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions shall be applicable in this Chapter, unless specified otherwise or superseded:
(a) BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen,
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter.
(b) BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building
and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face
of the building wall.
(c) BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other
place of disposal.
(d) CHLORINE REQUIREMENT. The amount of chlorine, in parts per million by weight,
120294
9:16
which must be added to sewerage to produce a specified residual chlorine content, or to meet
the requirements of some other objective, in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard
Methods."
(e) COMMISSION. The Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission as established by Section
144.07, Wis. Stats., and "City" shall mean the City of Menasha.
(f) GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
(g) INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid waste from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or
business as distinct from sanitary sewerage.
(h) NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body or
surface or groundwater.
(i) PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental
agency or other entity.
(j) pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogenion concentration expressed in
moles per liter. It shall be determined by one (1) of the procedures outlined in Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
(k) PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried
freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater
than one-half (1/2) inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
(l) PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission or
City. It also includes sewers within or outside the City boundaries that serve one (1) or more
persons and ultimately discharge into the City sanitary systems, even though those sewers may
not have been constructed with City funds.
(m) SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewerage or industrial wastes or an combination
of both and into which storm, surface and groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not
intentionally admitted.
(n) SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface or are in suspension in an
industrial waste mixture and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
(o) SEWERAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings,
institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters
as may be present.
(p) SHALL is mandatory. MAY is permissive.
(q) SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewerage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen
(15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration of flows
during normal operation.
(r) SEWERAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewerage.
(s) STORM DRAIN (SOMETIMES TERMED "STORM SEWER"). A sewer which carries
storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewerage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.
(t) SUPERINTENDENT. The superintendent-engineer of the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage
Commission or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
(u) WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
120294
9:17
SEC. 9-3-18 CAPACITY STUDY FOR NEW CONNECTIONS.
No new or additional sewer connections that feed the Neenah/Menasha Sewerage Commission Plant
may be made when engineering studies or the Department of Natural Resources has determined that
there is insufficient capacity to handle the same.
120294
9:18
SEC. 9-3-19 SEWER SERVICE BILLING.
(a) All utility bills for sewer for all customers shall be paid by the Menasha Utility to the City of
Menasha each month. There shall be a one and one-half percent (1-1/2 %) late payment charge
added to all sewer user fees per month commencing with the due date.
(b) Any and all service may be disconnected as a means to enforce collection of the entire utility
bill.
(c) Once per year the general manager of the Utility shall certify to the City Treasurer those bills
deemed by him as uncollectible with administrative reasons therefor. After it has been made,
the same shall be placed on the tax roll.
SEC. 9-3-20 THROUGH 9-3-29 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
120294
9:1
ARTICLE B
Industrial Pretreatment
SEC. 9-3-30 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
(a) The purpose of the rules and regulations in this Article is to set forth uniform requirements
for dischargers into the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage Commission's interceptors and
Wastewater Treatment System to enable the Commission to protect its property, its
wastewater treatment efficiency, and the public health in conformity with all applicable
local, state and federal laws relating thereto.
(b) The policy of these rules and regulations is:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Commission's Wastewater
Treatment System which will interfere with the normal operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge.
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Commission's Wastewater
Treatment System which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW and which
will pass through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be
incompatible with the system.
(3) To increase the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the
system.
(c) Accordingly, the rules and regulations of this Article provide for the regulation of
discharges into the Commission's wastewater system through the issuance by the
Commission of permits to industrial discharges.
SEC. 9-3-31 DEFINITIONS.
Unless the text specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this
Article, shall be defined as follows:
(a) ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
amended (33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.).
(b) BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5)
days at twenty (20) degrees Centigrade.
(c) CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. National pretreatment standards
specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be
discharged or introduced into the POTW by specific industrial dischargers. The categorical
pretreatment standards contain pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act and
which apply to a specific category of industrial users.
(d) COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A series of samples deposited in a common container taken
from a waste stream on the basis of flow, such that each discrete sample is taken after an
equal volume of flow of the waste stream has passed a given point.
(e) COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration to which the only pollutant added is heat.
(f) DISCHARGER; INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGER. Any nonresidential user who
discharges an industrial waste to public sewers and hence to the POTW.
120294
9:2
(g) GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one (1) time basis
with no regard to the flow rate of the waste stream and without consideration of time.
(h) INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial,
manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development, recovery or processing
of natural resources.
(i) INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment process or
operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the Commission's
WPDES permit. Interference occurs when sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW is
not in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act or more stringent state criteria (including those
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA)
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
(j) NEENAH-MENASHA SEWERAGE COMMISSION OR COMMISSION. The
authority which owns and operates the Neenah-Menasha Wastewater Treatment Plant and
certain major interceptors, having been created under Sec. 66.30, Wis. Stats., by virtue of
the execution of an Ordinance-Contract on September 28, 1982, by and among the
following Wisconsin municipalities: City of Menasha; City of Neenah; Town of Neenah
Sanitary District No. 1, Sanitary District No. 1-1, and Sanitary District No. 2; Town of
Menasha Sanitary District No. 4; Town of Harrison, Waverly Sanitary District; Town of
Neenah; Town of Menasha; and Town of Harrison. (The abbreviated term "Commission" is
used throughout these rules and regulations.)
(k) NEW SOURCE. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the
publication of proposed regulations which are prescribed by Section 307(c) of the Act (33
U.S.C. 1317; i.e., categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such a
source), if such standard is thereafter promulgated within one hundred twenty (120) days of
proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later than one hundred
twenty (120) days after proposal, a new source means any source, the construction of which
is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard.
(l) PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
(m) pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration
is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution.
(n) POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage,
sewage sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural
wastes discharged into water.
(o) POTW. Publicly owned treatment works, specifically the wastewater treatment plant and
certain major interceptors owned and operated by the Neenah-Menasha Sewerage
Commission.
(p) PRETREATMENT. The elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state, or the reduction of the amount of
pollutants therein prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants
into the POTW.
(q) SLUDGELOAD. Any substance released in a discharge at a rate and/or concentration
which causes interference to the POTW.
(r) TOXIC POLLUTANTS. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in
regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
under the provisions of Section 307(a) of the Act or other Acts.
(s) UPSET. An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is
120294
9:3
in a state of noncompliance with the standards set forth in applicable appendices hereto due
to factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger, and excluding noncompliance to
the extent cause by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation
thereof.
(t) WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Commission to
industrial dischargers who discharge or are capable of discharging toxic pollutants to the
POTW, as well as other industrial users at the discretion of the Commission.
(u) WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM. Is synonymous with the definition of
POTW herein.
(v) WPDES. Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. Any permit or requirement
issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Act for the
purpose of controlling sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes under the authority of
Section 402 of the Act.
SEC. 9-3-32 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
No discharger shall contribute or otherwise cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any of the
following-described substances into the Wastewater Treatment System or the facilities of the
Commission:
(a) Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be
(either alone or by interaction) sufficient to cause fire or explosion or to be injurious in any
other way to the operation of the POTW.
(b) Solid or viscous substances likely to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
interference with the operation of the Wastewater Treatment System.
(c) Any wastewater having a pH less than five and one-half (5.5) or greater than ten (10) or
having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the structures,
equipment, appurtenances or personnel of the Wastewater Treatment System.
(d) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard
to humans or animals, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a Categorical Pretreatment
Standard.
(e) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids, which, either singly or by interaction,
are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent access
to the sewers for the purpose of maintenance and repair.
(f) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or treatment residues, sludges or
scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process. (In no case shall any substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in
noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed
under Section 405 in the Act; or with any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge
use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, or State of Wisconsin standards applicable to the sludge
management method being used.)
(g) Any substance which will cause or is likely to cause the POTW to violate its Wisconsin
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System and/or other disposal system permits.
(h) Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but
not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(i) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
120294
9:4
treatment plant resulting in interference and, in any case, wastewater with a temperature at
its introduction into the POTW exceeding forty (40) degrees Centigrade [one hundred four
(104) degrees Fahrenheit].
(j) Any slugload, which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc.) released in a single extraordinary discharge episode of such volume or strength
as to cause interference to the POTW.
(k) Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, non-contact cooling water.
(l) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as exceed limits established by the Commission in compliance with
applicable State of Wisconsin or federal regulations.
(m) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
SEC. 9-3-33 LIMITATIONS ON WASTEWATER STRENGTH.
(a) NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. The National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Act shall be met by all dischargers of the regulated industrial
categories. An application for modification of the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards may be considered for submittal to the Regional Administrator by the
Commission when the Commission's Wastewater Treatment System achieves consistent
removal of the pollutants as defined by 40 C.F.R. 403.7.
(b) STATE REQUIREMENTS. State of Wisconsin requirements and limitations on
discharges to the POTW shall be met by all dischargers which are subject to such standards
in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal law requirements and
limitations or those of this or any other applicable ordinance or law.
(c) RIGHT OF REVISION. The Commission reserves the right to amend these rules and
regulations to provide for more stringent limitations or requirements as to discharges to the
POTW when deemed necessary by it to comply with the policies set forth in Section 9-3-30
of these rules and regulations.
(d) DILUTION. No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way,
nor mix separate waste streams for the purposes of diluting a discharge, either as a partial or
complete means to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in these rules and
regulations.
(e) SUPPLEMENTARY LIMITATIONS. No discharger shall discharge wastewater
containing concentrations and/or mass limitations of the following-enumerated materials
exceeding the following values:
Material Concentration (Mass Limitation)
(mg/l)
Cadmium 0.1 Milligrams/liter
Copper 2.0 Milligrams/liter
Cyanide 0.4 Milligrams/liter
Lead 2.0 Milligrams/liter
Mercury 0.02 Milligrams/liter
Nickel 2.0 Milligrams/liter
Total Chromium 8.0 Milligrams/liter
Zinc 4.0 Milligrams/liter
120294
9:5
The Commission may impose specific mass limitations on dischargers which are using dilution to
meet the Pretreatment Standards or requirements of these rules and regulations, or in cases where
the imposition of mass limitations is deemed appropriate by the Commission.
SEC. 9-3-34 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
(a) PROTECTION FROM ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES. Each discharger shall provide
protection from accidental discharge or prohibited or regulated materials or substances
established by these rules and regulations. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the discharger's cost
and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures necessary to
provide such protection shall be submitted to the Commission for review and will be
approved by the Commission before construction of the facility. Each existing discharger
shall complete its plan and submit the same to the Commission within ninety (90) days of
written notification of need from the Commission. The Commission shall have sixty (60)
days from receipt of the same to review and comment on the plan. No discharger who
discharges to the POTW after the aforesaid notification and time shall be permitted to
introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge protection procedures have
been approved by the Commission. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures by the Commission shall not relieve the discharger from the responsibility to
modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of these rules and regulations.
(b) NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. Each discharger shall immediately
notify the Commission and Director of Public Works upon the occurrence of any slugload or
accidental discharge of substances prohibited by these rules and regulations. Such
notification shall include information regarding the location of the discharge, the date and
time thereof, the type of waste, the concentration and volume and all corrective actions
taken. Any discharger who discharges a slugload of prohibited materials shall be liable for
any expense, loss or damage to the POTW resulting therefrom, in addition to the amount of
any fines imposed by the Commission (or on the Commission) or by the municipality as the
result thereof under local, state or federal law. Within five (5) days of the date of occurrence,
the discharger shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge
and the measures to be taken by the discharger to prevent similar future occurrences.
(c) SIGNS. Prominent signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on discharger's
premises, advising employees to immediately call the Commission and Director of Public
Works in the event of a slugload or accidental discharge. No less frequently than annually,
every discharger shall instruct all of its employees who are in a position to cause or discover
such a discharge as to the aforesaid immediate notification obligation.
SEC. 9-3-35 PURPOSE - FEES AND CHARGES.
The Commission hereby adopts a system of fees and charges, including a permit fee, a sampling
charge, an annual administrative fee and a laboratory analysis charge, to wit:
(a) PERMIT FEE. The Commission shall charge all industrial dischargers that are required to
obtain a permit or renewal permit under Sections 9-3-37 through 9-3-43 hereof a
wastewater discharge permit fee of Three Hundred Fifty Dollars ($350.00) each.
(b) SAMPLING CHARGE. The Commission shall assess an industrial discharger a charge
120294
9:6
for Commission sampling of its wastewater, such charge to be based on the actual cost to
the Commission. It is estimated that the sampling charge, per site, will be One Hundred
Fifty Dollars ($150.00) per sampling day for twenty-four (24) hour composite samples and
will be Thirty Dollars ($30.00) per grab sample.
(c) ANNUAL ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. The Commission shall assess each permitted
industrial discharger an annual administrative fee for reviewing discharger-submitted
reports and plans, maintaining and updating the discharger's file, coordinating the
Commission's sampling/inspection program and other related responsibilities. The
estimated administrative fee is to be Two Hundred Twenty-five Dollars ($225.00) per
sampling day for each permitted industrial discharger.
(d) LABORATORY ANALYSIS CHARGE. The Commission shall assess an industrial
discharger a laboratory analysis charge to recover the Commission's expenses for analyzing
such discharger's wastewater samples for specific pollutants. The charges for toxic organic
pollutants and toxic inorganic pollutants will be determined by the commercial laboratory
retained by the Commission to perform the analysis.
(e) ADDITIONAL FEES. Additional fees as established by the Commission will be charged
to industrial users on a case-by-case basis for the following items:
(1) Fees for filing appeals.
(2) Fees for consistent removal (by the POTW) of pollutants otherwise subject to
categorical pretreatment standards.
(3) Fees for permit modifications.
SEC. 9-3-37 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.
(a) GENERAL PERMITS. All industrial dischargers that discharge or are capable of
discharging toxic pollutants to the POTW, as well as other industrial users at the discretion
of the Commission, shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit for a term of five (5) years
from the Commission.
(b) PERMIT APPLICATION. All industrial dischargers required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit shall complete and file with the Commission a permit application in the
form prescribed by the Commission and accompanied by the appropriate fee established in
Sections 9-3-35 and 9-3-36 herein. Existing industrial dischargers shall apply for a
wastewater discharge permit within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this Article,
and future new industrial dischargers shall apply for a permit at least sixty (60) days prior to
expiration. No discharge permit or renewal shall be issued unless and until all of the
following conditions have been met by the applicant:
(1) Disclosure of name, address and location of the discharger.
(2) Disclosure of the applicant's Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) number
according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget,
1972, as amended.
(3) Disclosure of the constituents and characteristics of the wastewater discharged by
the applicant, including, but not limited to, those mentioned in these rules and
regulations, including Appendix A, all as determined by bona fide chemical and
biological analyses. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the U.S. EPA as set forth in 40 C.F.R., Part 136, as
amended.
(4) Disclosure of time and duration of applicant's discharges.
(5) Disclosure of applicant's average daily wastewater flow rates, stated in gallons per
120294
9:7
day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. All flows shall be
measured unless otherwise verifiable techniques are approved by the Commission
because of cost or non-feasibility.
(6) Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details of
applicant's premises showing all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes,
sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
(7) Description of the activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises of
applicant, including all materials which are or may be discharged to the sewers or
works of the Commission.
(8) Disclosure of the nature and concentration of any pollutants or materials prohibited
by these rules and regulations and contained in the discharge of applicant, together
with a statement indicating whether or not compliance by applicant, is being
achieved with these rules and regulations on a consistent basis and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance activities and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the applicant to comply with these rules and regulations.
(9) Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be
required to comply with these rules and regulations, the applicant shall provide a
declaration of the shortest time schedule within which it will provide either such
additional pretreatment and/or implement additional operational and maintenance
activities. As to such time schedule:
a. The schedule shall contain milestone dates regarding the commencement
and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment facilities required by applicant to comply with the
requirements of these rules and regulations; these milestone dates shall
include, but not be limited to, dates relating to hiring an engineer, hiring
other appropriate personnel, completing preliminary plans, completing final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction,
completing construction and all other acts necessary to achieve compliance
with these rules and regulations.
b. The Commission shall not permit a time increment for any single step of
such schedule which exceeds nine (9) months.
c. Not later than fourteen (14) days after each milestone date in the schedule,
including the final date for compliance, the applicant shall submit a progress
report to the Commission, including a statement indicating at least whether
or not applicant has complied with the increment of progress represented by
such milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with
such increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by
the applicant to return the construction to schedule. In no event shall more
than nine (9) months elapse between such progress report to the
Commission.
d. Disclosure of each product produced by applicant, indicating the type,
amount, process or processes employed to produce the same and the rate of
production.
e. Disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials utilized (average and
maximum per day) by applicant.
f. All permit applications for new or modified permits and all renewal
applications shall be signed by principal executive officer of the applicant.
(10) The Commission shall evaluate the application and the date furnished by the
applicant and may require additional information. After full evaluation and
120294
9:8
acceptance of the data furnished, the Commission shall issue a wastewater discharge
permit to applicant subject to the terms and conditions provided herein.
(c) PERMIT MODIFICATIONS. The Commission reserves the right to amend any
wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder in order to assure compliance by the
Commission with applicable laws and regulations. Within nine (9) months after the
promulgation of any new National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the existing
wastewater discharge permit of each discharger subject to such standard shall be revised to
require compliance with such standard within the time prescribed by the standard. All
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards adopted after the promulgation of these rules
and regulations shall be deemed adopted by the Commission as part of these rules and
regulations. Where a discharger, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard,
has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required
by Section 9-3-37(b), such discharger shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit from
the Commission within ninety (90) days after the promulgation of the applicable National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard by the U.S. EPA. A discharger with an existing
wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the Commission, within ninety (90) days after
the promulgation of an applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the
information required by Section 9-3-37(b)(a) and (0). A discharger shall be informed by the
Commission of any proposed change in his permit authority and/or conditions at least thirty
(30) days prior to the effective date of such change. Any permit change or new condition
shall be based upon a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
(d) PERMIT CONDITIONS. Wastewater discharge permits shall specify the following:
(1) The fees and charges to be paid by the permittee for the wastewater to be discharged
to the POTW, as listed in Sections 9-3-35 and 9-3-36.
(2) The limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics
regulated thereby.
(3) The limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge and/or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization regulated thereby.
(4) The requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling
facilities.
(5) The requirements for installation and maintenance of pretreatment facilities.
(6) Such special conditions, if any, which the Commission may reasonably require
regarding a specific type of discharge, including sampling locations, frequency of
sampling and the number, type and standards for test, as well as a reporting
schedule.
(7) Compliance schedules.
(8) The requirement, if any, for submission to the Commission by permittee of special
technical reports or discharge reports if different from those prescribed by these
rules and regulations.
(9) Requirements for notification by the permittee to the Commission of the
introduction of any new wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the
volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system.
(10) Requirements for permittee maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge and affording Commission access thereto.
(11) Requirements for notification by permittee to the Commission of slug discharges.
(12) Duration of permit.
(13) Any other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ensure
compliance with these rules and regulations.
120294
9:9
(e) PERMIT DURATION. All wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a term of
five (5) years subject to amendment or revocation by the Commission as provided in these
rules and regulations.
(f) LIMITATIONS ON PERMIT TRANSFER. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to
a specific discharger for a specific operation and are not assignable to another discharger, or
transferrable to any other location, without the prior written approval of the Commission.
SEC. 9-3-38 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE.
(a) REPORTING REQUIREMENTS. All industrial discharges subject to Categorical
Pretreatment Standards shall, at a minimum, comply with the reporting requirements
contained in 40 C.F.R., Part 403.12, including, but not limited to, baseline monitoring
reports, compliance date reports and periodic compliance reports.
(b) COMPLIANCE DATE REPORT. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final
compliance by the discharger with applicable pretreatment standards set forth in these rules
and regulations or within ninety (90) days following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW by a new discharger, such discharger subject to these rules and
regulations shall submit to the Commission a report indicating the nature and concentration
of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge and the average and
maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional
operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into
compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement
shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger and certified by a registered
professional qualified to certify the report.
(c) PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
(1) Any discharger subject to a pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirements,
after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new
discharger, after commencement of the discharge to the POTW, shall submit to the
Commission during the months of June and December each year, unless required
more or less frequently by the Commission, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of prohibited or regulated effluent substances which are limited by the
pretreatment standards hereof. In addition, this report shall include a record of all
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows previously reported under
Subsection (b) above. The Commission, for good cause shown considering such
factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles or other extenuating
factors may authorize the submission of said reports in months other than those
specified above.
(2) Reports of permittees shall contain the full results of all sampling and analysis of the
discharge, including the flow, the nature and concentration thereof, and production
and mass when required by the Commission. The frequency of monitoring by the
discharger shall be as prescribed in the applicable Categorical Pretreatment
Standards. Where such Standards do not specify the frequency of monitoring, the
discharger shall perform the required monitoring as specified in the Commission's
Industrial Pretreatment Program Report. All analyses shall be performed in
accordance with 40 C.F.R., Part 136, and amendments thereto. (Comment: Where
40 C.F.R., Part 136, does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
120294
9:10
the procedures set forth in the EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures
for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and
amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved
by the Administrator of the U.S. EPA.)
SEC. 9-3-39 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
Industrial dischargers shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with
these rules and regulations and shall achieve compliance with all Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or pretreatment requirements within the time limitations as specified by the Federal
Pretreatment Regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the
Commission shall be provided, operated efficiently and maintained in good operating condition at
the industrial discharger's own expense.
SEC. 9-3-40 SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows prior to discharge into any part of the
wastewater treatment system is required, plans, specifications, operating procedures and other
pertinent data or information relating to such pretreatment flow-control facilities shall first be
submitted by the industrial discharger to the Commission for review, comment and/or approval.
The review of such plans and operating procedure will in no way relieve the industrial discharger
from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to
the Commission under the provisions of these rules and regulations. Any subsequent changes to
such pretreatment or flow-control facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be
acceptable to the Commission prior to the industrial discharger's initiation of the changes.
SEC. 9-3-41 MONITORING FACILITIES.
(a) Each discharger shall provide and operate at its own expense a monitoring facility to allow
inspection, sampling and flow measurement of each sewer discharge to the public sewer
and POTW. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the discharger's premises, unless
to do so would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the discharger, in which event the
Commission may allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area
provided it is so located that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
There shall be ample room in or near each monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling
and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measurement equipment
shall be maintained at all times in safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the
discharger.
(b) All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable
local construction standards and specifications.
SEC. 9-3-42 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
The Commission may, at any time, inspect the monitoring facilities of any discharger to determine
its compliance with the requirements of these rules and regulations. The discharger shall allow the
120294
9:11
Commission or its representatives to enter upon the premises of the discharger for the purposes of
inspection, sampling or records examination. The Commission shall have the right to set up on the
discharger's property, at any time, such devices as are necessary to independently conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Sampling of industrial wastewater
for the purpose of compliance determinations with respect to Sections 9-3-32 through 9-3-34
prohibitions and limitations shall be done at such intervals as the Commission may designate.
However, it is the intention of the Commission to conduct compliance sampling or cause such
sampling to be conducted, at least once every year, for all industrial dischargers whose wastewater
contribution may significantly impact the Commission's wastewater treatment system.
SEC. 9-3-43 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
Information and data furnished to the Commission with respect to the nature and frequency of
discharge shall be available to the public or any governmental agency without restriction unless the
discharger specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission
that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets or proprietary information of the discharger. When requested
by a discharger furnishing a report, the portions of a report which may disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, provided, however, that
such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review
or enforcement proceedings involving the discharger furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics shall not be recognized as confidential information. In no event
shall any information be withheld from the public that is, by definition, a public record as set forth
in Sec. 19.34, Wis. Stats., as amended.
SEC. 9-3-44 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF SERVICE AND WASTEWATER
DISCHARGE PERMITS.
(a) The Commission may, for good cause, summarily suspend the wastewater treatment service
and the wastewater discharge permit of a discharger when it appears to the Commission that
an actual or threatened discharge presents or threatens:
(1) Imminent substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons;
(2) Imminent substantial danger to the environment;
(3) Adverse interference with the operation of the POTW;
(4) Violation of any pretreatment limits imposed by these rules and regulations; or
(5) Violation of any of the provisions of the discharger's wastewater discharge permit
issued pursuant to these rules and regulations.
(b) Any discharger notified of the suspension of the Commission's wastewater treatment service
and/or such discharger's wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate
the adverse discharge within a period of time determined by the Commission.
(c) In the event of failure or the reasonable likelihood of failure of the discharger to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order within the time specified, the Commission or City
may commence judicial proceedings at any time to compel compliance with such order.
The Commission or City may reinstate the wastewater discharge permit of the discharger,
and/or resume wastewater treatment service, and/or terminate judicial proceedings upon due
and satisfactory proof by the discharger of its full elimination of the noncomplying
discharge or of the conditions creating the threat of imminent or substantial danger as set
120294
9:12
forth above.
SEC. 9-3-45 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
The Commission may revoke the wastewater discharge permit of any discharger which:
(a) Fails to accurately and fully report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
discharge;
(b) Fails to report significant changes in its wastewater constituents or characteristics;
(c) Refuses reasonable access to the discharger's premises by representatives of the
Commission for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
(d) Violates the conditions of its wastewater discharge permit, these rules and regulations or
any judicial order entered with respect thereto.
SEC. 9-3-46 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
Whenever the Commission finds that any discharger has engaged in conduct which justifies
revocation of a wastewater discharge permit pursuant to Section 9-3-45 hereof, the Commission
shall serve or cause to be served upon such discharger a written notice, either personally or by
certified or registered mail, return-receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation.
Within fifteen (15) days of the date of receipt of the notice, the discharger shall respond personally
or in writing to the Commission advising of its position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter,
the parties shall meet to ascertain the validity of the allegations and, where necessary, establish a
plan for the satisfactory correction thereof.
SEC. 9-3-47 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
Where the violation of Section 9-3-45 hereof is not corrected by timely compliance by the
discharger, the Commission may order any discharger which causes or allows conduct prohibited
by Section 9-3-45 hereof to show cause before the Commission or its duly authorized representative
why permit revocation action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the
discharger specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Commission or its designee
regarding the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed
enforcement action and directing the discharger to show cause before the Commission or its
designee why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall
be served no less than ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer
or authorized representative of a discharger. The proceedings at the hearing shall be considered by
the Commission which shall then enter appropriate orders with respect to the alleged improper
activities of the discharger. Appeal of such orders may be taken by the discharger in accordance
with applicable local or state law.
SEC. 9-3-48 JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.
Before or after the entry of any order by the Commission with respect to the conduct of a discharger
contrary to the provisions of Section 9-3-45 hereof, the attorney for the Commission or City of
Menasha may, following the authorization of such action by the Commission, commence an action
120294
9:13
for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Winnebago County Circuit Court.
SEC. 9-3-49 ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS -- ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF
OFFENDERS.
A list of all significant dischargers which were the subject of enforcement proceedings under
Sections 9-3-44 through 9-3-51 of these rules and regulations during the preceding calendar year
and whose violations remained uncorrected for forty-five (45) or more days after notification of
noncompliance, or which exhibited a pattern of noncompliance during said calendar year, or which
failed to accurately report their noncompliance with these rules and regulations, may be annually
published by the Commission in a local newspaper, summarizing the enforcement action taken
against said dischargers.
SEC. 9-3-50 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to request in writing an interpretation or
ruling of the Commission on any matter covered by these rules and regulations and shall be entitled
to a prompt written reply. In the event that such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of
performance, or compliance with these rules and regulations, or deals with a wastewater discharge
permit issued hereunder for which enforcement activity relating to an alleged violation is the
subject, receipt of a discharger's request shall stay enforcement proceedings until receipt of the
aforesaid written reply, unless enforcement proceedings have already begun. Appeal of any final
judicial order entered pursuant to these rules and regulations may be taken in accordance with local
and state law.
SEC. 9-3-51 OPERATING UPSETS.
Any discharger which experiences an upset in operations which places the discharger in a
temporary state of noncompliance with these rules and regulations or a wastewater discharge permit
issued pursuant hereto shall inform the Commission thereof within twenty-four (24) hours of first
awareness of the commencement of the upset. Where such information is given orally, a written
follow-up report thereof shall be filed by the discharger with the Commission within five (5) days.
The report shall specify:
(a) DESCRIPTION. Description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact on a
discharger's compliance status.
(b) DURATION. Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of
noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is
reasonably expected to occur.
(c) REMEDIES. All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of
such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance.
SEC. 9-3-52 CIVIL PENALTIES.
Section 1-1-7 of the Menasha Municipal Code entitled "General Penalties" is hereby adopted by
reference.
120294
9:14
SEC. 9-3-53 RECOVERY OF COSTS AND EXPENSES INCURRED BY THE
COMMISSION.
Any discharger who violates any of the provisions of the rules and regulations in this Article or who
discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or who causes damage to or
impairs the Commission's wastewater disposal system shall be liable to the Commission for any
expense, loss or damage caused by such violation, discharge or impairment, including any attendant
legal or consulting expense of the Commission or City. The Commission or City shall bill such
discharger for all such costs incurred by the Commission or City and for any cleaning, repair or
replacement work necessitated by the violation or discharge. Refusal of a discharger to pay the
assessed costs within thirty (30) days of billing shall constitute a violation of these rules and
regulations enforceable under the provisions of Section 9-3-44 through 9-3-51 of these rules and
regulations.
SEC. 9-3-54 FALSIFYING INFORMATION.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any
application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to
these rules and regulations or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under these rules and regulations, upon conviction, shall be
punished by the imposition of a civil penalty pursuant to Section 9-3-52.
SEC. 9-3-55 RECORDS RETENTION.
All dischargers subject to these rules and regulations shall retain and preserve for no less than three
(3) years any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all
summaries thereof relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a
discharger in connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the
subject of enforcement or litigation activities brought by the Commission or City pursuant hereto
shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded
and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired.
SEC. 9-3-56 REMOVAL CREDITS.
Where applicable, the Commission may elect to initiate a program of removal credits as part of
these rules and regulations to reflect the POTW's ability to remove pollutants in accordance with 40
C.F.R. 403.7.
120294
9:15
SEC. 9-3-57 HAULED MATERIALS.
The Commission may allow wastewater which is hauled via truck or other conveyance to be
discharged to the POTW. Prior to such discharge, the Commission may require a written report
from the hauler describing the quantity, source of wastewater, laboratory analysis of the pollutant
constituents and other information as deemed necessary by the Commission. The Commission
shall require that written permission and discharge conditions be issued by the Commission to the
hauler prior to discharge of any hauled wastewater.
120294
9:16
APPENDIX A
TOXIC POLLUTANTS
Federal Priority Pollutants
1. Acenaphthene
2. Acrolein
3. Acrylonitrile
4. Benzene
5. Benzidine
6. Carbon tetrachloride (tetrachloromethane)
7. Chlorobenzene
8. 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene
9. Hexachlorobenzene
10. 1,2-dichloroethane
11. 1,1,1-trichloroethane
12. Hexachloroethane
13. 1,1-dichloroethane
14. 1,1,2-trichloroethane
15. 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane
16. Chloroethane
17. Bis (chloromethyl) ether
18. Bis (2-chloroethyl) ether
19. 2-chloroethyl vinyl ether (mixed)
20. 2-chloronapthalene
21. 2,4,6-trichlorophenol
22. Parachlorometacresol
23. Chloroform (trichloromethane)
24. 2-chlorophenol
25. 1,2-dichlorobenzene
26. 1,3-dichlorobenzene
27. 1,4-dichlorobenzene
28. 3,3'-dichlorobenzidine
29. 1,1-dichloroethylene
30. 1,2-trans-dichloroethylene
31. 2,4-dichlorophenol
32. 1,2-dichloropropane
33. 1,3-dichloropropylene
34. 2,4-dimethylphenol
35. 2,4-dinitrotoluene
36. 2,6-dinitrotoluene
37. 1,2-diphenylhydrazine
38. Ethylbenzene
39. Fluoranthene
40. 4-chlorophenyl phenyl ether
41. 4-bromophenyl phenyl ether
42. Bis (2-chloroisopropyl) ether
120294
9:17
43. Bis (2-chloroethoxy) methane
44. Methylene chloride (dichloromethane)
45. Methyl chloride (chloromethane)
46. Methyl bromide
47. Bromoform (tribromomethane)
48. Dichlorobromomethane
49. Trichlorofluoromethane
50. Dichlorodifluoromethane
51. Chlorodibromomethane
52. Hexachlorobutadiene
53. Hexachlorocyclopentadiene
54. Isophorone
55. Naphthalene
56. Nitrobenzene
57. 2-nitrophenol
58. 4-nitrophenol
59. 2,4-dinitrophenol
60. 4,6-dinitro-o-cresol
61. N-nitrosodimethylamine
62. N-nitrosodiphenylamine
63. N-nitrosodi-n-propylamine
64. Pentachlorophenol
65. Phenol (4APP method)
66. Bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate
67. Butyl benzyl phthalate
68. Di-n-butyl phthalate
69. Di-n-octyl phthalate
70. Diethyl phthalate
71. Dimethyl phthalate
72. Benzo(a)anthracene (1,2 benzanthracene)
73. Benzo(a)pyrene (3,4-benzopyrene)
74. 3,4-benzofluoranthene
75. Benzo(k)fluoranthane (11,12-benzofluoranthene)
76. Chrysene
77. Acenaphthylene
78. Anthracene
79. Benzo(ghi)perylene (1,12-benzoperylene)
80. Fluorene
81. Phenanthrene
82. Dibenzo (a,h) anthracene
83. Indeno (1,2,3-cd) pyrene
84. Pyrene
85. Tetrachloroethylene
86. Toluene
87. Trichloroethylene
88. Vinyl chloride (chloroethylene)
89. Aldrin
90. Dieldrin
91. Chlordane (tech. mixture and metabolites)
120294
9:18
92. 4,4' -- DDT
93. 4,4' -- DDE (p,p'-DDX)
94. 4,4' -- DDD (p,p'-TDE)
95. Alpha-endosulfan
96. Beta-endosulfan
97. Endosulfan sulfate
98. Endrin
99. Endrin aldehyde
100. Heptachlor
101. Heptachlor epoxside
102. Alpha-BHC
103. Beta-BHC
104. Gamma-BHC (lindane)
105. Delta-BHC
106. PCB-1242 (Aroclor 1242)
107. PCB-1254 (Aroclor 1254)
108. PCB-1221 (Aroclor 1221)
109. PCB-1232 (Aroclor 1232)
110. PCB-1248 (Aroclor 1248)
111. PCB-1260 (Aroclor 1260)
112. PCB-1016 (Aroclor 1016)
113. Toxaphene
114. Antimony (Total)
115. Arsenic (Total)
116. Asbestos (Fibrous)
117. Beryllium (Total)
118. Cadmium (Total)
119. Chromium (Total)
120. Copper (Total)
121. Cyanide (Total)
122. Lead (Total)
123. Mercury (Total)
124. Selenium (Total)
125. Silver (Total)
126. Thallium (Total)
127. Zinc (Total)
128. 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)
3/2/2009
9:1
CHAPTER 4
Communications Utility
SEC. 9-4-1 UTILITY CABINETS REGULATED.
(a) Public franchise utility cabinets, electric distribution system cabinets and telecommunication
system utility cabinets, hereafter referred to as Utility Cabinets, are subject to requirements of
this section.
SEC. 9-4-2 APPLICABILITY.
(a) A permit is required for the installation of all Utility Cabinets except as follows:
(1) Cabinets under 32 cubic feet and less than four feet in height located in the rear yard
or outside of a front yard setback.
SEC. 9-4-3 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
Application for the installation of Utility Cabinets shall be made on forms available from the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee hereafter referred to as DPW and shall include the
following information:
(a) Name, address, phone number and e-mail address of the applicant.
(b) A description of the project including the relationship of the Utility Cabinet(s) to the
overall utility system and the size and location of related elements of the proposed Utility
Cabinet.
(c) A description of the function of the cabinet documenting the required size of the cabinet
and the maximum spacing from other cabinets serving a related function.
(d) A site plan showing the location of the proposed cabinet in relation to street right-of-way,
sidewalks, terraces, driveways, above ground utilities, trees, traffic control devices,
fences, hedges, and structures within 100 feet of the proposed site.
(e) A scaled drawing showing the dimensions of the cabinet and base. The drawing shall
indicate the color of the cabinet and shall depict the location and size of any lettering,
logo’s or other symbols that may be applied on or attached to the cabinet. The location of
any electric meters shall also be depicted.
(f) An affidavit stating that property owners within 100 feet of the proposed utility cabinet
installation were notified of the proposed installation. Such notice shall include a
description of the size, height, location and appearance of the utility cabinet and also
describe any proposed landscaping or other means of screening the cabinet. Such notice
shall include the contact person at the utility and be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested at least five working days prior to submitting to application to the DPW.
(g) Any other information the DPW may determine as relevant to the placement of the Utility
Cabinet.
(h) Payment of a Utility Cabinet application fee in an amount set by the Common Council.
SEC. 9-4-4 GUIDELINES FOR PLACEMENT OF UTILITY CABINETS.
Wherever feasible, utility cabinets should be placed in rear yards or other areas not visible from
the street right-of-way. If practical alternatives to placing the cabinets in the right-of-way or
front yard setback do not exist, cabinets shall be screened in a manner consistent with the criteria
for transitional areas outlined in Sec. 13-1-17(3) of the Menasha Code of Ordinances.
3/2/2009
9:2
SEC. 9-4-5 PERMIT ISSUANCE:
Following review, the DPW may issue, deny, or issue with conditions a permit for the proposed
Utility Cabinet within 30 days of receipt of the completed application. If denied, the DPW shall
state the reasons for such denial in writing. The DPW may attach conditions to the permit related
to the size, height, location or appearance of the Utility Cabinet including requirements for
landscaping or other screening of the cabinet. The DPW shall consider the following criteria
when evaluating a permit application for a Utility Cabinet:
(a) The rationale set forth by the applicant in Sec. 9-4-3(b & c) stating the need for a Utility
Cabinet at the specified location.
(b) The location of the Utility Cabinet in relation to the features described in 9-4-3(d).
(c) The overall appearance of the Utility Cabinet including the features described in 9-4-3(e).
(d) Other factors as may be relevant to the placement of the Utility Cabinet.
SEC. 9-4-6 APPEAL.
The applicant may appeal any permit denial or condition attached to the Utility Cabinet permit.
Such appeal shall be made, in writing, to the Board of Public Works within 30 days of permit
denial or issuance with conditions. In considering an appeal of a permit denial, the Board of
Public Works may affirm the DPW’s denial, or grant the permit with such conditions as it deems
necessary. In considering an appeal of permit conditions, the Board of Public Works may affirm
the conditions as noted by the DPW, or rescind, modify or add conditions as it deems necessary.
SEC. 9-4-7 REVOCATION.
Permits for Utility Cabinets may be revoked by the DPW if:
(a) The project is not constructed in accordance with the plan submitted under Sec. 4(a).
(b) The conditions attached to the permit by the DPW have not been met within 180 days of
permit issuance.
(c) The use of the cabinet has been discontinued for a period of not less than 60 days.
120294
9:1
CHAPTER 5
Municipal Steam Utility
SEC. 9-5-1 STEAM UTILITY.
(a) Pursuant to Chapters 62, 66 and 197 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and without limitation, sec.
62.11(5), Wis. Stats., the City of Menasha (“City”) hereby exercises its authority to create a
municipal steam utility within the City.
(b) The steam utility shall be responsible to plan, acquire, construct, extend, improve, maintain,
operate, lease, dispose of, regulate, and manage a steam system in order to provide, among
other things: production steam to a limited number of commercial steam customers.
(c) The steam utility shall be under the charge and management of the Menasha Electric and
Water Utilities Commission pursuant to Wis. Stats. Sec. 66.0805, which may exercise all
powers necessary or desirable to effect its purposes.
(d) The City hereby finds that a municipal steam system will provide public benefits by
providing for the continued growth and economic development of the City and is, thereby, in
the best interests of the City.
SEC. 9-5-2 VALIDITY.
Should any section, clause or provision of this ordinance be declared by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any
part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
SEC. 9-5-3 CONFLICTING PROVISION REPEALED.
All ordinances in conflict with any provision of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
Chapter 6
Municipal Stormwater Utility
ii. GENERAL SECTION PROVISIONS
9-6-1 FINDINGS
9-6-2 ESTABLISHMENT
9-6-3 AUTHORITY
9-6-4 INTERPRETATION
9-6-5 SEVERABILITY OF ORDINANCE PROVISIONS
9-6-6 DEFINITIONS
9-6-7 BASIS OF CHARGE
9-6-8 CUSTOMER CLASSIFICATION
9-6-9 CHARGE FORMULAS
9-6-10 CREDITS AND ADJUSTMENTS
9-6-11 BUDGET-EXCESS REVENUES
9-6-12 BILLING AND COLLECTION
9-6-13 METHOD OF APPEAL
9-6-14 ALTERNATIVE COLLECTION METHODS
9-6-15 BILLING FOR SINGLE-FAMILY TO FOUR-FAMILY DWELLINGS
9-6-1 FINDINGS
The City of Menasha Common Council finds that the management of storm water and other
surface water discharges within the City limits is a matter that affects the public health, safety,
and welfare of the City, its citizens and businesses, and others in the surrounding area. Failure to
manage the storm water and other surface water discharges may cause, among other things, land
erosion, property damage, and other environmental damage. In addition, the City is required by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) Administrative Code Section 216 to
improve the quality of storm water discharged from the City into Waters of the State. For
Menasha, the immediate Waters of the State are Little Lake Butte des Morts, the Fox River, and
Lake Winnebago. The City owns, operates, and maintains a storm sewer collection system that
provides collection and regulation of storm water and other surface water discharge for all real
property owners within the City. The costs of operating and maintaining this system and
financing necessary plans, studies, repairs, replacements, improvements, and extensions thereof
should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services received from the
system.
9-6-2 ESTABLISHMENT
In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, there is hereby established a
storm water utility in the City of Menasha.
9-6-3 AUTHORITY
(1) This ordinance is adopted under authority granted by Wisconsin Statutes 62.04,
62.11, 62.16, 62.175, 62.18, 66.0101, 66.0621, 66.0627, 66.0809, 66.0811, and
66.0821.
(2) The city, acting through the stormwater utility, may acquire, construct, lease, own,
operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage
and finance such facilities, operations and activities, as are deemed by the city to be
proper and reasonably necessary for a system of storm and surface water drainage
facilities, sewers, watercourses, retaining walls, ponds, streets, roads, ditches and
such other facilities as will support a stormwater management system.
(3) The Common Council hereby designates the Director of Public Works to administer
and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
9-6-4 INTERPRETATION
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be interpreted
liberally to secure the ends sought hereby and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other power granted to the city by the Wisconsin Statutes.
9-6-5 SEVERABILITY OF ORDINANCE PROVISIONS
If any section, provisions or portion of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected
thereby.
9-6-6 DEFINITIONS
(1) “Administering authority” means the governmental employees or their designees
empowered under S. 62.234, Wisconsin Statutes to administer this ordinance. For the
purpose of this ordinance the administering authority is the Director of Public Works
under the guidance of the Board of Public Works.
(2) “Duplex” means a residential dwelling having two side-by-side units or one lower level
unit and one upper level unit, including zero-lot line condominiums.
(3) “ERU” means Equivalent Runoff Unit and indicates the computed average impervious
surface of a single-family home within the City of Menasha.
(4) “Impervious surface” means a surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by rainwater. The term includes,
without limitation due to enumeration, all areas covered by structures, decks, roof
extensions, patios, porches, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, pavement, gravel,
compacted clay, and loading docks, all as measured on a horizontal plane.
(5) “Land Disturbing Activity” means any man-made alteration of the land surface resulting
in a change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover, that
may result in runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment
into waters of the state. Land disturbing construction activity includes clearing and
grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling and grading activities,
and soil stockpiling.
(6) “Multi-family” means a residential property comprised of three or more attached living
units, including but not limited to manufactured home parks, apartments, flats, and
condominiums.
(7) “Non-residential” means a lot or parcel of land, with improvements such as a building,
paving, or impervious areas as defined in Sec. 9-6-6(4), grading or substantial
landscaping, which is not exclusively residential as defined herein, including, but not
limited to, commercial, industrial, institutional, mixed-use, and governmental property.
(8) “Other surface water discharge” means a discharge to the storm sewer system created by
some process other than storm water runoff.
(9) “Runoff” or “Storm water runoff”means that portion of the precipitation falling during a
rainfall event, or that portion of snowmelt, or irrigation water that runs off the surface of
the land and into the natural or artificial conveyance or drainage network.
(10) “Storm sewer system” means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads
with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels
or storm drains which is designed for collecting water or conveying storm water.
(11) “Undeveloped” means property that is not developed by the addition of an improvement
such as a building, structure, other impervious area as defined in Sec. 9-6-6(4), grading of
more than 4,000 square feet, or other land disturbing activity which increases stormwater
runoff. For the purposes of this ordinance, a property shall be considered developed upon
issuance of a building permit.
(12) “Unimproved” means lots within a subdivision or certified survey map, or units within a
condominium plat which do not abut an improved street.
(13) “Waters of the State” means those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within
the boundaries of Wisconsin, and all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells,
impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water
or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within Wisconsin or its
jurisdiction.
9-6-7 BASIS OF CHARGE
(1) By this ordinance, the Common Council is establishing the rate classification and basis
for computation of charges for stormwater services for each lot within the City of
Menasha. The actual charges to be imposed pursuant to these rate classifications, and
any future changes in the charges, shall be made by resolution. A schedule of current
rates, following approval by the common council, shall be maintained and on file in the
office of the Director of Public Works.
(2) The rate classifications used to distribute the costs of the Stormwater Program among
utility customers shall be based on the Equivalent Runoff Unit (ERU). The charge
assigned to each developed parcel shall be assessed based upon the impervious areas or
living units as reasonably determined by the city. Undeveloped properties shall be
assessed a fraction of an ERU based on proportionate costs of administration and
operating costs. For the purposes of this section, undeveloped, unimproved property shall
be aggregated, and a single ERU charge shall be assigned to the aggregated lots. Public
right-of-way, public trails within official easements and undeveloped properties which
are predominantly classified as “Wetlands” as defined by Section 23.32(1) of the
Wisconsin Statutes and/or “Protective Areas” as defined by Wis. Admin. Code NR
151.12(5)(d)1. Where such classifications render the property undevelopable shall be
exempt from the utility charge.
9-6-8 CUSTOMER CLASSIFICATION
(1) Customer Classes. For the purposes of imposing the stormwater charges, all lots and
parcels within the city are classified into the following six (6) customer classes.
(a) Residential, Single Family
(b) Residential, Duplex (Two-Family)
(c) Residential, Multi-Family
(d) Residential, Riparian
(e) Non-residential
(f) Undeveloped
(g) Right-of-way
(2) Parcel Classification. The Director of Public Works shall assign a customer classification
to each lot and parcel within the City of Menasha.
(3) ERU. The ERU is established to be 2,980 square feet.
9-6-9 CHARGE FORMULAS
(1) Residential, Single Family. The charges imposed for residential properties comprised of a
single living unit including housing units located within manufactured housing
communities shall be the charge for one ERU, i.e.
Residential parcel charge = one ERU fee
For the purposes of this ordinance a lot located within a manufactured housing community shall
be considered a parcel.
(2) Residential, Duplex (Two-Family). The charges imposed for residential properties
comprised of two attached living units, either side-by-side or one lower level unit and
one upper level unit shall be the fee of one ERU per living unit existing on the property,
i.e.
Duplex (Two-Family) parcel charge = 1.0 ERU fee x number of dwelling units
(3) Residential, Multi-Family. The charges imposed for residential properties with three (3)
or more attached living units shall be the charge for one ERU times the numerical factor
obtained by dividing the total square footage of impervious area of the property by the
square footage of one ERU. The factor shall be rounded down to the nearest one-tenth
(0.1), i.e.
Multi-Family parcel charge = ERU charge x parcel impervious area ÷ 2,980 square feet
(4) Residential, Riparian. The charges imposed for residential properties adjacent to the Fox
River, US Government Canal, Lake Winnebago, and Little Lake Butte des Morts shall be
the fee of 0.80 of one ERU per living unit existing on the property, i.e.
Residential Riparian charge = 0.80 ERU fee x number of dwelling units
(5) Non-Residential. The charges imposed for non-residential properties shall be the charge
for one ERU times the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total square footage of
impervious area of the property by the square footage of one ERU. The factor shall be
rounded down to the nearest one-tenth (0.1), i.e.
Non-residential parcel charge = ERU charge x parcel impervious area ÷ 2,980 square feet
(6) Undeveloped. The charges imposed for undeveloped parcels as defined herein shall be
the fee of 0.40 of one ERU, i.e.
Undeveloped parcel charge = 0.40 x ERU fee
(7) Right-of-Way. Public highway, road, public trails within official easements and rail
right-of-way shall be exempt from the stormwater utility charge.
(8) Minimum Charge. The minimum charges for any customer assessed a charge shall be
equal to the charge for undeveloped parcels.
(9) New Construction. For parcels other than single family and duplex, the owner shall be
responsible for storm water charges related to an increase in ERU’s for the construction
of new or expanded buildings, driveways, and/or other structures. The City will
recalculate ERU’s upon completion of the new construction.
(10) Impervious Area Measurement. The Director of Public Works or designee shall be
responsible for determining the impervious area of nonresidential parcels based on best
available information, including, but not limited to, data supplied by the city assessor,
city building inspector, aerial photography, property owner, tenant, or developer. The
Director of Public Works or designee may require additional information as necessary to
make the determination. The number of ERU’s shall be updated by the Director of
Public Works or designee based on any additions to the impervious area as approved
through the building permit process.
9-6-10 CREDITS AND ADJUSTMENTS
(1) Credits.
(a) Eligibility. A customer may be eligible for a credit, in the form of a reduced ERU
multiplier for properties where all of the following conditions apply:
1. The city’s cost of providing service or making service available to the
property has been lessened.
2. The property conforms to all applicable ordinances and standards of the City
of Menasha.
3. The property has been assigned a multi-family or nonresidential user
classification.
(b) Maximum Credit. The maximum aggregate credit for any individual property is a
percentage of its ERU charge as determined annually based on actual operations.
(c) Credit Types. The following credits may be available to customers for properties
that meet all of the eligibility criteria of Sec. 9-6-10(1)(a).
1. Zero Discharge Credit. Credits may be considered for properties that
discharge stormwater directly into a water body not maintained in any way by
the city, or directly into a water body downstream of where it is maintained
by the city, or is otherwise contained entirely upon the property.
2. Peak Discharge Control Credit. Credits may be considered for customers who
own and maintain stormwater management facilities such as retention or
detention basins that exceed state and local peak discharge rate requirements
applicable to the site.
3. Water Quality Credit. Credits may be considered for customers who own and
maintain stormwater management facilities that improve the quality of runoff
from the property to a degree that exceeds state and local water quality
requirements applicable to the site.
(2) Adjustments and Incentives: A customer may be eligible for incentives, or have the
number of ERU’s assigned to their property adjusted under the conditions described
below:
(a) Nonresidential Property. Nonresidential customers who believe the number of
ERU’s assigned to their property to be incorrect may submit an adjustment
request to the Director of Public Works. The allocated ERU’s may be adjusted if
the owner can provide information stamped by a certified engineer or surveyor,
showing the square footage calculation as determined in Sec. 9-6-9 is incorrect.
(b) Residential Property. The Common Council may, via separate resolution, create
such incentives as it deems appropriate, to encourage on-site stormwater
management practices on residential properties.
(4) Review Procedure.
(a) Within thirty (30) days of submission of a request to the Director of Public
Works for a credit, adjustment or reimbursement, the Director of Public Works
shall issue a written notice as to whether the request has been granted, denied, or
granted in part. The written notice shall also set forth the reason or reasons for the
decision and shall be sent to the customer by mail.
(5) Effective Date. Any ERU adjustment granted shall thereafter be used to calculate the
customer’s user charges. The reduction shall only apply for the period of time subsequent
to the filing of the request for adjustment. There shall be no retroactive adjustment for
user charges imposed prior to the filing of the request.
9-6-11 BUDGET-EXCESS REVENUES
The city shall separately account for the stormwater utility finances. The Director of Public
Works shall prepare an annual budget, which is to include capital, borrowing and other costs
related to the operation of the utility. The budget is subject to approval by the common council.
Any excess of revenues over expenditures in a year will be deposited in a stormwater
maintenance fund, which shall only be used to defer the costs of capital improvements, retire
debt or other stormwater management expenses approved by the Director of Public Works.
9-6-12 BILLING AND COLLECTION
(1) Billing. Stormwater utility charges shall be billed not less than annually and payable
within 25 days of issuance. The property owner shall be ultimately responsible for
payment of the Stormwater Utility charge.
(2) Late Payment. Failure to pay the charges when due will be subject to a late payment
charge of one and a half (1.5) percent per month that will be added to bills not paid
within 25 days of issuance.
(3) Unpaid Charges. Unpaid charges shall be assessed as a lien against the property and
placed on the property tax bill pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 66.0821.
9-6-13 METHOD OF APPEAL
(1) If a property has been denied a credit or adjustment, the decision may be appealed by
submitting an appeal with the Director of Public Works.
(2) Within sixty (60) days of the submission of an appeal, the Director of Public Works shall
issue a written recommendation as to whether the appeal should be granted, denied or
granted in part. A hearing shall be scheduled before the Board of Public Works. The
written recommendation shall also set forth the reason or reasons for such
recommendation. The recommendation and notice of hearing shall be sent to the
customer by mail, and shall be provided to the Board of Public Works.
(3) The Board of Public Works shall allow the customer to present evidence at the hearing.
Upon review, the Board of Public Works shall determine whether the recommendation
should be approved, rejected, or modified. The final determination of the Board of Public
Works shall be in writing and set forth the reason or reasons for its decision. No further
city appeal will be allowed.
(4) In reviewing a recommendation, the Board of Public Works shall apply the
considerations set forth in Wis. Stat. § 66.0821(4)(c).
(5) Any appeal granted shall thereafter be used to calculate the customer’s user charges. The
reduction shall only apply for the period of time subsequent to the filing of the request for
appeal. There shall be no retroactive adjustment for user charges imposed prior to the
filing of the request.
9-6-14 ALTERNATIVE COLLECTION METHODS
In addition to any other method for collection of the charges established under this Section, or by
subsequent resolution, such charges may be levied and imposed on a property as a special charge
pursuant to Sec. 66.0627, Wis. Stats. The mailing of the bill for stormwater utility charges to a
property owner shall serve as notice to the property owner that failure to pay the charges when
due may result in the charges being imposed pursuant to the authority of Sec. 66.0627, Wis.
Stats. The procedures contained in Sec. 66.0627, Wis. Stats., shall govern such notice and further
collection procedures.
9-6-15 BILLING FOR SINGLE-FAMILY TO FOUR-FAMILY DWELLINGS
Storm water billings for Single-Family to Four-Family dwellings should be sent to the
occupant/tenant.
ARTICLE A
General Provisions
SEC. 10-1-1 STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED.
(a) STATUTES ADOPTED. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code,
the statutory provisions in Chapters 340 to 348 of the Wisconsin Statutes, describing
and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic, exclusive of any
regulations for which the statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment or
exclusively state charges, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this
Chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited
by any regulation incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by this
Chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutory
regulations in Chapters 340 to 348 incorporated herein are intended to be made part
of this Chapter in order to secure to the extent legally practicable uniform statewide
regulation of vehicle traffic on highways, streets and alleys of the State of
Wisconsin. Any person who shall, within the City of Menasha, Wisconsin, violate
any provisions of any Statute incorporated herein by reference shall be deemed
guilty of an offense under this Section.
(b) OTHER STATE LAWS ADOPTED. There are also hereby adopted by reference
the following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, but the prosecution of such
offenses under this Chapter shall be as provided in Chapters 340 to 348 of the
Wisconsin Statutes and the penalty for violation thereof shall be limited to a
forfeiture as hereinafter provided in this Chapter:
941.01 Negligent Operation of Vehicle Off Highway
941.03 Highway Obstruction
943.11 Entry into Locked Vehicle
943.23 Operating Motor Vehicles Without Owners Consent
947.045 Drinking in Motor Vehicle on Highway
(c) STATUTES SPECIFICALLY INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
Whenever this Chapter incorporates by reference specific sections of the Wisconsin
Statutes, such references shall mean the Wis. Stats., of 1985-86 as from time to time
amended, repealed or modified by the Wisconsin Legislature.
(d) GENERAL REFERENCES. General references in this Chapter to Wisconsin
statutory sections or chapters describing or defining procedures or authority for
enactment or enforcement of local traffic regulations shall be deemed to refer to the
most recent enactments of the Wisconsin Legislature describing or defining such
procedures or authorities.
SEC. 10-1-2 STATE ADMINISTRATIVE CODE PROVISIONS ADOPTED.
(a) ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS ADOPTED. The following
administrative rules and regulations adopted by the Secretary of the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation and published in the Wisconsin Administrative Code,
exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to be imposed, are
hereby adopted by reference and made part of this Chapter as if fully set forth
herein.
Wis. Adm. Code - MVD 3 Reciprocity - Nonresident Motor Carriers [Penalties
of Wis. Stats. Sec. 341.04 apply]
Wis. Adm. Code - MVD 4 Lettering on Vehicles, Display of Evidence of
Registration and Dual Permit
Wis. Adm. Code - MVD 5 Standards for Motor Vehicle Equipment
Wis. Adm. Code - MVD 6 Transportation of Explosives by Motor Vehicle
Wis. Adm. Code - MVD 17 Transportation of Explosives by Motor Vehicle
Wis. Adm. Code - MVD 18 Protective Headgear Standards and Specifications
Wis. Adm. Code - MVD 22 Standards and Specifications - Design and Mounting
SMV Emblem
(b) NON-COMPLIANCE PROHIBITED. No person shall operate or allow to be
operated on any highway, street or alley within the City a vehicle that is not in
conformity with the requirements of Subsection (a) or the provisions of
Section 110.075 and Chapter 347, Wis. Stats., incorporated by reference in Section
10-1-1 of this Chapter.
SEC. 10-1-3 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS AND CONTROL DEVICES;
PROHIBITED SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKERS.
(a) DUTY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS TO ERECT AND INSTALL
UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. Whenever traffic regulations
created by this Chapter, including a State of Wisconsin traffic regulation adopted by
reference in Section 10-1-1, require the erection of traffic control devices for
enforcement, the Director of Public Works, with the cooperation of the Police
Department, shall procure, erect and maintain uniform traffic control devices
conforming to the Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual promulgated by the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation, giving notice of such traffic regulation to
the users of the streets and highways on which such regulations apply. Whenever
State law grants discretion to local authorities in erecting or placement of a uniform
traffic control device, devices shall be erected in such locations and in such a manner
as, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works or his designee, will carry out
the purposes of this Chapter and give adequate warning to users of the streets and
highways of the City of Menasha.
(b) CODE NUMBERS TO BE AFFIXED TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICES. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall cause to be placed
on each official traffic control sign a guide board, mile post, signal or marker erected
under Subsection (a), a code number assigned by the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation, and shall also place or direct the placing of code numbers on all
existing official traffic control devices as required by the laws of the State of
Wisconsin.
(c) PROHIBITED SIGNS AND MARKERS IN HIGHWAYS. No person other
than an officer authorized by this Chapter to erect and maintain official traffic
control devices or his/her designee, shall place within the limits of any street or
highway maintained by the City any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument unless
permission is first obtained from the Director of Public Works or, where applicable,
the State Highway Commission. Any sign, signal, marker, mark or monument
placed or maintained in violation of this Subsection shall be subject to removal as
provided in Subsection (d).
(d) REMOVAL OF UNOFFICIAL SIGNS, MARKERS, SIGNALS AND
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. The Director of Public Works or his designee
may remove any sign, signal, marking or other device which is placed, maintained
or displayed in violation of this Chapter or state law. Any charge imposed against
premises for removal of a prohibited or illegal sign, signal, marking or device shall
be reported by the Director of Public Works or his designee to the Board of Public
Works for review and certification at its next regular meeting following the
imposition of the charge. Any charge not paid on or before the next succeeding
November 15 shall be placed upon the tax roll for collection as other special
municipal taxes.
State Law Reference: Sections 346.41 and 349.09, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 10-1-4 REGISTRATION RECORD OF VEHICLE AS EVIDENCE.
When any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision of this
Chapter regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and the identity of the
operator cannot be determined, the owner, as shown by the ownership registration of the
vehicle supplied by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, or a comparable authority
of any other state, shall be deemed to have committed the violation for purposes of
enforcement of this Chapter and specifically Section 10-1-1 and shall be subject to the
applicable forfeiture penalty; provided the defenses defined and described in Section
346.485(5)(b), Wis. Stats., shall be a defense for an owner charged with such violation.
SEC. 10-1-5 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
The operator of every vehicle involved in an accident shall immediately after such accident
file with the Police Department a copy of the report required by Section 346.70 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, if any. If the operator is unable to make such report, any occupant of
the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making such report shall have the duty to
comply with this Section. Such reports shall be subject to the provisions and limitations of
Sections 346.70(4)(f) and 346.73 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
SEC. 10-1-6 SCHOOL BUS WARNING LIGHTS.
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 346.48(2)(b)2., Wis. Stats., adopted by
reference in Section 10-1-1 to the contrary, and except as provided in Subsection (b)
below, school bus operators shall use flashing red warning lights in residential and
business districts when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or
unloaded at locations at which there are no crosswalk or traffic signals so that pupils
must cross the street or highway before being loaded or after being unloaded.
(b) Pursuant to Sec. 349.12(2), Wis. Stats., the use of flashing red warning lights by
school bus operators is prohibited when pupils or other authorized passengers are
loaded or unloaded directly from or onto the school grounds or that portion of the
right-of-way between the roadway and the school grounds in a zone designated by
"school" warning signs as provided in Sec. 118.08(1), Wis. Stats., in which a street
or highway borders the grounds of a school.
SEC. 10-1-7 BLUE WARNING LIGHTS ON POLICE VEHICLES.
(a) Pursuant to Sections 346.03(3), 346.94(14), 346.95(3) and 347.25(1), (1m)(a) and
(b) and (4), Wis. Stats., a marked police vehicle under Section 340.01(3)(a), Wis.
Stats., may be equipped with a blue light and a red light which flash, oscillate or
rotate.
(b) If the vehicle is so equipped, the lights shall be illuminated when the operator of the
police vehicle is exercising the privileges granted under Sec. 346.03, Wis. Stats.
The blue light shall be mounted on the passenger side of the vehicle and the red light
shall be mounted on the driver side of the vehicle. The lights shall be designed and
mounted so as to be plainly visible and understandable from a distance of five
hundred (500) feet during normal sunlight and during hours of darkness. No
operator of a police vehicle may use the warning lights except when responding to
an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law,
when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm or when necessarily
parked on a highway in a position which is likely to be hazardous to traffic using the
highway.
SEC. 10-1-8 NINETY-DAY TRIAL PERIODS TO DEVELOP TRAFFIC
PATTERNS AUTHORIZED.
(a) DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS. Among other powers and
duties of the above mentioned Board, it shall be their duty, and to this end, it shall
have the authority within the limits of the funds at its disposal, to coordinate traffic
activities, to carry on educational activities in traffic matters, to supervise the
preparation and publication of traffic reports, to receive complaints having to do
with traffic matters, and to recommend to the legislative body of the City, and other
City officials, ways and means for improving traffic conditions, including the
acquisition of off-street parking, and the administration and enforcement of traffic
regulations.
(b) TEMPORARY REGULATIONS. For the purpose of testing proposed regulations
under actual conditions, the Board of Public Works is empowered to make
temporary regulations governing traffic for trial periods not to exceed ninety (90)
days. If the trial periods are deemed successful by the Board, it shall make its
recommendations accordingly to the Common Council for the purpose of that body
considering legislation to make such temporary regulations permanent.
(c) WHEN NINETY (90) DAY PERIOD TO COMMENCE. Said ninety (90) day
period shall commence only when the proper traffic signals and signs are installed,
and required lines painted, and only after the City Clerk has caused to be published
in the official newspaper a display notice to that effect. For enforcement purposes,
said program shall go into effect the day following publication.
SEC. 10-1-9 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
ARTICLE B
Controlled intersections; Street Traffic Regulations
SEC. 10-1-10 OPERATORS TO OBEY TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
Every operator of a vehicle approaching an intersection at which an Official Traffic Control
Device is erected in accordance with this Chapter shall obey the direction of such Official
Traffic Control Device as required by the Wisconsin Statutes incorporated by reference in
Section 10-1-1 of this Chapter. Operators of vehicles approaching a stop sign shall stop
before entering a highway as required by Section 346.46, Wis. Stats. Operators approaching
intersections at which a yield sign has been installed shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles as required by Section 346.18(6), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 10-1-11 SPEED LIMITS.
(a) STATE SPEED LIMITS ADOPTED. The provisions of Sections 346.57, 346.58
and 346.59, Wis. Stats., relating to the maximum and minimum speed of vehicles
are hereby adopted as part of this Section as if fully set forth herein, except as
specified by this Section pursuant to Section 349.11(3)(c), Wis. Stats., where the
Common Council has determined that the statutory speed limits are unreasonable,
unsafe and imprudent and has modified such limits.
(b) SPEED LIMITS MODIFIED. The speed limits are increased as hereinafter set
forth in this Subsection upon the following streets or portions thereof between the
limits designated:
(1) Thirty miles per hour. Earl Street from Midway Road to the south City limits
south of Terrace Avenue in the City of Menasha.
(2) Thirty-five miles per hour.
a. Airport Road -- that part which lies in the City of Menasha between
Racine Street Road and Appleton Road.
b. Midway Road -- that part which lies in the City of Menasha between
Chain Drive and Home Avenue.
c. Valley Road -- that part which lies in the City of Menasha between
Chain Drive and Southwood Avenue.
d. Appleton Road -- north of the City limits on Highway 47 to south of the
Goodwill Industries property line.
e. Racine Street, Valley Road and Midway Road -- that part which lies in
Highway P and County Trunk Highway AP.
f. Racine Street Road -- that part which lies in the City of Menasha
between Warsaw Street and Gordon Street.
g. Valley Road -- that part which lies in the City of Menasha between
Palisades Drive and Theresa Avenue.
h. Manitowoc Road from Oneida Street to the east City limits.
i. Lake Park Road—that part which lies in the City of Menasha between
USH 10 and Manitowoc Road.
j. Plank Road—that part which lies in the City of Menasha between
Manitowoc Road and the eastern City Limits.
k. Oneida Street—that part which lies in the City of Menasha between
HWY 114 and the northern City Limits.
(c) SPEED LIMITS DECREASED. The speed limits are decreased as hereinafter set
forth in this Subsection upon the following streets or portions thereof between the
limits designated:
(1) Fifteen miles per hour.
a. DePere Street -- from Airport Road to a point eight hundred (800) feet
south.
b. River Street -- from the Soo Line railroad tracks westerly to its dead
end.
c. Broad Street parking lot alley.
d. Brighton Drive from its beginning at its curve to the end at the cul de
sac.
(2) Ten miles per hour. Kargus Drive.
State Law Reference: Section 349.11(3)(c), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 10-1-12 THROUGH STREETS AND SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES
DESIGNATED.
In the interest of public safety and pursuant to Section 349.07, Wis. Stats., the following
streets or portions thereof set forth in this Section are declared to be through highways and
snow emergency routes, and traffic signs or signals giving notice thereof shall be erected by
the Director of Public Works in accordance with Section 10-1-3:
(a) Ahnaip Street from Curtis Reed Plaza to Nicolet Boulevard.
(b) Airport Road and Eugene Street from Racine Street to east City limits.
(c) Appleton Road from DePere Street to Ninth Street.
(d) DePere Street from Third Street to Appleton Road (State Trunk Highway 47).
(e) Keyes Street from Curtis Reed Plaza to Willow Lane.
(f) London Street from Old Plank Road (State Trunk Highway 114) to Airport Road,
except Seventh Street and Ninth Street.
(g) Main Street from Racine Street to Tayco Street.
(h) Milwaukee Street from Chute Street to Third Street.
(i) Nicolet Boulevard from Lake Winnebago to Washington Street, except Naymut
Street and Ahnaip Street.
(j) Ninth Street from Tayco Street to east City limits, except Racine Street and
Appleton Road.
(k) Old Plank Road (State Trunk Highway 114) from Manitowoc Street to east City
limits.
(l) Racine Street (State Trunk Highway 114) from Main Street to Third Street.
(m) Racine Street from Third Street to Ninth Street.
(n) Seventh Street from Racine Street to Melissa Street, except DePere Street, Appleton
Road and London Street.
(o) Tayco Street from River Street to Ninth Street, except Main Street, Second Street,
and Sixth Street.
(p) Third Street from Manitowoc Street to Brighton Drive, except at Ahnaip Street.
(q) Third Street (State Trunk Highway 114) from Racine Street to Manitowoc Street.
(r) Third Street from Tayco Street to Racine Street.
(s) Washington Street from Nicolet Boulevard to River Street.
State Law Reference: Section 349.07, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 10-1-13 ONE-WAY STREETS.
Pursuant to Sec. 349.10, Wis. Stats., the following streets are heretofore declared to be
one-way streets, and no person shall operate any vehicle thereon except in the indicated
directions:
(a) Broad Street between Racine and DePere Streets.
(b) Kargus Drive within Jefferson Park.
(c) Water Street between Main and Mill Streets.
(d) The Senior Center alley northbound.
State Law Reference: Section 349.10, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 10-1-14 HEAVY TRAFFIC ROUTES.
(a) DEFINITION. For purposes of this Section, heavy traffic shall be defined as:
(1) All vehicles not operating completely on pneumatic tires; and
(2) All vehicles or combination of vehicles, other than motor buses, designed or
used for transporting property of any nature and having a gross weight of
more than fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds.
(b) PROHIBITED ROUTES. Heavy traffic is prohibited from using any City street or
highway not designated as a heavy traffic route. This Section shall not act to
prohibit heavy traffic from using a City street or highway for the purpose of
obtaining orders for supplies or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or
from any place of business or residence which has an entrance on such street or
highway. Furthermore, this Section will not act to prohibit heavy traffic from using
any City streets over which are routed state trunk highways. When being driven to
the site of any construction, repair or maintenance of electric, gas or water service,
vehicles owned and operated by a public utility will be exempt from the provisions
of this Section.
(c) ADMINISTRATION. The Director of Public Works in cooperation with the
Police Department shall administer this Section. Administration shall include:
(1) Posting of signs. Appropriate signs shall be posted giving notice of this
Section and of the heavy traffic routes established herein. Yellow sign posts
may also be used to designate heavy traffic routes.
(2) Maps. Heavy traffic routes shall be shown on the Official Traffic Map.
(3) Construction equipment.
a. The Director of Public Works may grant temporary permits to allow
heavy construction equipment to use City streets or highways not
designated as heavy traffic routes. These permits may be granted only
when use of a non-designated route is necessary for the equipment to
reach a construction site. No permit may be issued unless the person or
corporation owning the equipment agrees to reimburse and hold the City
harmless for any damage done to the City street by the equipment and/or
any personal injury or property damage caused in part or in whole by the
street damage.
b. City-owned or operated equipment is specifically excluded from the
provisions of this Section.
(d) LIABILITY. Any operator, corporation, owner or agent whose heavy traffic
vehicle damages any City streets or highways in violating this Section shall be liable
and required to pay the City the cost of repair or replacement of the damaged street
or highway.
(e) SPECIAL AND SEASONAL WEIGHT LIMITATIONS. The Director of
Public Works shall have the authority to impose special or seasonal weight limits on
any highway, bridge or culvert maintained by the City to prevent injury to the
roadway or for the safety of the users of such bridge or culvert and shall be
responsible for erecting Uniform Traffic Control Devices giving notice thereof in
accordance with the proving of Section 10-1-3.
(f) HEAVY TRAFFIC ROUTES DESIGNATED. The following streets in the City
are hereby designated as heavy traffic routes:
(1) State Highway 47.
(2) County Trunk Highway P (Calumet and Winnebago Counties).
(3) County Trunk Highway AP (Winnebago County).
(4) Racine Street from Third Street to the north City limits.
(5) Racine Street from Third Street south to Ahnaip Street, all of Ahnaip Street,
then west on Nicolet Boulevard to State Highway 114.
State Law Reference: Section 349.17, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 10-1-15 CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED.
(a) COMPLETE STOPS REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful for any person driving or
operating any motor vehicle or other vehicle to drive or cause the same to be driven
into an intersection designated and declared by this Section to be a stop zone listed
heretofore as requiring one-way stops, two-way stops, three-way stops, four-way
stops or signalized intersections, without first coming to a full and complete stop.
(b) ONE-WAY STOPS AUTHORIZED.
(1) Water Street at Lush Street (west side).
(2) Center Street at Water Street.
(3) Walbrun Street at Sixth Street.
(4) School Court at Seventh Street.
(5) Paris Street at Broad Street.
(6) Fourth Street at Konemac Street.
(7) Trader Road at Manitowoc Road.
(8) Meadowview Drive at Manitowoc Road.
(9) Lucerne Drive at Appleton Road.
(10) Woodland Drive at Ninth Street.
(11) Elmwood Drive at Ninth Street.
(12) Maria Lane at Ninth Street.
(13) Manitowoc Street at Fourth Street.
(14) Twelfth Street at Racine Road.
(15) Fifteenth Street at DePere.
(16) Airport Road at Racine Road.
(17) Earl Street at Midway Road.
(18) Beck Street at Racine Road.
(19) Bud Drive at Valley Road.
(20) Ninth Street eastbound at Meadowview Drive.
(21) Pulley Lane at Tayco Street.
(22) Woodland Drive at Geneva Road.
(23) Highridge Drive and Racine Road.
(24) Fieldview Drive at Manitowoc Road.
(25) Briarwood Drive at Lucerne Drive.
(26) London Street at Lucerne Drive.
(27) Ida Street at Geneva Road.
(28) Wittmann Park Lane at Appleton Road.
(29) Twelfth Street at DePere Street.
(30) Abbey Avenue at the crossing of the Wisconsin Central Railroad (north
side).
(31) Calder Street at Twelfth Street.
(32) Ice Street at Second Street
(33) First Street at Ice Street
(34) Midway Crossing at Province Terrace.
(35) Midway Crossing at Midway Crossing and Private Drive.
(36) Midway Crossing at Province Link.
(c) TWO-WAY STOPS AUTHORIZED.
(1) Kaukauna Street (west), Tayco Street (north) at Main Street.
(2) Nicolet Boulevard and Naymut Street (northeast and northwest corners).
(3) Warsaw Street at Eighth Street.
(4) Appleton Street at Broad Street.
(5) Appleton Street at First Street.
(6) Fourth Street at Appleton Street.
(7) Fifth Street at Appleton Street.
(8) Sixth Street at Appleton Street.
(9) Appleton Street at Eighth Street.
(10) First Street at DePere Street.
(11) Second Street at DePere Street.
(12) DePere Street at Eighth Street.
(13) Manitowoc Street at Broad Street.
(14) Manitowoc Street at First Street.
(15) Manitowoc Street at Second Street.
(16) Second Street and Konemac Street (northwest and southwest corners).
(17) Manitowoc Road at U.S.H. 10 (Oneida Street).
(18) Meadowview Drive at Jennie Street.
(19) Greendale Street at Elmwood Drive.
(20) Bullard Court at Tayco Street.
(21) Harding Street at Ida Street.
(22) Harding Street at Grove Street.
(23) Harding Street at John Street.
(24) Elizabeth Street at Harding Street.
(25) Elizabeth Street at Eighth Street.
(26) Lincoln Street at Grove Street.
(27) Jefferson Street at Grove Street.
(28) Eighth Street at Grove Street.
(29) Eighth Street at Ida Street.
(30) Eighth Street at John Street.
(31) Eighth Street at Arthur Street.
(32) Eighth Street at Melissa Street.
(33) Meadowview Drive at Lucerne Drive.
(34) Geneva Road at London Street.
(35) Second Street at Tayco Street.
(36) Konemac Street at the crossing of Konemac and Wisconsin Central Railroad
tracks.
(37) Apple Court at Lucerne Drive.
(38) Southfield Drive at Manitowoc Road.
(39) Southfield Drive at Midway Road.
(40) Midway Place/Kenwood Drive at Midway Road.
(41) Madison Street at the crossing of Wisconsin Central Railroad.
(42) Garfield Avenue at the crossing of Wisconsin Central Railroad.
(43) Fieldcrest Drive at Jennie Street.
(44) Jennie Street at Deerfield Avenue.
(45) Broad Street at Racine Street
(d) THREE-WAY STOPS AUTHORIZED.
(1) Tayco Street and Sixth Street.
(2) Elmwood and Eugene Streets
(3) Lucerne Drive and Meadowview Drive (east, west, north)
(e) FOUR-WAY STOPS AUTHORIZED.
(1) Tayco Street and Ninth Street.
(2) (number skipped)
(3) Milwaukee Street and Sixth Street.
(4) Milwaukee Street and Seventh Street.
(5) Milwaukee Street and Eighth Street.
(6) Appleton Street and Second Street.
(7) State Street and Eighth Street.
(8) DePere Street and Seventh Street.
(9) Manitowoc Street and Sixth Street.
(10) Manitowoc Street and Eighth Street.
(11) Konemac Street and Eighth Street.
(12) London Street and Seventh Street.
(13) Melissa Street and Seventh Street.
(14) Chain Drive and Valley road (southeast corner in City).
(15) Racine Road and Airport Road.
(16) Racine Road and Midway Road.
(17) Geneva Road at Meadowview Drive.
(18) Meadowview Drive at Geneva Road.
(19) Southfield Drive and Deerhaven Drive
(20) First Street and Appleton Street
(21) Broad Street and DePere Street
(22) Broad Street and Appleton Street
(f) SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS AUTHORIZED.
(1) Seventh Street and Racine Street.
(2) Appleton Road (S.T.H. 47) and Airport Road.
(3) Ninth Street and Appleton Road (S.T.H. 47).
(4) Ninth Street and Racine Street.
(5) Midway Road and Appleton Road (S.T.H. 47).
(6) Racine Street and State Highway 441.
(7) DePere Street and Third Street.
(8) Third Street and Racine Street.
(9) Racine Street and First Street.
(10) Main Street and Racine Street.
(11) Mill Street and Main Street.
(12) Washington Street and Garfield Avenue.
(13) Nicolet Boulevard and Washington Avenue.
(14) Tayco Street at Third Street.
(15) Midway Road (CTH "AP") and Racine Street (CTH "P").
(16) Airport Road and Racine Street (CTH "P").
(17) Third Street and Tayco Street.
(18) Main Street and Tayco Street.
(19) River Street and Washington Street.
(20) Ahnaip Street and Nicolet Boulevard.
(g) Notwithstanding Section 346.37(1)(c)3. Wis. Stats., no operator of any vehicle
may turn right after stopping for a red traffic light until such light turns green
at the following intersections:
(1) Mill Street northbound at Main Street.
(2) Tayco Street southbound at Third Street.
(3) Third Street westbound at Tayco Street.
(4) Third Street eastbound at Tayco Street.
(5) Washington Street northbound at River Street.
(6) Washington Street southbound at River Street.
(7) River Street eastbound at Washington Street.
SEC. 10-1-16 YIELD TO TRAFFIC; SIGNS.
(a) OPERATOR TO YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY. The Common Council hereby
authorized the use of Yield Right-of-Way signs within the City. The operator of
vehicle, when approaching any intersection at which has been installed a Yield
Right-of-Way sign, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered
the intersection from any intersecting street, or which are approaching so closely on
the intersecting street as to constitute a hazard of collision, and, if necessary, shall
reduce speed or stop in order to so yield. The following are authorized yield sign
intersections.
(b) YIELD SIGNS AUTHORIZED.
(1) Lake Road at Willow Lane.
(2) Lawson Street (north side) at Garfield Avenue.
(3) Railroad Street at Garfield Avenue.
(4) Water Street (east side) at Mill Street.
(5) Green Bay Street at Second Street.
(6) Martin Street at Eighth Street.
(7) Warsaw Street at Sixth Street.
(8) State Street at Sixth Street.
(9) Wilson Street at Eighth Street.
(10) Harding Street at Manitowoc Street.
(11) Lincoln Street at Manitowoc Street.
(12) Jefferson Street at Manitowoc Street.
(13) Eighth Street at Grove Street.
(14) Eighth Street at Ida Street.
(15) Eighth Street at John Street.
(16) Eighth Street at Melissa Street.
(17) Tenth Street at Appleton Street.
(18) Tenth Street at DePere Street.
(19) Eleventh Street at DePere Street.
(20) Twelfth Street at DePere Street.
(21) Clovis Street at Grove Street.
(22) Clovis Street at Ida Street.
(23) Greendale Street (west side) at Woodland Drive.
(24) Greendale Street at Meadowview Drive.
(25) Grove Street at Ida Street.
(26) Alcan Drive at Ida Street.
(27) Alcan Drive at Valley Road.
(28) Tayco Street at Main Street -- northbound traffic only.
(29) Melissa Street at Seventh street -- southeast corner for right-turn lane onto
Manitowoc Road only.
(30) Green Bay Street at First Street.
(31) Grove Street at Woodland Drive.
(32) Kaukauna Street at Broad Street.
(33) Dunning Street at Olde Midway Road (Southbound traffic only).
(34) Deerhaven Drive at Southfield Drive.
(35) Elizabeth Street at Marquette Street.
(36) Applewood Drive at Southfield Drive
(37) Sweetbriar Lane at Southfield Drive
SEC. 10-1-17 RIGHT TURNS, LEFT TURNS AND U TURNS PROHIBITED AT
CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
(a) LEFT TURNS PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for an operator of any vehicle
to make a left turn from:
(1) Third Street onto Racine Street while such vehicle is proceeding in an
easterly direction in the right lane upon said Third Street and is about to enter
Racine Street.
(2) Racine Street onto Third Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a
northerly direction in the right lane or center lane upon said Racine Street
and is about to enter Third Street.
(3) Third Street onto DePere Street while such vehicle is proceeding in an
easterly direction in the right lane upon said Third Street and is about to enter
DePere Street.
(4) DePere Street onto Third Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a
northerly direction in the right lane upon said DePere Street and is about to
enter Third Street.
(5) DePere Street onto Third Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a
southerly direction in the right land upon said DePere Street and is about to
enter Third Street.
(6) Third Street onto DePere Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a
westerly direction in the right lane upon said Third Street and is about to
enter DePere Street.
(7) Milwaukee Street onto Third Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a
northerly direction in the right lane upon said Milwaukee Street and is about
to enter Third Street.
(8) Ahnaip Street onto Racine Street while such vehicle is proceeding in an
easterly direction in the right lane upon said Ahnaip Street.
(9) Ahnaip Street onto Nicolet Boulevard while such vehicle is proceeding in a
westerly direction in the right lane upon said Ahnaip Street.
(10) Racine Street bridge onto Keyes Street or to proceed straight ahead onto
Naymut Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a southerly direction in
the right lane upon said Racine Street bridge.
(11) Racine Street onto the Racine Street bridge while such vehicle is proceeding
in a southerly direction in the right lane upon said Racine Street.
(12) Main Street onto Racine Street while such vehicle is proceeding in an
easterly direction in the right lane upon said Main Street.
(13) Racine Street bridge onto Main Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a
northerly direction in the right lane upon said Racine Street bridge.
(14) Broad Street onto Racine Street while such a vehicle is proceeding in a
westerly direction upon said Broad Street
(b) RIGHT TURNS PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for an operator of any
vehicle to make a right turn from:
(1) Racine Street bridge onto Ahnaip Street while such vehicle is proceeding in
a southerly direction in the left lane upon Racine Street bridge.
(2) DePere Street onto Third Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a
northerly direction in the left lane upon said DePere Street and is about to
enter Third Street.
(3) DePere Street onto Third Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a
southerly direction in the left lane upon said DePere Street and is about to
enter Third Street.
(4) Racine Street onto Main Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a
southerly direction in the left lane upon said Racine Street.
(5) Ahnaip Street onto Naymut Street or Keyes Street while such vehicle is
proceeding in an easterly direction in the left lane upon said Ahnaip Street.
(6) Racine Street bridge onto Racine Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a
northerly direction in the left lane upon said Racine Street bridge.
(7) Third Street onto DePere Street while such vehicle is proceeding in an
easterly direction in the left lane upon said Third Street and is about to enter
DePere Street.
(8) Racine Street onto Third Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a
northerly direction in the left lane upon said Racine Street and is about to
enter Third Street.
(9) Ahnaip Street onto Nicolet Boulevard while such vehicle is proceeding in a
westerly direction in the left lane upon said Ahnaip Street.
(10) Third Street onto Racine Street while such vehicle is proceeding in an
easterly direction in the left lane upon said Third Street and is about to enter
Racine Street.
(11) Third Street onto DePere Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a
westerly direction in the left lane upon said Third Street and is about to enter
DePere street.
(12) Third Street onto Racine Street while such vehicle is proceeding in a
westerly direction in the left lane upon said Third Street and is about to enter
Racine Street.
(c) PROCEEDING AHEAD PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for an operator of
any vehicle to proceed straight ahead when such vehicle is proceeding in:
(1) A southerly direction in the right lane upon said DePere Street and is about
to enter Third Street.
(2) A northerly direction in the left lane upon said DePere Street and is about to
enter Third Street.
(3) An easterly direction in the left lane upon said Third Street and is about to
enter Racine Street.
(4) A westerly direction in the left lane upon said Third Street and is about to
enter Racine Street.
(5) A westerly direction in the right lane upon said Ahnaip Street.
(6) A northerly direction in the right lane upon said Racine Street and is about to
enter Third Street.
(7) An easterly direction in the left lane upon said Third Street and is about to
enter DePere Street.
(8) A southerly direction in the right lane upon said DePere Street and is about
to enter Third Street.
(9) A direction across the Racine Street Bridge from Main Street while such
vehicle is proceeding in an easterly direction in the left lane upon said Main
Street.
(10) A westerly direction upon said Broad Street and is about to enter Racine
Street
SEC. 10-1-18 AND SEC. 10-1-19 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
Updated: 4/23/2020
ARTICLE C
Parking Regulations
SEC. 10-1-20 RESTRICTIONS ON PARKING; POSTED LIMITATIONS.
(a) POSTED LIMITATIONS.
(1) The Common Council may designate certain streets or portions of streets as no parking or no
stopping or standing zones or as zones for parking by physically handicapped persons and may
limit the hours in which the restrictions apply. The City shall mark, by appropriate signs, each zone
so designated in accordance with the provisions of Section 349.13, Wis. Stats.
(2) No person shall stop or park a motor vehicle in an established no stopping or standing zone, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police
Officer or traffic control device.
(3) No motor vehicle shall be parked in a no-parking zone during hours when parking is prohibited,
except physicians on emergency calls or as permitted by state law or elsewhere by this Code of
Ordinances.
(4) The Chief of Police is hereby granted the authority, within the reasonable exercise of police power,
to prohibit, limit the time, or otherwise restrict the stopping, standing, or parking of motor vehicles
beyond the provisions of Chapter 346 and this ordinance.
(5) The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to restrict the turning or movement of heavy
traffic and to impose special weight limitations on any street or portions thereof which would
likely be seriously damaged or destroyed in the absence of any restrictions on heavy traffic
movement or special weight limitations because of the weakness of the roadbed due to
deterioration, climatic conditions, or other special or temporary conditions.
(6) No prohibition, restriction, or limitation on parking, restriction on movement or turning of heavy
traffic, or imposition of special weight limits is effective unless official traffic control devices have
been placed or erected indicating the particular prohibition, restriction, or limitation.
(7) After the parking time limitations on any given street have expired, any change of location of a
motor vehicle by less than one (1) stall shall be and constitute a violation of this Chapter.
(b) SUSPENSION POWERS OF THE MAYOR. For a limited and reasonable period of time, the Mayor
may suspend the parking time limitations upon notification to the Chief of Police.
(c) All motor vehicles shall be parked within the designated striping of any parking stall.
(d) All motor vehicles shall be parked parallel to and within one (1) foot of the curb except where streets and
parking lots are so marked for angle parking.
(e) The Chief of Police or his/her designee may establish a location on a motor vehicle where the parking
permits authorized by Section 10-1-30 must be displayed.
SEC. 10-1-21 TEMPORARY PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
(a) STREET MAINTENANCE. Whenever it is necessary to clear or repair a City street or any part thereof,
the Director of Public Works and/or Police Department shall post such streets or parts thereof with signs
bearing the words "No Parking." Such signs shall be erected at least twelve (12) hours prior to the time
street maintenance work is to commence.
(b) RESTRICTIONS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 349.13, Wis. Stats.,
the Chief of Police is authorized to direct temporary "No Parking" signs be erected by the Director of
Public Works during parades, festivals, and other authorized events that require the regulating of motor
vehicle stopping, standing, or parking on City streets. The temporary regulation shall be limited to the time
the event exists or is likely to exist.
(c) PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL. No person shall park, place, or leave standing any motor
vehicle on any street or public way one (1) hour after the time such area has been designated and marked
with signs or barriers by the Police Department and/or the Department of Public Works of the City
indicating no parking due to snow removal. See Section 10-1-31 for more information on snow removal
and parking during snow emergencies.
(d) LIMITED TERM PARKING RESTRICTIONS. The Board of Public Works may temporarily
impose or remove parking restrictions on existing streets for a period of at least thirty (30) days but not
Updated: 4/23/2020
to exceed one (1) year. Any temporary signs posted by the Board of Public Works shall supersede all
existing posted rules for the days and times specified.
SEC. 10-1-22 STOPPING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN SPECIFIED PLACES.
(a) PARKING PROHIBITED. No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any motor vehicle, whether
attended or unattended and whether temporarily or otherwise, in any of the following places.
(1) Within an intersection.
(2) On a crosswalk.
(3) On a sidewalk or terrace area, except when parking in such place is clearly indicated by official
traffic signs, markers, or parking meters. "Terrace or Sidewalk Area" means the area between the
sidewalk and the nearest curb line running parallel or generally parallel thereto or, in the absence of
a sidewalk, ten (10) feet beyond the curb line.
(4) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping or standing would
obstruct traffic or when pedestrian traffic would be required to travel in the street.
(5) On the street side of any parked motor vehicle unless double parking is clearly indicated by official
traffic signs or markers.
(6) Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station.
(7) In any place or manner so as to obstruct, block, or impede traffic.
(8) Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant, unless a greater distance is indicated by an official traffic
sign.
(9) Upon any bridge.
(10) Upon any street facing a direction different from that of normal traffic flow for the lane of traffic in
which said motor vehicle is stopped, parked, or standing.
(b) Skipped
(c) PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. No person may leave or park any motor vehicle on private
property, including in any private driveway, without the consent of the owner or lessee of the property.
(d) PARKING BY PERMIT. Owners or lessees of public or private property may permit parking by certain
persons and limit, restrict, or prohibit parking as to other persons if the owner or lessee posts a sign on the
property indicating for whom parking is permitted, limited, restricted, or prohibited. No person may leave
or park any motor vehicle on public or private property contrary to a sign posted thereon.
(e) MOTOR VEHICLES NOT TO BLOCK PRIVATE DRIVE, ALLEY, OR FIRE LANE. No motor
vehicle shall, at any time, be parked so as to unreasonably restrict the normal access to any private drive,
alley, or fire lane. Said access shall be deemed to be unreasonably restricted if any motor vehicle is parked
within four (4) feet of either side of said access. Upon discovery of any such blocked drive, alley, or fire
lane by a police officer or upon complaint by the owner, the Chief of Police may order said motor vehicle
towed from such position at the risk and expense of the owner of said motor vehicle.
(f) PARKING MOTOR VEHICLE FOR REPAIR PROHIBITED. No person shall stand or park a motor
vehicle on any street, alley, public right-of-way, or municipal parking lot in the City for the purpose of
repairing said motor vehicle.
(g) ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS. The prohibitions on off-street parking contained in Section 13-1-51
may be enforced pursuant to Section 10-1-60.
SEC. 10-1-23 PARKING RESERVED FOR MOTOR VEHICLES OF DISABLED.
When official traffic signs, erected in accordance with Section 10-1-3 of this Chapter, designate restricted parking
areas for motor vehicles displaying special registration plates, identification cards, or emblems, as issued by the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation or other jurisdiction, for physically disabled persons no person shall park,
stop, or leave standing any motor vehicle in said areas if it does not display said credentials.
SEC. 10-1-24 PARKING MOTOR VEHICLES WITH MOTOR RUNNING.
No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle with the motor, generator, or refrigerator unit running for
more than thirty (30) minutes within three hundred (300) feet of any residence between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
Updated: 4/23/2020
SEC. 10-1-25 ANGLE PARKING.
Perpendicular or diagonal angle parking is prohibited on all streets except in the following places where motor
vehicle parking markers indicate that the same is permissible.
(a) Front in Angle Parking. Where angle parking is clearly authorized by official traffic signs or pavement
markings, vehicles shall be parked with the rear of the vehicle oriented closest to the traffic lane at the angle
indicated and within the spaces indicated.
(1) The west side of Appleton Street from one hundred ten (110) feet south of Third Street to fifty (50) feet
south of Second Street.
(2) Both sides of Appleton Street from Broad Street ninety-eight (98) feet north.
(3) The west side of Appleton Street forty-eight (48) feet north from Fifth Street.
(4) The north side of Broad Street from Appleton Street approximately ninety (90) feet west.
(5) The north side of Broad Street from the west end of the street east seven (7) stalls.
(6) The south side of the Broad Street Alley.
(7) The east side of Chute Street.
(8) The south side of Eighth Street from Racine Street to Milwaukee Street.
(9) The east side of Manitowoc Street from Plank Road one hundred fourteen (114) feet north.
(10) The west side of Manitowoc Street in front of 204 Manitowoc Street. Also see Section 10-1-27 (c) (1).
(11) The south side of Second Street from Appleton Street fifty-six (56) feet east.
(12) Both sides of Seventh Street from Racine Street to Milwaukee Street.
(13) The west side of Center Street from Main Street to 135’ South.
(14) The south side of Third Street from Konemac Street to 1360’ East
(15) The east side of Konemac Street from Second Street to Third Street
(b) Back-in Angle Parking. Where back-in angle parking is clearly authorized by official traffic signs and
pavement markings, vehicles shall be parked with the rear of the vehicle oriented furthest from the traffic lane at the
angle indicated and within the spaces indicated.
(1) The north side of Broad Street 40’ east of Tayco Street to 375’ east of Tayco Street
(2) The south side of Broad Street 40’ east of Milwaukee Street to 125’ east of Milwaukee Street
(3) The south side of Broad Street 300’ west of Racine Street to 40’ west of Racine Street
SEC. 10-1-26 NO PARKING.
No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle upon any of the following streets or parts thereof, except
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers, product, or
merchandise.
(a) Both sides of Ahnaip Street.
(b) The east side of Appleton Road from DePere Street to Ninth Street.
(c) The west side of Appleton Road from DePere Street to Marquette Street and from Jefferson Street to Ninth
Street.
(d) The east side of Appleton Street between Third Street and Fourth Street.
(e) The east side of Baldwin Street.
(f) Both sides of Barlow Street.
(g) The even numbered side of Brighton Drive including the turnaround.
(h) The south side of Broad Street west from Barlow Street.
(i) The north side of Broad Street from Racine Street one hundred forty (140) feet east.
(j) Both sides of the southernmost two hundred (200) feet of the east leg of Carver Lane (7:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m., Monday through Friday).
(k) The north side of Center Street.
(l) The west and south side of Chute Street from the intersection of Chute Street and Main Street two hundred
ten (210) feet north and west.
(m) The east side of DePere Street from Third Street to ninety-six (96) feet north of Appleton Road.
(n) The west side of DePere Street from Third Street to Fourth Street and from Sixth Street to Appleton
Road.
(o) The west side of DePere Street from Fifth Street twenty-five (25) feet north.
(p) Both sides of Drum Corps Drive from University Avenue fifty (50) feet west.
(q) The east side of Elm Street from Nicolet Boulevard to Riverway.
Updated: 4/23/2020
(r) The north side of Fifth Street from Racine Street to one hundred seventy-five (175) feet west of Appleton
Street.
(s) The north side of Fifth Street from DePere Street ninety (90) feet west.
(t) The south side of Fifth Street from Manitowoc Street to one hundred twenty (120) feet west (8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday).
(u) Both sides of First Street from Racine Street one hundred twenty (120) feet east.
(v) The north side of Fourth Street from Konemac Street forty (40) feet east.
(w) The north side of Garfield Avenue from Washington Street to the railroad tracks.
(x) The south side of Garfield Avenue from one hundred forty (140) feet west of Washington Street to the
railroad tracks.
(y) The east side of Ice Street.
(z) Fifty (50) feet in all directions from the intersection of Kaukauna Street, Main Street, and Tayco Street.
(aa) The south side of Kaukauna Street between Lush Street and Broad Street.
(bb) Both sides of Keyes Street from Racine Street to Elm Street.
(cc) The south side of Keyes Street from Elm Street to Cleveland Street and from forty (40) feet west of Park
Street to Willow Lane.
(dd) The north side of Keyes Street from Cleveland Street to Park Street.
(ee) The west side of Konemac Street from Plank Road to Fourth Street.
(ff) The south side of Lake Street.
(gg) The west side of Lush Street from Water Street to Kaukauna Street.
(hh) The south side of Madison Street from the railroad tracks east to Railroad Street.
(ii) The north side of Main Street from Mill Street to Chute Street.
(jj) The north side of Main Street from Tayco Street sixty-seven (67) feet east.
(kk) Both sides of Manitowoc Road from Melissa Street to Oneida Street.
(ll) The west side of Manitowoc Street between Second Street and Third Street, except as provided by 10-1-25
(j).
(mm) The east side of Meadowview Drive from Manitowoc Road to Greendale Street.
(nn) The west side of Melissa Street from Seventh Street to Plank Road.
(oo) The west side of Mill Street.
(pp) The east side of Milwaukee Street from five hundred thirty-five (535) feet north of Third Street to six
hundred fifty (650) feet north of Third Street.
(qq) The west side of Milwaukee Street from seven hundred forty (740) feet north of Third Street to seven
hundred sixty (760) feet north of Third Street.
(rr) The west side of Milwaukee Street from Eighth Street to Sixth Street (7:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday
through Friday).
(ss) The east side of Milwaukee Street from Seventh Street one hundred eighty (180) feet south (7:30 a.m. and
3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday).
(tt) The east side of Nassau Street from Ahnaip Street one hundred ten (110) feet south.
(uu) The west side of Nassau Street.
(vv) The north side of Nicolet Boulevard one hundred five (105) feet east of Washington Street.
(ww) The south side of Ninth Street two hundred (200) feet east and west from Appleton Road.
(xx) Both sides of Novak Drive from Valley Road two hundred twenty (220) feet south.
(yy) The east side of Oak Street.
(zz) The south and west sides of Paris Street from Broad Street to DePere Street.
(aaa) The north side of Parkview Street.
(bbb) The east side of Pine Street.
(ccc) Both sides of Plank Road from the intersection of Third Street and Manitowoc Street west to the City limits
in Winnebago County.
(ddd) The east side of Polonia Street.
(eee) Both sides of Racine Street between Ahnaip Street and Fourth Street.
(fff) Both sides of Racine Street seventy-five (75) feet north and south of Seventh Street.
(ggg) Both sides of Racine Street ninety-eight (98) feet south of Ninth Street.
(hhh) The west side of Racine Street from Ninth Street north to the City limits.
(iii) The east side of Racine Street between Eighth Street and Seventh Street.
(jjj) The east side of Railroad Street from Garfield Street to Madison Street.
(kkk) Both sides of River Street.
(lll) The north side of Roosevelt Street from Manitowoc Street to London Street.
Updated: 4/23/2020
(llll) The east side of Tayco Street from Main Street two hundred (210) feet north.
(mmm) The west side of School Court from Seventh Street forty-one (41) feet south.
(nnn) The north side of Seventh Street from Appleton Road two hundred thirty-five (235) feet west from April 1
through October 31.
(ooo) The north side of Seventh Street from Racine Street one hundred seventy-five (175) feet east.
(ppp) The south side of Seventh Street from Racine Street one hundred sixty-five (165) feet east.
(qqq) The south side of Seventh Street from Milwaukee Street four hundred (400) feet west (7:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m., Monday through Friday).
(rrr) The north side of Seventh Street from Milwaukee Street to the intersection of Kinzie Court and Seventh
Street (7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday).
(sss) The south side of Seventh Street from Milwaukee Street forty-nine (49) feet east.
(ttt) The south side of Seventh Street from School Court thirty (30) feet west.
(uuu) The south side of Seventh Street from School Court seventy-two (72) feet east.
(vvv) The north side of Seventh Street from Milwaukee Street forty-two (42) feet east.
(www) The north side of Sheboygan Street from Manitowoc Street seventy-five (75) feet east.
(xxx) The north side of Sixth Street from Racine Street to Appleton Street.
(yyy) The north side of Sixth Street from Milwaukee Street to eighty (80) feet west
(zzz) Both sides of State Trunk Highway 114 from Oneida Street north to the City limits.
(aaaa) Both sides of Tayco Street between Main Street and the Tayco Street Bridge.
(bbbb) The west side of Tayco Street from Third Street to Fourth Street.
(cccc) The north side of Third Street from Milwaukee Street to Manitowoc Street.
(dddd) The north side of Third Street from Tayco Street two hundred fifty (250) feet east.
(eeee) The south side of Third Street from one hundred (100) feet east of Manitowoc Street to Tayco Street.
(ffff) The east side of University Drive.
(gggg) The west side of Walnut Street from Ahnaip Street to Nicolet Boulevard.
(hhhh) Both sides of Washington Street except for turnout in front of 160 Washington Street.
(iiii) The east side of Willow Lane south of Lake Road.
(jjjj) The east side of Winnebago Avenue from Nicolet Boulevard to Keyes Street.
(kkkk) The east side of Ida Street from Ninth Street four hundred forty (444) feet north to six hundred fifty
(650) feet north (7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. on days school is in session).
SEC. 10-1-27 TIME RESTRICTED PARKING.
When signs or parking meters are erected in any block giving notice of time restricted parking, no person shall park
or leave standing any motor vehicle for longer than the period specified upon any of the following streets or parts
thereof; however, this provision shall not apply to Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays.
(a) NO PARKING FOR MORE THAN TWO (2) CONSECUTIVE HOURS.
(1) The west side of Appleton Street from Second Street to Third Street.
(2) Both sides of Appleton Street from First Street to Second Street between 7:30 a.m. and 3:30
p.m.
(3) The east side of Appleton Street from Second Street sixty (60) feet south.
(4) The south side of Broad Street from one hundred eighty-eight (188) feet east of Racine Street to
Appleton Street.
(5) The south side of Broad Street from Racine Street west to the alley.
(6) The north side of Broad Street from Milwaukee Street to Racine Street.
(7) The east and west Broad Street surface lots, excluding the north row of parking stalls.
(8) Both sides of Center Street from Main Street two hundred fifty (250) feet south.
(9) Both sides of Chute Street from Tayco Street to fifty (50) feet north of Main Street.
(10) City Hall Lot.
(11) The north side of Fifth Street from Manitowoc Street to two hundred thirty-five (235) feet west.
(12) The north side of First Street from Racine Street to Milwaukee Street, excluding the bump out
area on the north side of the street adjacent to the Library.
(13) Both sides of First Street one hundred twenty (120) feet east of Racine Street to Appleton St.
(14) The north side of Fourth Street from Manitowoc Street to DePere Street.
(15) Both sides of Garfield Avenue from Railroad Street to Lawson Street.
(16) The south side of Main Street.
(17) Both sides of Main Street from Racine Street to Tayco Street.
Updated: 4/23/2020
(18) Both sides of Milwaukee Street from Main Street to Second Street.
(19) The west side of Railroad Street from Abby Avenue to Garfield Avenue.
(20) The north side of Second Street from Racine Street to Appleton Street (7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.).
(21) The south side of Second Street from Appleton Street fifty-six (56) feet west.
(22) The west side of Walbrun Street in front of house numbers 620 to 632 between 7:30 a.m. and
3:30 p.m.
(23) The north side of Water Street, approximately one hundred (100) feet west from Tayco Street.
(b) NO PARKING FOR MORE THAN ONE (1) CONSECUTIVE HOUR.
(1) School Court on days school is in session
(2) Four (4) visitor parking stalls on the north side of Seventh Street. No person other than a
temporary visitor to Menasha High School may park in these stalls between 7:30 a.m. and 3:30
p.m.
(c) NO PARKING FOR MORE THAN FIFTEEN (15) CONSECUTIVE MINUTES.
(1) Manitowoc Street in front of 204 Manitowoc Street.
(2) The west side of Park Street from forty-eight (48) feet north of Keyes Street to ninety-two (92) feet
north of Keyes Street.
(d) SPECIAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
(1) No person shall park any type of motor vehicle at any boat launch site adjacent to the Fox River
where said site is to be used exclusively for boat launching purposes.
(2) Temporary parking shall only be for trucks and unloading on the south side of Garfield Avenue
one hundred fifty (150) feet west from Washington Street to Railroad Street.
(3) Temporary parking for the loading and unloading of vehicles in the bump out at 160 Washington
Street and on Ahnaip Street one hundred (100) fee southwest of Naymut Street.
(4) No parking on the east side of Racine Street from Fourth Street to Ninth Street from 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
(5) The northern seven (7) stalls on the east side of Center Street and north of the Harbor House are
restricted to motor vehicles with a Menasha Marina sticker from May 1 to September 30.
(6) No person shall park any type of motor vehicle which has been used for hauling, towing, or
launching any boat at any boat launching site without having obtained the boat launching permit
required by Section 12-2-3(b).
(7) Calder Stadium Street Parking:
a. No parking on the north side of Eleventh Street from Appleton Street to DePere Street for
a period commencing one (1) hour before and ending one (1) hour after events at Calder
Stadium.
b. The prohibition of parking along streets under the above provisions shall become effective
by police direction and/or appropriate signs and barricades.
c. This Section does not rescind any parking regulation already in effect in the
above-described streets.
(8) No parking on the west side of Brighton Beach Road from three hundred (300) feet south of Rue
Reynard to the city limits between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(9) Temporary parking shall only be for loading or unloading of vehicles in the bump out areas of the
Broad Street Alley.
(e) A drop-off area is created on the north side of Seventh Street directly in front of Menasha High School for
the temporary purpose of dropping off and picking up students. This activity is limited to not more than
five (5) minutes.
SEC. 10-1-28 SCHOOL BUS LOADING ZONES.
No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended and whether
temporarily or otherwise in any of the following school bus loading zones between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30
p.m. on school days:
(a) The north side of Broad Street from one hundred thirty-one (131) feet east of Tayco Street to two
hundred thirty-eight (238) feet east of Tayco Street.
(b) The east side of Milwaukee Street from twenty (20) feet north of the curb line of Seventh Street three
hundred ten (310) feet north.
(c) The east side of Nassau Street from ninety (90) feet south of Ahnaip Street to two hundred sixty (260)
feet south of Ahnaip Street.
Updated: 4/23/2020
(d) The north side of Ninth Street between Ida Street and Arthur Street.
(e) The north side of Second Street from one hundred ninety-five (195) feet west of Appleton Street to two
hundred eighty-five (285) feet west of Appleton Street.
(f) The north side of Sixth Street from fifty (50) feet east of Walbrun Street to one hundred forty (140) feet
east of Walbrun Street.
(g) The east side of DePere Street between Fifteenth Street and Airport Road.
SEC. 10-1-29 ALL NIGHT PARKING REGULATED.
When signs have been erected at or reasonably near the corporate limits of the City as provided in Section 349.13,
Wis. Stats., no motor vehicle shall be parked upon any street in the City between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. without express permission from the Police Department, except as follows:
(a) Overnight parking will be allowed during the period of April 1 through October 31 on an even-odd basis,
with the even side parking on even numbered days and the odd side parking on odd numbered days.
(b) All current restrictions on streets remain in place; that is, if there is no parking on the odd number side of
the street now, overnight parking is not allowed on that side even on odd numbered days.
(c) Even-odd shall be construed as the date prior to 12:00 a.m. midnight.
(d) Overnight parking will be allowed during the period of April 1 through October 31 on the following
streets:
(1) The south side of Center Street from the cul-de-sac four hundred twenty (420) feet east.
(2) The east side of Nassau Street.
(3) The west side of Oak Street.
(4) The west and north sides of Riverway from Keyes Street to Cleveland Street.
(5) The south side of Roosevelt Street from Manitowoc Street to London Street.
(6) The west side of Winnebago Avenue from Nicolet Boulevard to Keyes Street.
(e) The even-odd exception shall not apply to the Broad Street cul-de-sac.
(f) All motor vehicles parked on City streets must be moved at least once every 72 hours.
SEC. 10-1-30 PUBLIC AND PERMITTED PARKING AREAS.
(a) PUBLIC PARKING LOTS. The following are City owned or leased parking lots:
(1) Broad Street Ramp after 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, weekends, and legal holidays.
(2) East Broad Street Lot.
(3) West Broad Street Lot.
(4) Center Street Lot.
(5) North Chute Street Lot.
(6) South Chute Street Lot.
(7) Library Lot.
(8) Marina Place Parking Ramp (Upper Level).
(9) Marina Lot.
(10) Six (6) stalls immediately east of the Marina Place Parking Ramp.
(b) CITY EMPLOYEE PARKING. From time to time the Common Council of the City of Menasha may
exercise the right to establish restricted parking for municipal employees in public parking lots and such
reservations shall be clearly and plainly marked.
(c) REGULATED PARKING LOT HOURS.
(1) Parking in the West and East Broad Street Lots, South Chute Street Lot, North Chute Street Lot,
Six (6) stalls immediately east of the Marina Place Parking Ramp, and Center Street Lot shall be
allowed without restriction between 6:00a.m and 2:00a.m.
(2) From November 1—March 31 parking in the Marina Lot shall be allowed without restriction
between 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m.
(d) PERMIT PARKING.
(1) Overnight parking shall be by permit issued by the Police Department or Harbor Master in the
Broad Street Lot, South Chute Street Lot, Marina Lot, and Center Street Lot from April 1
through October 31.
(2) There shall be no overnight parking in the Library Lot, the Marina Place Parking Ramp (Upper
Level), or the Six (6) stalls immediately east of the Marina Place Parking Ramp except by special
Updated: 4/23/2020
annual permit issued by the Community Development Department. The total number of such
permits issued in a particular year may not exceed five (5).
(3) The Director of Public Works and the Chief of Police may designate specific areas of these lots for
permit parking.
(4) Parking in the Marina Lot is restricted to motor vehicles with a Menasha Marina permit sticker
from April 1 through October 31.
(e) PERMIT FEES AND CONDITIONS.
(1) The permit fee shall be set and may be adjusted from time to time by the Common Council.
(2) All motor vehicles parked in City lots must be moved at least once every 72 hours.
(3) There shall be no parking of trailers, recreational motor vehicles, converted buses, and/or
commercial motor vehicles in any of these lots.
(f) LIBRARY PARKING. This lot is designated for library patrons only. No parking shall be permitted
from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
SEC. 10-1-31 SNOW EMERGENCIES.
(a) EMERGENCY DECLARED.
(1) A snow emergency is in existence when the Mayor, or in his/her absence the President of the
Common Council, declares an emergency to exist in the City of Menasha by reason of a heavy
snowstorm. Whenever snow falls within twenty-four (24) hours or less and is expected to reach a
depth of three (3) inches or more, such storms constitute a serious public hazard impairing
transportation, the movement of food and food supplies, medical care, fire, health, police
protection, and other vital facilities of the City; said emergency is declared to continue for a period
of forty-eight (48) hours after declaration or until such earlier time as snow plowing operations
have been declared completed by the Director of Public Works.
(2) Whenever the emergency exists and has been declared by the Mayor, or in his/her absence the
President of the Council, said Chief Executive or Officer of the City shall cause announcements
thereof to be made by not less than one (1) radio station serving the area.
(b) TYPES OF SNOW EMERGENCIES. There shall be two (2) types of emergencies:
(1) General Emergency: In this event, the standards set forth in Section (a) above shall apply.
(2) Parking Emergency: Such emergency shall exist when snow causes narrowing of streets to the
point where emergency vehicles cannot have free access to all parts of the City or narrowed streets
create hazardous driving conditions. In that event, in consultation with the Director of Public
Works, the Mayor, or in his/her absence the President of the Council, can declare an emergency
where no parking shall be permitted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. alternately on
the even and odd numbered sides of the street depending upon the dates fixed by the Mayor, or in
his/her absence the President of the Council. In addition, after a snowstorm has abated and the
street crew decides to remove the snow for widening, the same may be done after the proper
temporary signs have been posted.
(c) PARKING LOTS. Whenever the Mayor, or in his/her absence the President of the Council, in his/her
official capacity declares an emergency, all the motor vehicles shall be removed from parking lots within
three (3) hours thereafter and shall not be permitted to re-enter until all snow has been removed. This
applies to motor vehicles with monthly parking permits as well.
(d) REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES. Whenever such an emergency exists, as hereinbefore defined,
and any motor vehicles are illegally parked, stopped, or standing in such a manner as to prevent or impede
snow clearance or removal in any manner upon any street, alley, or parking lot, the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee, shall be authorized to move or remove such motor vehicles to where such
motor vehicles will no longer prevent or impede such aforesaid snow clearance or removing. Towing fees
will be assessed against the owners of such motor vehicles. This Section shall not be construed to exempt
the owners from other penalties which may incur.
SEC. 10-1-32 PARKING OF VEHICLES OVER 10,000 POUNDS OR 16 FEET RESTRICTED.
(a) No person owning or having control of any truck, trailer, truck power unit, tractor, bus, or recreation motor
vehicle in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross weight, over sixteen (16) feet in length, and/or
having an enclosed area of a height of more than eight (8) feet from the street shall park the same upon any
street or public way where zoned residential between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. One (1) hour
Updated: 4/23/2020
parking will be allowed between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The provisions of this Section shall not be
deemed to prohibit the lawful parking of such equipment upon any street or public way for the actual
loading or unloading of goods, ware, or merchandise, providing, however, the "loading" and "unloading,"
as used in this Section, shall be limited to the actual time consumed in such operation. The Common
Council may, however, designate specific truck parking zones.
(b) Any vehicle unlawfully parked under Section (a) above may be removed from the street by order of the
Chief of Police and the expense of so moving and storing such vehicle shall be paid by the operator or
owner of said vehicle as forfeiture in addition to the penalties hereafter prescribed.
SEC. 10-1-33 TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS ON SCHOOL DISTRICT GROUNDS.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 118.105, Wis. Stats., the following regulations shall apply to the grounds of
the Menasha School District located within the City.
(a) PARKING. All parking on grounds of the Menasha School District from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. shall be
by permit only unless said area has been designated as visitor parking by signs established by the School
Board. There shall be no parking on said grounds between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except when school
functions extend past 11:00 p.m.; on such nights there shall be no parking one (1) hour after the function
has concluded.
(b) SPEED LIMITS. No persons shall at any time operate a motor vehicle upon any Menasha School District
grounds at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
(c) MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED AT SPECIFIED TIMES. No person shall at any time operate a
motor vehicle, other than a school bus or emergency motor vehicle, in or upon any drive designated by
sign for buses during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on any weekday
during the months school is in session.
SEC. 10-1-34 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF PARKING CITATION.
No person other than the owner or operator of a ticketed motor vehicle shall remove a City parking ticket from said
motor vehicle.
SEC. 10-1-35 OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN PUBLIC PARKING LOTS AND RAMPS.
(a) UNLICENSED OPERATORS PROHIBITED. No person who does not hold a valid operator’s license
shall operate a motor vehicle in any public parking lot or ramp or in any private parking lot or ramp held
out for the use of parking for the general public.
(b) TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLICABLE. All provisions of Section 10-1-1 of this Chapter and of
the Wis. Stats. and laws incorporated herein by reference shall be applicable on any public parking lot or
ramp and on any private parking lot, street, or ramp held out for use for the general public for parking or
vehicular traffic.
SEC. 10-1-36 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED MOTOR VEHICLES.
(a) HAZARD TO PUBLIC SAFETY. Any motor vehicle parked, stopped, or standing upon a street or
public parking lot or ramp in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is declared to be a hazard to
traffic and public safety.
(b) REMOVAL BY OPERATOR OR OWNER. Such motor vehicle shall be removed by the operator or
owner, upon request of any traffic officer, to a position where parking is permitted or to a private or public
parking or storage premises.
(c) REMOVAL BY TRAFFIC OFFICER. Any traffic officer after issuing a citation for illegal parking,
stopping, or standing of an unattended motor vehicle in violation of this Chapter, is authorized to remove
such motor vehicle to a position where parking is permitted.
(d) REMOVAL BY PRIVATE SERVICE. The officer may order a motor carrier holding a permit to
perform motor vehicle towing services, a licensed motor vehicle salvage dealer, or licensed motor vehicle
dealer who performs motor vehicle towing services to remove and store said motor vehicle in any public
storage garage or rental parking grounds or any facility of the person providing the towing services.
(e) TOWING AND SERVICE CHARGES. In addition to other penalties provided in this Chapter, the
owner or operator of a motor vehicle so removed shall pay the actual cost of moving, towing, and storage.
Updated: 4/23/2020
If the motor vehicle is towed or stored by a private motor carrier, motor vehicle salvage dealer, or licensed
motor vehicle dealer, actual charges regularly paid for such services shall be paid. If the motor vehicle is
stored in a public storage garage or rental facility, customary charges for such storage shall be paid. Upon
payment, a receipt shall be issued to the owner of the motor vehicle for towing and storage charges.
SEC. 10-1-37 INOPERABLE, WRECKED, OR DISCARDED MOTOR VEHICLES.
(a) STORAGE PROHIBITED. No person owning or having custody of any partially dismantled,
non-operable, wrecked, junked, or discarded motor vehicle shall allow such motor vehicle to remain on
any public street, parking lot, or parking ramp longer than twenty-four (24) hours after notification thereof
by the Police Department. Notification shall be accomplished by placing in a conspicuous place on the
motor vehicle and by mailing or serving upon the owner or occupant in charge of the premises a written
notice setting forth briefly the applicable provisions of this Section and the date of the notice. Any motor
vehicle so tagged which is not removed within twenty-four (24) hours is declared to be a public nuisance
and may be removed as provided in Section 10-1-36.
(b) EXEMPTIONS. This Section shall not apply to a motor vehicle in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner authorized by the City.
SEC. 10-1-38 PARKING OF TRAILERS.
(a) No person owning or having control of a trailer less than 10,000 pounds or sixteen (16) feet shall park the
trailer upon any street or public way zoned residential between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. This
Section is not applicable to trailers that are attached to a tow motor vehicle. "Trailer" means a motor
vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property or passengers wholly on its own structure
and for being drawn by a motor vehicle but does not include a mobile home.
(b) Any motor vehicle unlawfully parked under Section (a) above may be removed from the street by order of
the Chief of Police and the expense of so moving and storing such motor vehicle shall be paid by the
operator or owner of said motor vehicle as forfeiture in addition to the penalties hereafter prescribed.
SEC. 10-1-39 THROUGH SEC. 10-1-49 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
ARTICLE D
Miscellaneous Provisions
SEC. 10-1-50 DISTURBANCE OF THE PEACE WITH A MOTOR VEHICLE.
No driver of any vehicle, including motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles and bicycles, shall
cause, by excessive and unnecessary acceleration, the tires of such vehicle or cycle to spin
and emit loud noises or to unnecessarily throw stones or gravel; nor shall such driver cause
to be made by excessive and unnecessary acceleration any loud noise as would disturb the
public peace.
SEC. 10-1-51 RAILROAD REGULATIONS.
(a) SPEED LIMITS. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to run
any locomotive, engine, car or cars on any railroad or railway within the limits of
the City of Menasha at the rate of speed higher than twelve (12) miles per hour.
(b) OBSTRUCTING STREETS. It shall be unlawful to stop and leave standing any
railroad train, locomotive, or car upon or across any street crossing or pedestrian
crossing, causing the obstruction of public travel thereon, for a longer period of time
than ten (10) minutes. It shall be unlawful to obstruct any street crossing or
pedestrian crossing in the City of Menasha for a continuous period of more than ten
(10) minutes by the operation of more than one (1) train or locomotive over the
same crossing.
(c) No person, firm, or corporation shall cause or permit the horn or whistle of any
locomotive, engine, car or cars of any railroad or railway to be sounded within the
City of Menasha except when in the judgment of the operator of the locomotive,
engine, car or cars, it is necessary to do so to prevent damage to property or injury
to persons.
(d) No railroad train, locomotive, or engine shall run over any public traveled grade
highway crossing, except where gates are operated or a flagman is stationed, unless
the engine bell shall be rung continuously for a distance of at least 20 rods prior to
such crossing until such crossing be reached.
SEC. 10-1-52 PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS.
(a) PEDESTRIAN OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND
REGULATIONS.
(1) Obedience to Traffic Control Devices. No person shall fail to obey the
instructions of any Uniform Traffic Control Device when traveling as a
pedestrian on any highway within the City of Menasha unless otherwise
directed by a law enforcement officer.
(2) Crossing at Crosswalks. No pedestrian shall cross at a crosswalk except on
the right half thereof whenever practicable. Where sidewalks are provided,
no pedestrian shall walk along and upon an adjacent roadway except when
the sidewalk is visibly unsafe, obstructed or closed to public travel.
(b) PROHIBITED PEDESTRIAN CROSSINGS. No pedestrian shall cross between
adjacent intersections, unless such crossing is permitted by Official Traffic Control
Devices.
SEC. 10-1-53 MOTOR VEHICLES ON PEDESTRIAN WAYS AND OVERPASSES.
No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle on any pedestrian way or pedestrian
overpass within the City of Menasha except municipal or county maintenance vehicles.
SEC. 10-1-54 UNAUTHORIZED OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
(a) PURPOSE.
(1) The unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles has resulted in serious
damage to public and private lands including damage or destruction of
vegetation, animal life and improvement to the lands; and
(2) The unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles has resulted in the
permanent scarring of land and an increase in both erosion and air pollution;
and
(3) The unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles has resulted in
collisions and near collisions threatening the life and safety of the operators
of such vehicles as well as of other persons; and
(4) The unauthorized off-road operation of motor vehicles has resulted in a loss
of the privacy, quietude and serenity to which the owners and users of land
are rightfully entitled.
(b) DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this Section, the terms below shall be defined as
follows:
(1) Unauthorized shall mean without the express prior consent of the owner,
lessee, manager or other person authorized to give consent by the owner or
lessee of land. Authorization shall not be implied from a failure to post
private or public land.
(2) Off-Road shall mean any location which:
a. Is not a paved or maintained public street or alley; or
b. Is not used or maintained by the owner or lessee of land as a
driveway, parking lot or other way for motor vehicles; or
c. Is a private trail for use only by the owner or his permittees for
recreational or other vehicular use. Off-road shall not include any
creekbed, riverbed or lake, provided, however, that this Subsection
shall not apply to snowmobiles or other vehicles being operated on
the ice covering such creekbed, riverbed or lake.
(3) Operation shall mean the physical manipulation or activation of any of the
controls of a motor vehicle necessary to put it in motion.
(4) Motor Vehicle shall mean, for purposes of this Section, any vehicle which is
self-propelled and shall include but not be limited to automobiles, trucks,
jeeps, vans, motorcycles, motorbikes, go-karts, motorized three-wheeled
vehicles, all-terrain vehicles, mopeds, snowmobiles, dune buggies and
tractors. A vehicle which would otherwise be defined as a motor vehicle
under this Section shall not be so defined while:
a. It is being operated solely for the purpose of construction or
maintenance of an improvement to land or solely for access to
construction or maintenance sites provided such operation is by
persons having legitimate business on such lands or sites;
b. It is being operated by or at the direction of public employees or
utility company employees as part of their employment duties.
c. It is being operated by the holder of an easement or right of access on
or over the land on which operation is occurring or the holder's
employees or agents.
(c) UNAUTHORIZED OFF-ROAD OPERATION PROHIBITED.
(1) The unauthorized off-road operation of a motor vehicle is prohibited.
(2) Except for authorized maintenance vehicles and snowmobiles operating in
authorized areas pursuant to Title 10, Chapter 3, it shall be unlawful to
operate any minibike, go-kart, all-terrain vehicle or any other motor-driven
craft or vehicle principally manufactured for off-highway use on the City
streets, alleys, parks, sidewalks, bikeways, parking lots or on any public
lands or private lands or parking lots held open to the public. The operator
shall at all times have the consent of the owner before operation of such craft
or vehicle on private lands.
(d) PROHIBITED USE OF SNOWMOBILE TRAILS. Except as provided in
Subsection (b)(4) above, no person shall operate any motor vehicle other than a
snowmobile on a snowmobile trail.
Cross Reference: Title 10, Chapter 3.
SEC. 10-1-55 SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS.
Pursuant to Sec. 349.215, Wis. Stats., those adult persons hired by the Police Department to
act as "School Crossing Guards" shall have the authority to stop vehicular traffic and to keep
it stopped as long as necessary at their respective school crossings for the purpose of
permitting school children to cross the street.
State Law Reference: Section 349.215, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 10-1-56 DRIVING OVER CURBING OR SAFETY ISLANDS PROHIBITED.
(a) DRIVING OVER CURBING PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for any motor
vehicle to be driven or backed over any curbing in the City of Menasha.
(b) DRIVING OVER SAFETY ZONES OR ISLANDS PROHIBITED. Whenever
safety zones or safety islands are marked in accordance with the Wisconsin
Uniform Traffic Control Device manual, no operator of a vehicle shall at any time
drive through or over a safety zone or safety island.
SEC. 10-1-57 MISCELLANEOUS LANE AND TURN CONTROLS.
The Director of Public Works, in cooperation with the Chief of Police, is authorized, when
in his judgment the safety of the situation requires, to place Official Traffic Control Devices
within or adjacent to intersections directing that a different course from that specified in
Section 346.31, Wis. Stats., be traveled by vehicles turning at the intersection and to mark
lanes for traffic designating separate lanes for slow moving traffic or for traffic moving in a
particular direction.
SEC. 10-1-58 BUSINESS ROUTE CREATED
Main Street from Tayco Street to Racine Street as Business Route 114.
SEC. 10-1-59 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
ARTICLE E
Enforcement and Penalties
SEC. 10-1-60 PENALTIES.
(a) FORFEITURE PENALTY. The penalty for violation of any provision of this
Chapter shall be a forfeiture as hereafter provided, together with court costs and
fees prescribed by Sections 814.63(1) and (2) or 814.65(1), Wis. Stats., the penalty
assessment for moving traffic violations and the driver improvement surcharge
imposed by Section 165.87 and 346.655, Wis. Stats., where applicable. Payment of
the judgment and applicable court costs, fees, assessments and surcharges may be
suspended by the sentencing court for not more than sixty (60) days. Any person
eighteen (18) years of age or older who shall fail to pay the amount of the forfeiture,
court costs, any penalty assessment or driver surcharge or other penalty imposed for
violation of any provision of this Chapter may, upon order of the court entering
judgment therefor and having jurisdiction of the case, be imprisoned until such
forfeiture, costs and assessment are paid, but not exceeding ninety (90) days.
(b) OTHER SANCTIONS.
(1) By Court. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the
sentencing court to exercise additional authorities granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes to suspend or revoke the operating privileges of the defendant, order
the defendant to submit to assessment and rehabilitation programs or to
attend traffic safety school in addition to payment of a monetary penalty or
in lieu or imprisonment.
(2) By Municipality. No person who has been convicted of a violation of any
provision of this Chapter shall be issued a license or permit by the City
Clerk, except dog license, until the forfeiture imposed for such violation any
penalty assessment, court costs and fees or surcharge is paid.
(c) FORFEITURES FOR VIOLATION OF UNIFORM MOVING TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS. Forfeitures for violations of any moving traffic regulation set
forth in the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference in Section 10-1-1 shall
conform to the forfeiture penalty permitted to be imposed for violations of the
comparable Wisconsin Statute, including any variations or increases for subsequent
offenses; provided, however, that this Subsection shall not be construed to permit
prosecution under this Chapter for any offense described in Chapters 341 to 348,
Wis. Stats., for which an imprisonment penalty or fine may be imposed upon the
defendant.
(d) FORFEITURES FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS.
(1) Forfeitures for Uniform Statewide Parking, Stopping and Standing Offenses.
Minimum and maximum forfeiture for violation of non-moving traffic
violations adopted by reference in Section 10-1-1 as described in Chapters
341 to 348, Wis. Stats., shall be as found in the current edition of the Revised
Uniform State Traffic Deposit Schedule.
(e) OTHER VIOLATIONS. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Chapter for which a penalty is not otherwise established by this Section shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than Two
Hundred Dollars ($200.00).
(f) ALCOHOL RELATED OFFENSES. Upon conviction of any alcohol related
offense for which the City has expended funds or incurred expense for the
withdrawal or testing of blood or urine, the cost of such service to the City shall be
added to any forfeiture, court cost, and fees imposed by the Court.
SEC. 10-1-61 ENFORCEMENT.
(a) ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
(1) How Enforces. This Chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes and this Section.
(2) Applicable Court Procedures. Except where otherwise specifically provided
by the laws of the State of Wisconsin or this Code, the traffic regulations in
this Code shall be enforced in the County Circuit Court.
(b) CITATIONS.
(1) Uniform Citation and Complaint. The Wisconsin Uniform Traffic Citation
and Complaint described and defined in the Wisconsin Statutes shall be used
for enforcement of all provisions of this Chapter except those provisions
which describe or define non-moving traffic violations and violations of
Sections 346.71 through 346.73, Wis. Stats.
(2) Parking Citations. The Comptroller shall recommend a citation for use in
enforcing the non-moving traffic offenses in this Chapter. Such citation
shall be used for enforcement of non-moving traffic regulations created or
adopted by this Chapter, including violations of non-moving traffic
regulations defined and described in the Wisconsin Statutes, adopted by
reference in Section 10-1-1, and all provisions regarding non-moving traffic
violations in this Chapter. The citation for non-moving traffic violations
shall contain a notice that the person cited may discharge the forfeiture for
violation of a non-moving traffic regulation and penalty thereof by
complying with Subsection (c)(2) of this Section. Non-moving traffic
citations may be issued by law enforcement officers or by the Comptroller's
staff.
(c) DEPOSITS AND STIPULATIONS.
(1) Uniform Traffic Offenses.
a. Who May Make. Persons arrested or cited for violation of moving
traffic offenses created by this Chapter shall be permitted to make
deposits and stipulations of no contest or released by the arresting
officer in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Wisconsin
Statutes. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made by persons
arrested for violations of this Chapter in accordance with Section
66.12(1)(b) of the Wisconsin Statutes whenever the provisions of
Section 345.27 of the Wisconsin Statutes are inapplicable to such
violations. Stipulations shall conform to the form contained in the
uniform traffic citation and complaint under Section 345.11 of the
Wisconsin Statutes. Stipulations may be accepted by the
Comptroller or his designate.
b. Delivery or Mailing of Deposit and Stipulation. Any person
stipulating guilt or no contest under the preceding Subsection must
make the deposit required under Section 345.26 of the Wisconsin
Statutes or, if the deposit is not established under such Statute, shall
deposit a forfeited penalty as provided in the schedule established by
the Chief of Police and approved by the City Attorney. Deposits
may be brought or mailed in lieu of court appearance to the Police
Department or placed in marked depositories as directed by the
Officer.
c. Receipt Required. Every officer accepting a stipulation under the
provisions of this Chapter shall comply with the provisions of
Sections 343.27, 343.28, 345.26(1)(a) and 345.27(2) of the
Wisconsin Statutes and shall require the alleged violator to sign a
statement of notice in substantially the form contained on the
uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated under Section
345.11 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The official or person receiving
the deposit shall furnish and deliver or mail an original receipt for
such deposit to the alleged violator and shall deliver the deposit and
stipulation to the Clerk of Courts.
(2) Non-moving Traffic Offenses.
Direct Payment of Penalty Permitted. Whenever any person parks any
vehicle in violation of any regulation imposed on City owned or leased
parking lots, the police officers of the City shall report the facts thereof,
knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the
circumstances attending such violation. Each such officer shall attach to
such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle had
been parked in violation of a City ordinance.
a. Such notice shall state that each such owner or operator may pay to the
City a forfeiture of Five Dollars ($5.00) if paid within ten (10) days of
the date of violation or if paid not less than eleven nor more than
twenty-eight (28) days of the issuance of said ticket a forfeiture of
Twelve Dollars ($12.00) plus costs shall be imposed. The failure of an
owner or operator to appear after being summoned to court shall subject
the owner or operator to a forfeiture of Fifteen Dollars ($15.00) plus
appropriate court costs.
b. Any citation for violation of Section 10-1-29 shall carry a forfeiture of
Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00). Failure to pay such forfeiture within ten
(10) days of the date of the violation shall result in a forfeiture of Thirtyfive
Dollars ($35.00) plus costs.
c. Any citation for violation of Section 10-1-29, if such violation shall
occur between April 1 and October 31, shall carry a forfeiture of Ten
Dollars ($10.00). Failure to pay such forfeiture within ten (10) days of
the date of the violation shall result in a forfeiture of Twenty Dollars
($20.00) plus costs.
(3) Registration Suspension Program.
a. The City shall participate in the Wisconsin department of
Transportation Traffic violation and Registration Program as set
forth in Sec. 345.28, Wis. Stats., and Wis. Adm. Code Trans. 128
and all amendments or changes thereto.
b. The Comptroller or his designate is hereby designated as a delegated
authority for purposes of Sections 85.13 and 345.28, Wis. Stats., and
Wis. Adm. Code Trans. 128. The Police Department is authorized to
perform, on behalf of the City, all functions required of a local
authority under said Statutes and Code including, but not limited to:
1. Preparing and completing all forms and notices, notifying the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation of unpaid citations
for non-moving traffic violations;
2. Specifying whether the registration of vehicles involved in
unpaid citations for non-moving traffic violations should be
suspended and/or whether registration should be refused for
any vehicle owned by persons with unpaid citations for nonmoving
traffic violations;
3. Determining the method by which the City will pay the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation for administration
of the program; establishing the effective date for
participation;
4. And taking such other action as is necessary to institute and
continue participation in the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation Traffic Violation and Registration Program.
c. The Comptroller is hereby authorized to assign a member of the
Comptroller's staff to perform such acts as are necessary to effectuate
this Subsection.
d. In addition to all applicable fines and court costs, the cost of using
the Wisconsin Department of Transportation Traffic Violation and
Registration Program shall be assessed as permitted by Sec.
345.28(4)(d), Wis. Stats. The Police Department may refuse to
notify the Wisconsin Department of Transportation of payment on a
citation until all applicable fines and costs, including costs assessed
under the preceding sentence, are paid.
e. The City's participation in such program shall be in addition to any
and all other means legally available to enforce such citations.
State Law Reference: Sec. 345.28, Wis. Stats.; Chapter Trans. 128, Wis. Adm.
Code.
Updated 12/7/2011
CHAPTER 2
Bicycles
SEC. 10-2-1 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Chapter:
(a) BICYCLE means every device propelled by the feet upon pedals and having
wheels, any two (2) of which are not less than fourteen (14) inches in diameter.
(b) BICYCLES' LANE means that portion of a roadway set aside for exclusive use of
bicycles and so designated by appropriate signs and markings by the responsible
governing body.
(c) BIKE ROUTE means any bicycle lane, bicycle way or highway which has been
duly designated by the responsible governing body and identified by appropriate
signs and markings.
(d) BICYCLE WAY means any path or sidewalk, or portion thereof, designated for
the use of bicycles by the responsible governing body.
(e) CARRIER means any device attached to a bicycle designed for carrying articles.
(f) IDENTIFICATION TAG means a metal plate or sticker indicating that a bicycle
is registered.
(g) RIGHT-OF-WAY means the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under
such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
SEC. 10-2-2 MANNER OF OPERATION RESTRICTED.
No bicycle shall be allowed to proceed in any street in the City by inertia or momentum with
the feet of the rider removed from the bicycle pedals. No rider of a bicycle shall remove
both hands from the handlebars or practice any trick or fancy riding in any street in the City
nor shall any bicycle rider carry or ride any other person so that two (2) persons are on the
bicycle at one time, unless a seat is provided for a second person. Operators shall not ride
bicycles abreast.
SEC. 10-2-3 LIGHTING AND OTHER EQUIPMENT.
No person shall operate a bicycle upon a highway unless equipped as required in Sec.
347.81, Wis. Stats., between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before
sunrise.
SEC. 10-2-4 PARKING A BICYCLE.
No person shall leave a bicycle at such a place or in such a way as to create a hazard to
pedestrians, automobile operators or to anyone else. Bicycles shall be parked either upon
the roadway against the curb, in bicycle racks or, if on the sidewalk, in such a manner as to
afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic, and not in such a manner as to obstruct the
ingress and egress to buildings used by the public. If there is no bicycle rack or other
facility intended to be used for the parking of bicycles in the vicinity, the operator may park
a bicycle on the sidewalk in an upright position parallel to and within twenty-four (24)
inches of the curb.
Updated 12/7/2011
SEC. 10-2-5 RULES OF THE ROAD.
The provisions of Chs. 346 and 347, Wis. Stats., and applicable City Ordinances shall
govern the operation of bicycles where appropriate.
SEC. 10-2-6 BICYCLE REGULATIONS.
(a) RULES FOR TURNING.
(1) The operator of a bicycle intending to turn to the right at an intersection shall
approach the point of turning in the traffic lane nearest the right-hand edge or
curb of the street and, in turning, shall keep as closely as practicable to the
right-hand edge or curb of the highway.
(2) The operator of a bicycle intending to turn to the left of an intersection or
into a private driveway shall make such turn from the traffic lane
immediately to the right or next to the center of the street and pass
immediately to the left of the center of the intersection, passing as closely as
practicable to the left of the center of the intersection immediately to the
right of the center of the intersection of the street.
(3) At any intersection where traffic is controlled by a traffic control signal or by
a traffic officer, it shall be unlawful for any such operator of such bicycle
upon any street to disobey the instructions of any official traffic sign or
signal placed in accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin and the
Ordinances of the City.
(4) Crosswalks shall be used when walking a bicycle through an intersection.
(b) TRICK RIDING. No person shall operate a bicycle upon the streets of said City
without having manual control of the handlebars or operate a bicycle in any other
manner which necessitates the element of unusual extraordinary skill and involves
unnecessary risk.
(c) TANDEM RIDING. No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on a street in said
City with another person upon said bicycle unless such bicycle is so constructed as
to be a tandem bicycle.
(d) EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY. The operator of a bicycle
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or
the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(e) BICYCLES NOT TO BE PULLED BY MOVING VEHICLES. No person
riding upon a bicycle shall cling or attach himself or his bicycle to any other
moving vehicle upon a street or highway, nor shall the operator of any such bicycle
tow or draw any coaster wagon, sled, person on roller skates, toy vehicles or any
other similar vehicle on such highway.
(f) SPEED. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under existing conditions or in excess of any posted speed limit.
(g) RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
(1) No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the C-2 Central
business district.
SEC. 10-2-7 REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES.
Updated 12/7/2011
(a) REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES. No person shall operate or possess a bicycle
upon any street, sidewalk, public property, bicycle pathway or public highway
within the City of Menasha unless said bicycle shall first have been registered and
an identification tag attached.
(b) FORM OF REGISTRATION.
(1) Every owner of a bicycle shall list and register with the Police Department
their name, address, manufacturer’s, model type, identification number, color
and general description.
(2) The registration period for a bicycle shall be permanent for any bicycle
registered after January 1, 1989.
(3) The City shall issue registration tags to residents at no charge so long as
ownership of the bicycle is retained. Any transfer of ownership shall require
a new registration unless such transfer is within the immediate family of the
original registrant.
(4) Upon registration the City shall provide a suitable registration tag numbered
to correspond with the registration number. The owner shall attach the
registration tag to the frame of the bicycle as specified by the Police
Department.
(5) The replacement of the frame on a bicycle shall require a new registration.
(c) RECORDS AND TRANSMITTAL OF FEES.
(1) The Police Department shall maintain a registration program consisting of all
applications and registrations.
(d) CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP.
(1) An owner shall notify the Police Department that a bicycle has been
permanently removed from the City or has been dismantled and taken out of
operation within 10 days. Upon such notice, the information will be removed
from the registry.
(e) REGISTRATION TO BE DISPLAYED.
(1) The identification tag issued under this Section shall be affixed to the
registered bicycle so as to be plainly seen and read unless otherwise ordered
removed by the Police Department.
(f) REMOVAL AND ALTERATION OF IDENTIFICATION TAGS.
(1) Removal Prohibited. No person shall remove an identification tag from a
bicycle during the period for which issued except upon a transfer of
ownership or when the bicycle is dismantled and taken out of operation.
(2) Alteration Prohibited. No person shall alter or counterfeit any identification
tag.
(f) PENALTIES.
(1) Any person operating or possessing a bicycle upon any street, sidewalk,
public property, bicycle pathway, or public highway within the City of
Menasha without a valid registration tag and having been previously issued a
warning ticket involving the same bicycle shall be fined $25.00 plus costs for
a first violation within one year and $100.00 plus costs for any subsequent
violation within one year.
(2) It shall be a defense to this Section for anyone who has validly registered
his/her bicycle in any other jurisdiction.
SEC. 10-2-8 SKATEBOARDS.
(a) SKATEBOARDING REGULATED. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates or roller skis in any of the following
places:
Updated 12/7/2011
(1) On any City streets.
(2) On any sidewalk in a business district. For purposes of this Section, a
business district shall be defined as any area primarily commercial in nature.
(3) In any public parking ramp or parking lot.
(4) Or on other municipally owned property.
(5) On private property, unless permission has been received from the owner,
lessee or person in charge of that property.
(b) RIGHT-OF-WAY. Operators or riders of skateboards, roller skates or roller skis
shall yield the right-of-way to other pedestrians using City sidewalks and shall not
otherwise endanger or interfere with normal pedestrian traffic on those sidewalks.
(c) PENALTIES.
(1) Any persons between fourteen (14) years of age through fifteen (15) years of
age who shall violate any provisions of this Section shall be issued a citation
subject to penalties provided in Section 1-1-7. In addition, the court may
suspend the child's operating license as found in Sec. 340.01, Wis. Stats.
(2) Any person under fourteen (14) years of age who shall violate any provision
of this Chapter may be issued a special bicycle violation warning notice
along with the addition of actions:
a. First offense in one (1) year, warning letter sent to parent or guardian
requiring their signature and return of the warning notice to the
police department.
b. Second offence in one (1) year, mandatory child-parent conference
with the juvenile officer.
c. Third offense in one (1) year, mandatory referral to Winnebago
County Juvenile Court.
CHAPTER 3
Snowmobiles
SEC. 10-3-1 STATE SNOWMOBILE LAWS ADOPTED.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter, the statutory provisions describing
and defining regulations with respect snowmobiles in the following enumerated sections of
the Wisconsin Statutes are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this Chapter as if
fully set forth herein. Acts required to be performed or prohibited by such statutes are
required or prohibited by this Chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications
of the Statutes incorporated herein by reference are intended to be made part of this Code.
350.01 Definitions.
350.02 Operation of Snowmobiles on or in the Vicinity of Highways.
350.03 Right-of-Way.
350.04 Snowmobile Races, Derbies and Routes.
350.045 Public Utility Exemption.
350.047 Local Utility Exemption.
350.05 Operation by Youthful Operators Restricted.
350.055 Safety Certification Program Established.
350.06 Firearms and Bows.
350.07 Driving Animals.
350.08 Owner Permitting Operation.
350.09 Head Lamps, Tail lamps and Brakes, Etc.
350.10 Miscellaneous Provisions for Snowmobile Operation.
350.12 Registration of Snowmobiles.
350.125 Completion of Application for Registration by Snowmobile Dealers.
350.13 Uniform Trail Signs and Standards.
350.15 Accidents and Accident Reports.
350.17 Enforcement.
350.18 Local Ordinances.
SEC. 10-3-2 APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS TO
SNOWMOBILES.
No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any street, highway or alley within the City of
Menasha in violation of the traffic regulation provisions of Sections 346.04, 346.06, 346.11,
346.14(1), 346.18, 346.19, 346.20, 346.21, 346.26, 346.27, 346.33, 346.35,346.37, 346.39,
346.40, 346.44, 346.46, 346.47, 346.48, 346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52, 346.53, 346.54,
346.55, 346.87, 346.88, 346.89, 346.90, 346.91, 346.92(1) and 346.94(1), (6), (6m) and (9),
Wis. Stats.
SEC. 10-3-3 SPEED; HOURS OF OPERATION; EQUIPMENT.
(a) SPEED. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the City or on any trail
designated in Section 10-3-6 of this Chapter at a speed in excess of fifteen (15)
miles per hour.
(b) HOURS OF OPERATION RESTRICTED. Except on a designated trail, no
person shall operate a snowmobile or other off-highway vehicle anywhere within
the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except for returning home
via the most direct route.
(c) RESTRICTION ON EQUIPMENT. No snowmobile or other vehicle operating
on the snowmobile route shall be allowed if it has an expansion chamber or any
muffler other than the type and size provided by the manufacturer. Each
snowmobile must display a lighted headlight and taillight at all times and said lights
must conform to the requirements of Section 350.09 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
SEC. 10-3-4 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
No person shall leave or allow a snowmobile owned or operated by him to remain
unattended on any public highway or public property while the motor is running or with the
starting key left in the ignition.
SEC. 10-3-4 OPERATION ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any sidewalk, pedestrian way or upon the area
between the sidewalk and the curb line of any street in the City, except as specifically
authorized by Sec. 10-3-6 or for the purpose of crossing to obtain immediate access to an
authorized area of operation.
SEC. 10-3-6 SNOWMOBILE AND OTHER OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE
OPERATION RESTRICTED.
(a) OPERATION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. Except as permitted by this Code of
Ordinances, it shall be unlawful to operate any snowmobile or any other motordriven
craft or vehicle principally manufactured for off-highway use on the City
streets, alleys, parks, parking lots or on any public lands or private lands or parking
lots held open to the public. The operator shall at all times have the express consent
of the owner before operation of such craft or vehicle on private property not owned
or controlled by him.
(b) PERMITTING OPERATION BY IMPROPER PERSONS PROHIBITED.
No owner or person having charge or control of a snowmobile shall authorize or
permit any person to operate such snowmobile who is not permitted under state law
to operate such snowmobile or who is under the influence of an intoxicant or a
dangerous narcotic drug.
(c) OPERATION WHILE UNDER INFLUENCE PROHIBITED. Sec. 346.63,
Wis. Stats., shall apply to the operation of a snowmobile any place within the City.
(d) OPERATION IN PARKS. No person shall drive a snowmobile in any park
within the City except upon designated snowmobile trails as shall be designated by
the Common Council.
Cross Reference: Section 10-1-54
SEC. 10-3-7 RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATORS.
(a) No person under the age of twelve (12) years may operate a snowmobile. No
person over the age of twelve (12) years but under the age of sixteen (16) years may
operate a snowmobile unless he holds a valid snowmobile safety certificate or is
accompanied by a person over eighteen (18) years of age or by a person over
fourteen (14) years of age having a snowmobile safety certificate issued by the
Department of Natural Resources.
(b) No person shall operate any snowmobile upon any street, alley or other public rightof-
way in the City unless such person shall have a valid motor vehicle operator's
license or unless such operator is accompanied by a person who has a valid motor
vehicle operator's license and who is occupying a seat on the vehicle.
SEC. 10-3-8 ACCIDENTS AND ACCIDENT REPORTS.
(a) If he can do so without serious danger to himself or to persons on board, the
operator of a snowmobile involved in a snowmobile accident within the City shall
stop his snowmobile and shall render to other persons affected thereby such
assistance as may be practicable and necessary to save them from or minimize any
danger caused by the accident and shall give his name and address and
identification of his snowmobile to any person injured and to the owner of any
property damaged in the accident.
(b) If the snowmobile accident results in death or injury to any person or total property
damage in excess of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00), every operator of a
snowmobile involved in such accident shall, as soon as possible, notify the Police
Department of the accident and shall, within ten (10) days after the accident, file a
written report thereof with the department on forms prescribed by it.
(c) If the operator of a snowmobile is physically incapable of making the report
required by this Section and there was another occupant in the snowmobile at the
time of the accident capable of making the report, he shall make such report.
(d) "Snowmobile accident" means a collision, accident or other casualty involving a
snowmobile.
SEC. 10-3-9 SNOWMOBILE ROUTES AND TRAILS DESIGNATED.
(a) ROUTE DESIGNATED. Except as provided in Sections 350.02 and 350.045 of
the Wisconsin Statutes, or for snowmobile events authorized in accordance with
Section 350.04, Wis. Stats., no person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public
right-of-way, in any public park, golf course or any other public municipal property
in the City of Menasha except upon those snowmobile routes and trails designated
and shown in that certain map entitled "Snowmobile Routes and Trails in the City
of Menasha," a copy of which is on file in the offices of the City Clerk and Police
Department and which is incorporated herein by reference as through fully set forth.
(b) TRAIL MARKERS. The Director of Public Works is directed and authorized to
procure, erect and maintain appropriate snowmobile route, trail and limit signs and
markers as approved by the State Department of Natural Resources under Section
350.13, Wis. Stats. The Chief of Police shall have the power to declare the stated
snowmobile routes and trails either open or closed.
(c) MARKERS TO BE OBEYED. No person shall fail to obey any route or trail
sign, marker or limit erected in accordance with this Section.
Cross Reference: Section 10-1-54.
SEC. 10-3-10 PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), together with the costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, may be imprisoned in the county jail for not
exceeding ten (10) days, provided no person shall forfeit an amount in excess of the
maximum fine or forfeiture allowed in the Wisconsin Statutes for the same offense and
further provided that the penalty and forfeiture for parking violations on highways shall be
the amount applicable to such violations by owners or operators of motor vehicles under
Title 10, Chapter 1, of this Code of Ordinances.
SEC. 10-3-11 ENFORCEMENT.
(a) UNIFORM CITATION FOR HIGHWAY VIOLATIONS. The uniform traffic
citation promulgated under Sec. 345.11, Wis. Stats., shall be used for violations of
this Chapter relating to highway use except as herein provided.
(b) PARKING VIOLATIONS. The special traffic citation described and defined in
Title 10, Chapter 1, of this Code of Ordinances shall be used for enforcement of
violations of rules of the road relating to parking of vehicles adopted by reference in
Section 10-3-1 of this Chapter.
(c) OTHER VIOLATIONS. All violations of this Chapter not described in
Subsections (a) or (b) shall be enforced in accordance with sections 66.12 and
66.114 of the Wisconsin Statutes. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made
as provided in Sec. 66.12(1)(b), Wis. Stats., in substantially the form provided in
the uniform traffic citation within five (5) days of the date of the citation for such
violation. Bail deposits may also be made under Sec. 66.12, Wis. Stats. Such
deposits shall include a Fifteen Dollars ($15.00) Clerk's fee and costs of
prosecutions.
(d) POLICE DEPARTMENT TO RECEIVE STIPULATIONS AND
PENALTIES. Stipulations, forfeited penalties and deposits for obtaining release
from arrest authorized under this Chapter may be accepted at the Police Department
offices by the Chief or officer designated by him. The officer authorized to accept
penalties and deposits shall be bonded and such bond shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
(e) FORFEITED PENALTIES AND DEPOSITS. Except as otherwise provided in
Sec. 345.26, Wis. Stats., and the deposit schedule adopted by the State Board of County
Judges, required forfeited penalties and deposits or bail not including costs or fees for
violation of this chapter shall be as established by the schedule adopted by the Common
Council.
120194
CHAPTER 4
Abandoned and Junked Vehicles
SEC. 10-4-1 ABANDONED VEHICLES; DEFINITIONS.
(a) ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED. No person shall leave unattended
any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home on any public street or highway or
private or public property in the City of Menasha for such time and under such
circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned.
Whenever any such vehicle has been left unattended on any street or highway in the city of
Menasha or upon private or public property without the permission of the property owner or
other person charged with the lawful jurisdiction thereof for more than seventy-two (72)
hours, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance.
(b) DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall be applicable:
(1) Vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home, whether or
not such vehicle is registered under Wisconsin Law.
(2) Unattended shall mean unmoved from its location with no obvious sign of
continuous human use.
(3) Street shall mean any public highway or alley and shall mean the entire width
between the boundary lines of any public way where any part thereof is open to the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
(c) PRESUMPTIONS. For purposes of this Section, the following irrebuttable presumptions
shall apply:
(1) A vehicle shall be presumed unattended if it is found in the same position seventytwo
(72) hours after issuance of a traffic ticket or citation and if such traffic ticket or
citation remains placed upon the windshield during said seventy-two (72) hours.
(2) Any vehicle left unattended for more than seventy-two (72) hours on any public
street or public ground or left unattended for more than seventy-two (72) hours on
private property without the consent of the property owner is deemed abandoned and
constitutes a nuisance; provided, that the vehicle shall not be deemed abandoned
under this Subsection if left unattended on private property outside of public view
and is enclosed within a building, or if designated as not abandoned by the Chief of
Police.
(d) EXCEPTIONS. This Section shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building or a
vehicle stored on a premises licensed for storage of junk or junked vehicles and fully in
compliance with City zoning regulations, or to a vehicle parked in a paid parking lot or
space where the required fee has been paid.
SEC. 10-4-2 REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
Any vehicle in violation of this Chapter shall be removed and impounded until lawfully claimed or
disposed of under the provisions of Section 10-4-3.
SEC. 10-4-3 REMOVAL, STORAGE, NOTICE OR RECLAIMER OF ABANDONED
120194
VEHICLES.
(a) APPLICABILITY. The provisions of this Section shall apply to the removal, storage,
notice, reclaimer or disposal of abandoned vehicles as defined in Section 10-4-1.
(b) REMOVAL.
(1) Any police officer who discovers any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile
home on any public street or highway or private or public property in the City of
Menasha which has been abandoned shall cause the vehicle to be removed to a
suitable place of impoundment.
(2) Upon removal of the vehicle, the police officer shall notify the Chief of Police or his
designee of the abandonment and of the location of the impounded vehicle.
(c) STORAGE AND RECLAIMER. Any abandoned vehicle which is determined by the
Chief of Police or his designee to be abandoned shall be retained in storage for a period of
fourteen (14) days after certified mail notice, as hereinafter provided, has been sent to the
Wisconsin titled owner and/or secured party of record with the Wisconsin Motor Vehicle
Division, except that if the Chief of Police or his designee determines an abandoned vehicle
to have a value of less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), or that the cost of towing and
storage charges for impoundment will exceed the value of the vehicle, it may be junked or
sold by direct sale to a licensed salvage dealer after having been retained in storage for a
period of seven (7) days and after certified mail notice, as hereinafter provided, has been
sent to the Wisconsin titled owner or secured party of record with the Wisconsin Motor
Vehicle Division, provided that it is first determined that the vehicle is not reported stolen or
wanted for evidence or other reason. All substantially complete vehicles in excess of
nineteen (19) model years of age shall be deemed as a having value in excess of One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00). Any such vehicle which may be lawfully reclaimed may be
released upon the payment of all accrued charges, including towing, storage and notice
charges and upon presentation of the vehicle title or other satisfactory evidence to the Chief
of Police or his designee to prove an ownership or secured party interest in said vehicle.
(d) NOTICE TO OWNER OR SECURED PARTY. Certified mail notice, as referred to
herein, shall notify the Wisconsin titled owner of the abandoned vehicle, if any, and/or the
secured party of record with the Wisconsin Motor Vehicle Division, if any, of the following:
(1) That the vehicle has been deemed abandoned and impounded by the City of
Menasha;
(2) The "determined value" of the abandoned vehicle;
(3) If the cost of towing and storage costs will exceed the determined value of the
vehicle;
(4) That if the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or other reason, the vehicle may be
reclaimed upon the payment of all accrued charges, including towing, storage and
notice charges, within fourteen (14) days of the date of notice, unless the vehicle has
been determined to have a value less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or that the
cost of towing and storage charges for impoundment will exceed the value of the
vehicle, in which case the vehicle may be reclaimed within seven (7) days upon the
payment of the aforesaid charges; and
(5) That the owner or aforesaid secured party may, upon request, be granted a hearing
relating to the determinations made with respect to said vehicle within the period that
such vehicles may be reclaimed.
SEC. 10-4-4 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
120194
Any abandoned vehicle impounded by the City which has not been reclaimed or junked or sold by
direct sale to a licensed salvage dealer pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter may be sold by
public auction sale or public sale calling for the receipt of sealed bids. A Class I Notice, including
the description of the vehicles, the name(s) and address(es) of the Wisconsin titled owner and
secured party of record, if known, and the time of sale shall be published before the sale.
SEC. 10-4-5 REPORT OF SALE OR DISPOSAL.
Within five (5) days after the direct sale or disposal of a vehicle as provided for herein, the Chief of
Police or his designee shall advise the State of Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Division of
Motor Vehicles, of such sale or disposal on a form supplied by said Division. A copy of the form
shall be given to the purchaser of the vehicle enabling the purchaser to obtain a regular certificate of
title for the vehicle. the purchaser shall have ten (10) days to remove the vehicle from the storage
area but shall pay a reasonable storage fee established by the City for each day the vehicle remains
in storage after the second business day subsequent to the sale date. Ten (10) days after the sale the
purchaser shall forfeit all interest in the vehicle and the vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned and
may be sold again. Any listing of vehicles to be sold by the City shall be made available to any
interested person or organization which makes a written request for such list to the Police
Department. The Police Department may charge a reasonable fee for the list.
SEC. 10-4-6 OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSAL COSTS.
(a) The owner of any abandoned vehicle, except a stolen vehicle, is responsible for the
abandonment and all costs of impounding and disposing of the vehicle. Costs not covered
from the sale of the vehicle may be recovered in a civil action by the City against the owner.
(b) Payment of removal and impoundment costs is not required when the vehicle has been
impounded for purposes of law enforcement investigation.
SEC. 10-4-7 CONFLICT WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS.
In the event of any conflict between this Section and any other provisions of this Municipal Code,
this Chapter shall control.
SEC. 10-4-8 JUNKED AUTOMOBILES REGULATED.
(a) No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall accumulate or store any junked automobile
or parts thereof outside of any building on any real estate located within the corporate limits
of the City of Menasha.
(b) Storage of an unlicensed vehicle not in a building shall be considered prima facie evidence
of operating a junk yard without a permit.
(c) Section 1-1-7 is incorporated herein by reference as to penalties, however, nothing in this
Section shall provide for penalties to be imposed which are greater than the State Statute
permits and each day the junk as herein defined shall be stored contrary to provisions hereof
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
120194
(d) The following conditions shall constitute prima facie evidence that a vehicle in public or
private property in the City of Menasha constitutes a junk vehicle:
1) Unlicensed or improperly registered vehicles
2) Broken or cracked windows or windshields
3) Flat tires or vehicles without tires
4) Vehicles without bumpers
5) Vehicles that do not start or continue to run
6) Vehicles that are in violation of any of the requirements of Wis. Admin. Code
Trans 305
7) Any other condition that can reasonably be construed as evidence that a vehicle
is a junk vehicle
The preceding list is designed to demonstrate prima facie examples of junk vehicles and
shall not be construed to be a limitation as to reasons that can be used to establish that a
vehicle is a junk vehicle.
State Law Reference: Section 342.40, Wis. Stats.
Updated: 9/23/2013
CHAPTER 1
State Statutes Adopted
SEC. 11-1-1 OFFENSES AGAINST STATE LAWS SUBJECT TO FORFEITURE.
The following statutes defining offenses against the peace and good order of the State are adopted
by reference to define offenses against the peace and good order of the City provided the penalty for
commission of such offenses hereunder shall be limited to a forfeiture imposed under the general
penalty provisions of this Code of Ordinances. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications
of the Statutes incorporated herein by reference are intended to be made part of this Code.
29.601(3)(a) Noxious and Deleterious Substances in Waters
167.10 Fireworks Regulated
254.76 Causing Fires by Tobacco Smoking
287.82 Littering on Highways, Waters, Public and Private Property
939.05 Aiding and Abetting
939.22 Words and Phrases Defined
940.19(1) Battery
940.291 Failure of a Police Officer to Render Aid
941.10 Negligent Handling of Burning Materials
941.12(2) Interfering With Fire Fighting
941.12(3) Interfering with Fire Hydrants
941.13 False Alarms and Interference with Fire Fighting
941.20(1) Endangering Safety by Use of a Dangerous Weapon
941.23 Carrying Concealed Weapon
941.235 Carrying a Firearm in a Public Building
941.24 Possession of Switchblade Knife
941.36 Fraudulent Tapping of Electric Wires or Gas or Water Meters or Pipes.
941.37(1)(2) Obstructing Emergency or Rescue Personnel
943.13 Trespass to lands
943.14 Trespass to dwellings
943.15 Entry onto a construction site or into a locked building, dwelling or room
943.20 Theft of Property
943.21 Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper, recreational attraction,
taxicab operator or gas station
946.41 Resisting or Obstructing Officer
946.72(2) Tampering with Public Records and Notices
947.01 Disorderly Conduct
947.012 Unlawful use of telephone
947.0125 Unlawful use of computerized communication systems
951.01 Definitions
951.015 Construction and Application
951.02 Mistreating Animals
951.03 Dognapping or Catnapping
951.04 Leading Animal from Motor Vehicle
951.05 Transportation of Animals
951.06 Use of Poisonous and Controlled Substances
951.07 Use of Certain Devices Prohibited
Updated: 9/23/2013
951.08 Instigating Fights Between Animals
951.09 Shooting at Caged or Staked Animals
951.10 Sale of Baby Rabbits, Chicks and Other Fowl
951.11 Artificially Colored Animals; Sale
951.13 Providing Proper Food and Drink to Confined Animals
951.14.1 Providing Proper Shelter
951.14.2 Animals; Neglected or Abandoned; Police Powers
961.573 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
Updated: 4/27/2020
CHAPTER 2
Offenses Against Public Safety and Peace
SEC. 11-2-1 REGULATION OF FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES.
(a) DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS REGULATED. No person, except a police officer or
other law enforcement officer in the performance of an official duty, shall fire or discharge
any firearm, rifle, spring gun, air gun or pneumatic pellet gun of any description within the
City. This Section does not apply and may not be enforced if the person’s conduct is
justified or, had it been subject to a criminal penalty would have been subject to a defense
described in §939.45, Wis. Stats.
(b) SHOOTING INTO CITY LIMITS. No person shall in the territory adjacent to the City
discharge any firearm in such manner that the discharge shall enter or fall within the City.
(c) SHOOTING RANGES. This section shall not prevent the maintenance and use of duly
supervised rifle or pistol ranges or shooting galleries approved by the Common Council,
after an advisory recommendation from the Chief of Police, where proper safety precautions
are taken.
(d) EXPLOSIVE DEVICES. No person shall discharge or detonate any dynamite,
nitroglycerin or other explosive within the City without first obtaining a permit to do so
from the Chief of Police.
(e) SHOOTING PROHIBITED. Shooting is banned on the Fox River within the corporate
limits of the City of Menasha.
(f) DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this Section, a firearm is defined as any instrumentality
from or with which a shot, bullet or pellet may be discharged or expelled, regardless of
whether the propelling force is provided by air, spring or other similar mechanical device, or
gun powder.
SEC. 11-2-2 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS PROHIBITED; CERTAIN
WEAPONS PROHIBITED.
(a) CONCEALED WEAPONS PROHIBITED.
(1) No person shall within the City wear or in any manner carry under his clothes or
conceal upon or about his person any deadly or dangerous weapon, provided this
Subsection shall not apply to a peace officer or such persons as may be authorized to
carry such weapons.
(2) Notwithstanding (a)(1) above, no person shall carry a concealed weapon into
or within any building owned or occupied by the City, except law enforcement
officers acting within the scope of their duties.
(3) "Dangerous weapon" means any firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, or any device
designed as a weapon and capable of producing death or great bodily harm, or any
other device or instrumentality which, in the manner it is used or intended to be
used, is calculated or likely to produce death or great bodily harm.
(b) POSSESSION, SALE AND MANUFACTURE OF CERTAIN WEAPONS
PROHIBITED.
(1) No person shall sell, manufacture, purchase, possess or carry a "Numchuk" (also
called a "Nunchaku") or a "Churkin" or a "Sucbai" or similar weapon within the
City of Menasha.
(2) For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
Updated: 4/27/2020
a. "Numchuk" or "Nunchaku." An instrument consisting of two (2) or more
sticks, clubs or rods connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain.
b. "Churkin." A round throwing knife consisting of several sharp points
protruding from a rounded disc.
c. "Sucbai." A short length of wood or metal or similar material which when
gripped in the hand protrudes on either side of the fist. Such prohibited
instrument may or may not have spikes or short pointed protrusions from
either end.
(3) Any such device shall be seized by a law enforcement officer and destroyed or
turned over to the State of Wisconsin Crime Laboratory for destruction.
SEC. 11-2-3 THROWING OR SHOOTING OF ARROWS, STONES AND OTHER
MISSILES PROHIBITED.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or throw by any means any dangerous
missile, object, arrow or bolt, stone, snowball or other missile within the City of Menasha,
provided, however, upon written application to the Chief of Police and Common Council, a
person may be granted permission by the Common Council to construct and maintain
supervised archery ranges if, in the opinion of the Common Council, the construction or
maintenance of such ranges will not endanger the public health and safety.
(b) HUNTING. This section shall not prevent a person from hunting with a bow and arrow
or crossbow in the following circumstances:
(1) If the person is hunting in accordance with Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources regulations; and
(2) The discharge is greater than 100 yards from a building, used for human
occupancy, unless the person who own s the land on which the building is located
allows the hunter to hunt within 100 yards of the building; and
(3) The discharge of the arrow or bolt from the respective weapon is toward the
ground.
SEC. 11-2-4 SALE AND DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS RESTRICTED.
No person shall sell, expose or offer for sale, use, keep, possess, discharge or explode any fireworks
except toy pistol paper caps, sparklers and toy snakes within the limits of the City unless he shall be
authorized by a fireworks permit as provided in Title 7, Chapter 8, of this Code of Ordinances. The
term "fireworks" as used in this Section shall be defined as provided in Section 167.10(1), Wis.
Stats., and shall be deemed to include all rockets or similar missiles containing explosive fuel.
SEC. 11-2-5 OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
(a) OBSTRUCTING STREETS. No person shall stand, sit, loaf or loiter or engage in any
sport or exercise on any public street, bridge or public ground within the City in such
manner as to prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon
or to prevent or hinder free ingress or egress to or from any place of business or amusement,
church, public hall or meeting place.
(b) BLOCKING SIDEWALK PROHIBITED. No person shall block any sidewalk by
obstructing the same so that it is impossible for a pedestrian to travel along the sidewalk
without leaving the sidewalk and walking on adjacent property or on the street.
(c) FREE SPEECH. This Section shall not be interpreted as prohibiting any person from
Updated: 4/27/2020
stopping on any sidewalk to talk or to make a speech, provided that such person shall not
stand in such a location that it is impossible for any pedestrian to travel along the sidewalk
without leaving the sidewalk and walking on adjacent property or on the street. If two (2) or
more persons are engaged in talking while stopped on a sidewalk, they shall not stand in
such locations as to completely prevent any pedestrian from passing them on the sidewalk.
(d) DEFINITIONS. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
(1) Block. To interfere with unobstructed travel by any means, including but not
limited to standing on the part of the walk that is fit for travel, or placing any object
or vehicle whatsoever on such walk.
(2) Sidewalk. Any sidewalk owned or maintained by the City. The term shall not
include sidewalks or walkways on private property in shopping centers, apartment
complexes, office building sites or any other private property.
SEC. 11-2-6 LOITERING PROHIBITED.
No person shall loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding
individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is
warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a police or peace officer,
refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight
by the person or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a police or peace officer shall, prior to
any arrest for an offense under this Section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm
which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain his
presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this Subsection if the
police or peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the
explanation given by the person was true and, if believed by the police or peace officer at the time,
would have dispelled the alarm.
SEC. 11-2-7 LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED.
(a) LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for any
person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud and unnecessary noise.
(b) TYPES OF LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISES. The following acts are declared to
be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this Section, but this enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any
automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the City for
longer than three (3) seconds in any period of one (1) minute or less, except as a
danger warning; the creation of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound by means of
any signaling device and the sounding of any plainly audible device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except
one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle, or other device
operated by engine exhaust and the use of any signaling device when traffic is for
any reason held up.
(2) Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated any radio receiving set; musical instrument, phonograph or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in a loud and
unnecessary manner. The operation of any set, instrument, phonograph, machine or
device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner as to be plainly
Updated: 4/27/2020
audible at the property line of the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section.
(3) Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of
commercial advertising or attracting attention of the public to any building or
structure. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer in
person and without the aid of any mechanical device.
(4) Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which causes frequent or long
continued unnecessary noise.
(5) Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or
danger or upon request of proper City authorities.
(6) Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine or motor boat except through a muffle or
other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(7) Construction or repair of buildings. The erection (including excavation),
demolition, alteration or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any pile
driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or any
other similar equipment attended by loud or unusual noise, other than between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays; provided, however, the Building
Inspector shall have the authority, upon determining that the loss of inconvenience
which would result to any party in interest would be extraordinary and of such
nature as to warrant special consideration, to grant a permit for a period necessary
within which time such work and operation may take place within the hours of
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(8) Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any
street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while in use, or
adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of
that institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital provided
that conspicuous signs are displayed in those streets indicating a school, hospital or
court street.
(9) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
a. Any vehicle of the City while engaged in necessary public business.
b. Excavations or repairs of streets or other public construction by or on behalf
of the City, County, or State at night when public welfare and convenience
renders it impossible to perform such work during the day.
c. The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public
addresses which are noncommercial in nature.
1. Operation of Certain Equipment. Lawn mowers, chain saws,
powered garden equipment, electric insect killing/repelling devices,
and other non-construction maintenance equipment shall be operated
only during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. unless within
the specified noise levels measured at the property line of the
location at which said equipment is in use.
2. Exemptions. Operations of emergency equipment shall be exempt
from this Chapter. Snow blowers not operated on a commercial
basis shall be exempt from this Chapter when used to gain access to
a City street. Emergency equipment shall include ambulance, police,
fire, snow removal, civil defense sirens, etc., necessary for the health,
safety, and protection of the citizens of the City.
Updated: 4/27/2020
3. Appeals. The Common Council may grant an exemption to
individuals proving evidence of substantial hardship. Evidence that
reasonable technological attempts have been made to correct the
problem shall be considered grounds for granting an exemption to
this Chapter for existing industries.
(c) PERMITS FOR AMPLIFYING DEVICES.
(1) Permit Required. The use of loudspeakers or amplifying devices on the streets or in
the parks of the City of Menasha is prohibited unless the party desiring to use such
loudspeaker or amplifying device first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police for
street use or the Director of Parks, Recreation, Forestry and Cemeteries for park use.
(2) Grounds or Reasons for Denial or Allowance. The Chief of Police or Director of
Parks, Recreation, Forestry and Cemeteries shall have the authority to revoke such
permit when he believes such loudspeaker or amplifying device is becoming a
nuisance because of the volume, the method in which it is being used or the location
in which it is being operated.
(3) Time Restrictions. The Chief of Police or Director of Parks, Recreation, Forestry
and Cemeteries shall not grant a permit to use a loudspeaker or amplifying device
before the hours of 9:00 a.m. or after 10:30 p.m. On New Years Eve, a permit may
be issued to allow such loud speaker or amplifying device until 12:30 am on January
1st. Nor shall a permit be granted to anyone who, in the opinion of the Chief of
Police or Director of Parks, Recreation, Forestry and Cemeteries, uses said
loudspeaker or amplifying device in such a manner or for such a purpose as to
constitute a nuisance.
SEC. 11-2-8 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
(a) DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED. No person within the City of Menasha
shall:
(1) In any public or private place engage in violent, noisy, riotous, abusive, indecent,
profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct which
tends to cause or provoke an immediate disturbance of public order or tends to
annoy or disturb any other person.
(2) Intentionally cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, riot or noisy altercation
other than a bona fide athletic contest.
(3) Unless other facts and circumstances that indicate a criminal or malicious intent
on the part of a person apply, no person may be in violation of disorderly conduct
under this section for loading, a firearm, or for carrying, or going armed with a
firearm or a knife, without regard to whether the firearm is loaded or the firearm
or the knife is concealed or openly carried.
(b) DISORDERLY CONDUCT WITH MOTOR VEHICLE. No person shall make
unnecessary and annoying noises with a motor vehicle, including motorcycles and allterrain
vehicles, by squealing tires, excessive acceleration of the engine or by emitting
unnecessary and loud muffler noise.
(c) DEFECATING OR URINATING IN PUBLIC PLACES. It shall be unlawful for any
person to defecate or urinate outside of designed sanitary facilities, upon any sidewalk,
street, alley, public parking lot, park, playground, cemetery or other public area within the
City, or upon any private property in open view of the public, or in the halls, stairways or
elevators of public or commercial buildings, or to indecently expose his person.
Updated: 4/27/2020
SEC. 11-2-9 POSSESSION OF DANGEROUS AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
a) CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a
controlled substance contrary to the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 161 of the
Wisconsin Statutes. or chemicals or products that contain chemicals temporarily controlled
by the United States Drug Enforcement Administration, using its emergency scheduling
authority, as published in the Federal Register.
b) POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA. No person shall possess any amount of marijuana,
tetra-hydrocannabinois or any derivative thereof, unless the substance was obtained directly
from, or pursuant to a valid prescription or order of, a licensed physician or pharmacist for a
valid medical purpose and the use of the marijuana is permitted under State and Federal
laws.
c) POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. No person may use, or possess with the
primary intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of this section. State Law Reference: Chapter 961, Wis.
Stats.
d) POSSESSION SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID.
(1) No person shall possess, purchase, attempt to purchase, sell, publicly display for sale or
attempt to sell, give, or barter any one or more of the following chemicals or products
that contain them whether under the common street or trade names of "Spice", "K2",
"Genie", "Yucatan Fire", "Fake", “Mr. Smiley”, “Budz”, “Summit 420” or "new
marijuana”, or by any other name, label, or description:
a. (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6dimethyl-3-(2methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10atetrahydrobenzo[
c]chromen-1-01 - some trade or other names: HU-210
b. 2-Methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1-naphthalenylmethanone - some trade or other
names: JWH-015
c. 1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole - some trade or other names: JWH-018
d. 1-Butyl-3-(1naphthoyl) indole - some trade or other names: JWH-073
e. (6aR,10aR)-3-(1,1-Dimethylbutyl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydro -6,6,9-trimethyl-6Hdibenzo[
b,d]pyran) – some trade or other names: JWH-133
f. 1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)-naphthalen-1-ylmethanone – some trade or
other names; JWH-200
g. 1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl) indole – some trade or other names; JWH-250
h. 2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol - some trade or
other names: CP47,497 and homologues
i. Any similar structural analogs of the identified in chemical compounds (a-h).
j. Any other compounds containing cannabinoid receptor agonists that are designed,
produced, manufactured, synthesized, grown, cultivated, harvested, used or
otherwise prepared to produce or mimic the effects of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).
(2) The unlawful acts in this section shall not be applicable to a person who is under the
direction or prescription of a licensed physician, dentist, or other medical health
professional authorized to direct or prescribe such acts, provided that such use is
permitted under State and Federal laws.
SEC. 11-2-10 UNAUTHORIZED PRESENCE ON SCHOOL PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, except as provided in Subsection (b) hereof, to be
present in, loiter or enter into any public school building, school parking lot or on any public
Updated: 4/27/2020
school grounds without the permission of the school principal, custodian or other person in
charge thereof between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on official school days.
(b) This Section shall not apply to:
(1) Students regularly enrolled in public schools who have not been properly ordered by
the school principal, custodian or other person in charge thereof to leave the school
building or school grounds;
(2) Persons coming into the school building or school grounds for the purpose of
attending scheduled school or civic functions, or making use of the recreational
facilities located upon or within school premises, but as to such attendance or use,
this exception shall apply only to the portion of the premises on which facilities are
located and during the hours such facilities are specifically open to the general
public or an invited portion thereof;
(3) Parents or legal guardians of a regularly enrolled student. However, such parent or
legal guardian may be required to register at the school office.
(c) The exceptions set forth in Subsection (b) shall not apply to any person who, while in
school buildings or on school grounds, commits or attempts to commit any act prohibited by
statute or ordinance.
(d) All entrances to the school buildings shall be posted with a notice stating "Entry Into School
Building by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited." All school grounds shall be posted with a
notice stating "Entry Upon School Grounds by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited."
SEC. 11-2-11 FAILURE TO OBEY LAWFUL ORDER.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the direction or order of a police officer while
such police officer is acting in an official capacity in carrying out his or her duties.
SEC. 11-2-12 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally receive or conceal property with a value of under
Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) that he knows to be stolen, or to aid and abet such activity.
SEC. 11-2-13 HABITUAL TRUANCY PROHIBITED.
(a) No child subject so school attendance laws shall be a truant or a habitual truant as defined in
this section.
(1) For purposes of this section, "habitual truant" shall mean a child or pupil who is
absent from school without an acceptable excuse as provided in sec. 118.15, Wis.
Stats., as may be amended from time to time, for part or all of five (5) or more days
on which school is held during a school semester.
(2) For purposes of this section, "truant" shall mean a child or pupil who is absent from
school without an acceptable excuse as provided in sec. 118.15, Wis. Stats., as may
be amended from time to time, for part or all of any day on which school is held
during a school semester.
(b) A child who is found to be habitually truant shall be subject to one or more of the following
dispositions:
(1) An order for the child to attend school.
(2) Suspension of the child's operating privileges, as defined in sec. 340.01(40), Wis.
Stats., as may be amended from time to time, for not less than 30 days nor more
than 1 year. The court shall immediately take possession of any suspended license
Updated: 4/27/2020
and forward it to the State Department of Transportation together with a notice
stating the reason for and the duration of the suspension.
(3) An order for the child to participate in counseling or a supervised work program
administered by school officials.
(4) An order for the child to be placed in a teen court program as described in sec.
938.342 Wis. Stats.
(5) A forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00.
(6) Suspension of hunting or fishing licenses for up to one year.
(c) A child who is found to be truant shall be subject to one or more of the following
dispositions:
(1) An order for the child to attend school.
(2) A forfeiture of not more than $50.00 for a first violation, or a forfeiture of not more
than $100.00 for any 2nd or subsequent violation committed within 12 months of a
previous violation. Such forfeiture shall be subject to a maximum cumulative
forfeiture amount of not more than $500.00 for all violations committed during a
school semester.
(3) An order for the child to perform community service.
(d) Contributing to Truancy
(1) No person 17 years of age or older, by any act or omission, shall knowingly
encourage or contribute to truancy, as defined under section 11-2-13 (a) of
a person 17 years of age or under.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a person who has under his or her control
a child who has been sanctioned under s. 49.26 (1) (h) Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) An act or omission contributes to the truancy of a child, whether or not the child is
adjudged to be in need of protection or services, if the natural and probable
consequences of that act or omission would be to cause the child to be truant.
SEC. 11-2-14 HARBORING MINORS PROHIBITED.
No person shall, unless duly licensed under the Wisconsin Statutes or without having first obtained
the permission of the parents or legal guardian of any minor or without first notifying the City
police department of the existence of a minor described in (1) below on premises owned or
operated by or under the control of such person:
(1) By any means conceal or shelter or assist in the concealing of sheltering of any
minor under the age of eighteen (18) years while the minor is under the legal
custody of a parent or legal guardian and while the minor is on report with any law
enforcement as a "missing person", a "runaway", or a "wanted" person; or,
(2) Supply false information to or obstruct any police officer in the performance of his
duty to locate or take into custody any minor described in this section.
SEC. 11-2-15 RESTRICTIONS ON SALE OR GIFT OF CIGARETTES OR NICOTINE,
TOBACCO OR VAPING PRODUCTS TO MINORS.
(a) DEFINITIONS. In this section:
(1) Cigarette has the meaning given in Sec. 139.30(1m), Wis. Stats.
(2) Direct marketer has the meaning given in Sec. 139.30(2n), Wis. Stats.
(3) Distributor means a person specified under Sec. 139.30(3) or 139.75(4), Wis. Stats.
(4) Identification card means a license containing the photograph issued under Chapter
343, Wis. Stats., an identification card issued under Sec. 343.50, Wis. Stats., an
Updated: 4/27/2020
identification issued under Sec. 125.085, Wis. Stats.
(5) Jobber has the meaning given in Sec. 139.30(6), Wis. Stats.
(6) Manufacturer means any person specified under Secs. 139.30(7) or 139.75(5), Wis.
Stats.
(7) Nicotine product means a product that contains nicotine and is not any of the
following:
a. A tobacco product.
b. A cigarette.
c. A product that has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a smoking cessation product or for another
medical purpose and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved
purpose.
(8) Retailer means any person licensed under Sec. 134.65(1), Wis. Stats.
(9) Subjobber has the meaning given in Sec. 139.75(11), Wis. Stats.
(10) Tobacco products has the meaning given in Sec. 139.75(12), Wis. Stats.
(11) Vending machine has the meaning given in Sec. 139.30(14), Wis. Stats.
(12) Vending machine operator has the meaning given in Sec. 139.30(15), Wis. Stats.
(13) Person who sells tobacco products at retail means a person whose ordinary course of
business consists, in whole or in part, of the retail sale of tobacco products subject to
the state sales tax
(14) Person who sells vapor products at retail means a person whose ordinary course of
business, in whole or in part, of the retail sale of vapor products.
(15) Use a tobacco product or vaping product means to smoke, chew, suck, inhale, or
otherwise consume a tobacco product or vapor product
(16) Vapor product includes e-cigs, e-hookahs, mods, vape pens and tank systems, and
refers to any device containing or delivering nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance
intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking
in the delivery of nicotine or any other substance through inhaling and exhaling
aerosol or vapor produced from the product. This includes any component part of
such a product whether or not sold separately.
(b) RESTRICTIONS.
(1) No person may purchase cigarettes, vaping products, tobacco products, or nicotine
products on behalf of, or to provide to, any person who is under 18 years of age.
(2) Except as provided in Sec. 11-6-6(c), no retailer, direct marketer, manufacturer,
distributor, jobber or subjobber, no agent, employee or independent contractor of a
retailer, direct marketer, manufacturer, distributor, jobber or subjobber and no agent
or employee of an independent contractor may sell or give cigarettes, vaping
products, nicotine products or tobacco products to any person under 18 years of age.
A vending machine operator is not liable under this paragraph for the purchase of
cigarettes, nicotine products or tobacco products from his or her vending machine
by a person under 18 years of age if the vending machine operator was unaware of
the purchase.
(3) No retailer, direct marketer, manufacturer, distributor, jobber or subjobber, no agent,
employee or independent contractor of a retailer, direct marketer, manufacturer,
distributor, jobber or subjobber and no agent or employee of an independent
contractor may provide for nominal or no consideration cigarettes, vaping products,
nicotine products, or tobacco products to any person except in a place where no
person younger than 18 years of age is present or permitted to enter unless the
person who is younger than 18 years of age is accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian or by his or her spouse who has attained 18 years of age.
(4) A retailer or vending machine operator may not sell cigarettes, vaping products or
Updated: 4/27/2020
tobacco products from a vending machine unless the vending machine is located in
a place where the retailer or vending machine operator ensures that no person
younger than 18 years of age is present or permitted to enter unless he or she is
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or by his or her spouse who has
attained 18 years of age.
(5) No retailer or direct marketer may sell cigarettes in a form other than as a package or
container on which a stamp is affixed under Sec. 139.32(1), Wis. Stats.
(c) DEFENSE. Proof of all the following facts by a retailer, manufacturer, distributor,
jobber, or subjobber, an agent, employee, or independent contractor of a retailer,
manufacturer, distributor, jobber, or subjobber, or an agent or employee of an independent
contractor who sells cigarettes or tobacco products to a person under 18 years of age is a
defense to any prosecution for a violation of Subsection (b)(2) above:
(1) That the purchaser falsely represented that he or she had attained 18 years of age and
presented an identification card.
(2) That the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary and prudent person
would believe that the purchaser had attained 18 years of age.
(3) That the sale was made in good faith, in reasonable reliance on the identification
card and appearance of the purchaser and in the belief that the purchaser had
attained 18 years of age.
(d) PENALTY.
(1) A person who commits a violation is subject to a forfeiture of:
a. Not more than $500 if the person has not committed a previous violation
within 12 months of the violation; or
b. Not less than $200 nor more than $500 if the person has committed a
previous violation within 12 months of the violation.
SEC. 11-2-16 RESIDENTIAL OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
(a) PURPOSE. To minimize “light trespass” or “obtrusive light,” or more specifically to
regulate and reduce any nuisance by caused artificial illumination of property and
buildings; to mitigate the impact on ecosystems; to promote the safety and welfare of
citizens by restricting glare producing sources of light; and generally establish proper
levels of lights.
(b) APPLICABILITY. This ordinance applies to all exterior lights installed, erected or
maintained on residential parcels.
(c) LIGHT TRESPASS. Any exterior mounted light at a property zoned residential is
prohibited except:
(1) If the luminaire is mounted below an eave which is not higher than 12 feet from
the ground of any structure on the property and the total luminaire output
measurement is less than 2000 lumens or 185 horizontal foot-candles.
(2) If the luminaire is mounted below an eave which is higher than 12 feet from the
ground of any structure on the property and the total luminaire output
measurement exceeds 2000 lumens or 185 horizontal foot-candles then the light
must be fully shielded to prevent glare and be directed no more than 45 degrees
above straight down.
(3) Any light mounted to a pole below the level of the eave of the primary structure.
(4) Any light mounted to a pole above the level of the eave of the primary structure
which is serviced by a public utility company.
(5) Landscape lighting less than 2000 lumens or 185 horizontal foot-candles per
luminaire.
Updated: 4/27/2020
(d) LIGHT TRESPASS AT PROPERTY LINE. All areas containing outdoor lighting or
illumination (except public street lighting) shall limit light trespass onto adjacent
property, when measured at any point along a property line. Compliance shall be achieved
by utilizing luminaire shielding, directional control designed into luminaires, luminaire
location, height, or aim or a combination of these and other factors. The maximum
illumination spillage to adjoining lots measured in foot-candles shall be 0.20 for
residential parcels.
120194
11:1
CHAPTER 3
Offenses Against Property
SEC. 11-3-1 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
(a) DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY. No person shall willfully injure or intentionally
deface, destroy or unlawfully remove, take or meddle with any property of any kind or
nature within the City and belonging to the City or its departments, the Menasha School
District or to any private person, without the consent of the owner or proper authority.
(b) UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF PROPERTY. It shall be unlawful for any person to take
and carry away the property of another without the owner's consent with the intention to do
so.
SEC. 11-3-2 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
(a) LITTERING PROHIBITED. No person shall throw any glass, refuse or waste, filth or
other litter upon the streets, alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the City, or
upon property within the City owned by the Menasha School District or any private person,
or upon the surface of any body of water within the City.
(b) LITTER FROM CONDUCT OF COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE.
(1) Scope. The provisions of this Subsection shall apply to all sales, promotions and
other commercial ventures that result in litter being deposited on any street, alley or
other public way.
(2) Litter to be cleaned up. Any person, firm, corporation or association carrying on an
enterprise that results in litter being deposited on any street, alley or other public way
shall clean up the same within twelve (12) hours of the time the same is deposited. If
any such litter is subject to being blown about, it shall be picked up immediately. If
any such litter is likely to attract animals or vermin, such litter shall be picked up
immediately.
(3) Litter picked up at litter's expense. If any person, firm, corporation or association
fails to pick up any litter as required by Subsection (b)(1) within the time specified,
the City shall arrange to have the same picked up by City crews or by private
enterprise. Applicable bidding procedures shall be used for any arrangement for the
use of private enterprise to pick up such litter. The entire expense of picking up such
litter, together with an additional charge of twenty percent (20%) for administrative
expenses, shall be charged to the person, firm, corporation or association that did the
littering. If such sum is not promptly paid, steps shall be taken, with the advice of
the City Attorney's office, to collect the same. This charge shall be in addition to any
forfeiture or other penalty for violation of this Section.
(c) DUMPING OF REFUSE AND GRASS IN GUTTERS. No person shall deposit any
refuse, leaves or grass clippings in any gutter along any public street, road, alley or highway.
(d) HANDBILLS.
(1) Scattering Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to deliver any handbills or advertising
material to any premises in the City except by being handed to the recipient, placed
on the porch, stoop or entrance way of the building or firmly affixed to a building so
as to prevent any such articles from being blown about, becoming scattered or in any
120194
11:2
way causing litter.
(2) Papers in Public Places Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to leave any handbills,
advertising material or newspapers unattended in any street, alley, public building or
other public place, provided that this shall not prohibit the sale of newspapers in
vending machines.
SEC. 11-3-3 OPEN CISTERNS, WELLS, BASEMENTS OR OTHER DANGEROUS
EXCAVATIONS PROHIBITED.
No person shall have or permit on any premises owned or occupied by him any open cisterns,
cesspools, wells, unused basements, excavations or other dangerous openings. All such places shall
be fulled, securely covered or fenced in such manner as to prevent injury to any person and any
cover shall be of a design, size and weight that the same cannot be removed by small children.
SEC. 11-3-4 WELL ABANDONMENT.
(a) PURPOSE. To prevent contamination of groundwater and to protect public health, safety
and welfare by assuring that unused, unsafe or non-complying wells or wells which may
serve as conduits for contamination or wells which may be illegally corss-connected to the
municipal water system, are properly abandoned.
(b) APPLICABILITY. This ordinance applies to all wells located within the corporate limits
of the City of Menasha.
(c) DEFINITIONS.
(1) Municipal water system. A system for the provision to the public of piped water for
human consumption when such system has at least 15 service connections or
regularly serves at least 25 year-round residents owned or operated by a city, village,
county, town sanitary district, utility district or public institution as defined in s.
49.10(12)(f)1., Wisconsin Statutes, or privately owned water utility serving any of
the above.
(2) Non-complying. A well or pump installation which does not comply with the
provisions of chapter NR 112, Wisconsin Administrative Code, in effect at the time
the well was constructed, a contamination source, was installed, the pump was
installed or work was done on either the well or pump installation.
(3) Pump installation. Pump and related equipment used for withdrawing water from a
well including the discharge piping, the underground connections, pitless adapters,
pressure tanks, pits, sampling faucets and well seals or caps.
(4) Unsafe. Well or pump installation which produces water which is bacteriologically
contaminated or contaminated with substances in exces of the standars of chapters
NR 109 or 140, Wisconsin Administrative Code, or for which a Health Advisory has
been issued by the Department of Natural Resources.
(5) Unused. Well or pump installation which is not in use or does not have a functional
pumping system.
(6) Well. An excavation or opening into the ground made by digging, boring, drilling,
driving, or other methods for the purpose of obtaining groundwater for consumption
or other use.
(7) Well Abandonment. The filling and sealing of a well according to the provisions of
chapter NR 112, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
120194
11:3
(d) ABANDONMENT REQUIRED. All wells located on premises within the corporate limits
of the City shall be abandoned in accordance with the terms of this ordinance and chapter
NR 112, Wisconsin Administrative Code, by October 10, 1990, unless a well operation
permit has been obtained by the well owner from the City Clerk.
(e) WELL OPERATION PERMIT. The City Clerk may grant apermit to a private well
owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed 5 years providing the conditions of this
section are met. An owner may request renewal of a well operation permit by submitting
information verifying that the conditions of this section are met. The City, or its agent, may
conduct inspections or have water quality tests conducted at the applicant's expense to obtain
or verify information necessary for consideration of a permit application or renewal. Permit
applications and renewals shall be made on forms provided by the City Clerk. The following
conditions must be met for issuance or renewal of a well operation permit:
(1) The well and pump installation meet or are upgraded to meet the requirements of
chapter NR 112, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(2) The well construction and pump installation have a history of producing
bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by at least 2 samplings taking a minimum
of 2 weeks apart. No exception to this condition may be made for unsafe wells,
unless the Department of Natural Resources approves, in writing, the continued use
of the well.
(3) There are no cross-connections between the well and pump installation and the
municipal water system; and,
(4) The propsoed use of the well and pump installation can be justified as being
necessary in addition to water provided by the municipal water system.
(f) ABANDONMENT PROCEDURES.
(1) All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this ordinance or rule shall be
abandoned according to the procedures and methods of chapter NR 112, Wisconsin
Administrative Code. All debris, pump, piping, unsealed liners and any other
obstructions which may interfere with sealing operations shall be removed prior to
abandonment.
(2) The owner of the well, or other owner's agent, shall notify the clerk at least 48 hours
prior to commencement of any well abandonment activities. The abandonment of
the well shall be observed by the Inspection Department.
(3) An abandonment report form, supplied by the Department of Natural Resources,
shall be submitted by the well owner to the City Clerk and the Department of Natural
Resources within 10 days of the completion of the well abandonment.
SEC. 11-3-5 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS PROHIBITED.
No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or
within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his control in a
place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or other
container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be
released from the inside without first removing said door or lid, snap lock or other locking device
from said ice box, refrigerator or container, unless such container is displayed for sale on the
premises of the owner or his agent and is securely locked or fastened.
SEC. 11-3-6 RETAIL THEFT.
120194
11:4
(a) Whoever intentionally alters indicia of price or value of merchandise or takes and carries
away, transfers, conceals or retains possession of merchandise held for resale by a merchant
without consent and with intent to deprive the merchant permanently of possession or the
full purchase price may be penalized as provided in Chapter 1-1-7.
(b) The intentional concealment of un-purchased merchandise which continues from one floor to
another or beyond the last station for receiving payments in a merchant's store is evidence of
intent to deprive the merchant permanently of possession of such merchandise without
paying the purchase price thereof. The discovery of un-purchased merchandise concealed
upon the person or among the belongings of another is evidence of intentional concealment
on the part of the person so concealing such goods.
(c) Whoever returns merchandise to a merchant for the purpose of claiming a cash refund or
credit by intentionally deceiving the merchant with a representation that such merchandise
was purchased by such person from such merchant at the price claimed where such
merchandise was, in fact, not purchased by such person or was not purchased from such
merchant or was purchased at a price lower than the price claimed, shall be guilty of a
violation of this Section. Intentionally giving of a false name or address to a merchant
during the return of merchandise is evidence of intent to defraud a merchant. Any person
violating this Section may be penalized as provided in Chapter 1-1-7.
(d) A merchant or merchant's adult employee who has probable cause for believing that a person
has violated this Section in his presence may detain such person in a reasonable manner for a
reasonable length of time to deliver him to a peace officer, or to his parent or guardian if a
minor. The detained person must be promptly informed of the purpose for the detention and
may make phone calls, but he shall not be interrogated or searched against his will before the
arrival of a police officer who may conduct a lawful interrogation of the accused person.
Compliance with this Subsection entitles the merchant or his employee affecting the
detention to the same defense in any action as is available to a peace officer making an arrest
in the line of duty.
State Law Reference: Section 943.50, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 11-3-7 STORAGE OF JUNK, ETC., REGULATED.
No person shall store junked or discarded property including automobiles, automobile parts, trucks,
tractors, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery or machinery parts, wood,
bricks, cement blocks or other unsightly debris which substantially depreciates property values in the
neighborhood except or upon permit issued by the Common Council. The Chief of Police may
require by written order any premises violating this Section to be put in compliance within the time
specified in such order and, if the order is not complied with, may have the premises put in
compliance and the cost thereof assessed as a special tax against the property.
Cross Reference: Section 7-11-5 and Title 10, Chapter 4.
SEC. 11-3-8 THEFT OF LIBRARY MATERIAL.
(a) DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this Section, certain words and terms are defined as
follows:
120194
11:5
(1) Archives. A place in which public or institutional records are systematically
preserved.
(2) Library. Means any public library, library of an educational or historical
organization or society or museum, and specifically the public libraries of the City of
Menasha.
(3) Library Material. Includes any book, plate, picture photograph, engraving, painting,
drawing, map, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, broadside, manuscript, document,
letter, public record, microform, sound recording, audiovisual materials in any
format, magnetic or other tapes, electronic data processing records, or other tapes,
artifacts or other documents, written or printed materials, regardless of physical form
of characteristics, belonging to, on loan to or otherwise in the custody of a library.
(b) POSSESSION WITHOUT CONSENT PROHIBITED. Whoever intentionally takes and
caries away, transfers, conceals or retains possession of any library material without the
consent of a library official, agent or employee and with intent to deprive the library of
possession of the material may be subject to a forfeiture as provided by the general penalty
provisions of this Code. The failure to return library material after its proper return date,
after written notice from the library, shall be deemed to be theft. Notice shall be considered
given when written notice is mailed to the last-known address of the person with the overdue
material; the notice date shall be the date of mailing.
(c) CONCEALMENT. The concealment of library material beyond the last station for
borrowing library material in a library is evidence of intent to deprive the library of
possession of the material. The discovery of library material which has not been borrowed
in accordance with the library's procedures or taken without consent of a library official,
agent or employee and which is concealed upon the person or among the belongings of
another is evidence of intentional concealment on the part of the person so concealing the
material.
(d) DETENTION BASED ON PROBABLE CAUSE. An official or adult employee or agent
of a library who has probable cause for believing that a person has violated this Section in
his or her presence may detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time to deliver the person to a peace officer or to the person's parent or guardian in the case
of a minor. The detained person shall be promptly informed of the purpose of the detention
and be permitted to make telephone calls, but shall not be interrogated or searched against
his or her will before the arrival of a peace officer who may conduct a lawful interrogation of
the accused person. Compliance with this Section entitles the official, agent or employee
effecting the detention to the same defense in any action as is available to a peace officer
making an arrest in the line of duty.
(e) DAMAGING MATERIAL PROHIBITED. No person shall mar, deface or in any other
way damage or mutilate any library material.
(f) RETURN DEMANDED. No person shall fail, on demand, to return any library material
when such demand has been made in accordance with the rules and regulations duly made
and adopted by the library.
State Law Reference: Section 943.61, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 11-3-9 DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY.
(a) DAMAGING PUBLIC PROPERTY. No person shall climb any tree or pluck any flowers
or fruit, wild or cultivated, or break, cut down, trample upon, remove, or in any manner
120194
11:6
injure or deface, write upon, defile or ill use any tree, shrub, flower, flower bed, turf,
fountain, ornament, statue, building, fence, apparatus, bench, table, official notice, sign,
bridge, structure or other property within any park of parkway, or in any way injure, damage
or deface any public building, sidewalk or other public property in the City.
(b) BREAKING OF STREET LAMPS OR WINDOWS. No person shall break glass in any
street lamps or windows of any building owned or occupied by the City.
SEC. 11-3-10 DISTURBING CEMETERY PROPERTY.
No person except the owner of the cemetery lot or a cemetery employee shall cut, remove, injure or
carry away flowers, trees, plants or vines from any cemetery lot or property; nor shall any person
deface, injure or mark upon any cemetery markers, headstones, monuments, fences or structures; nor
shall any person other than the owner injure, carry away or destroy any vases, flower pots, urns or
other objects which have been placed on any cemetery lot.
SEC. 11-3-11 THEFT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.
(a) No person may intentionally obtain or attempt to obtain telecommunications service, as
defined in State Statutes 196.01(9m), by any of the following means:
(1) Charging such service to an existing telephone number of credit card number without
the consent of the subscriber thereto or the legitimate holder thereof.
(2) Charging such service to a false, fictitious, suspended, terminated, expired, canceled
or revoked telephone number or credit card number.
(3) Rearranging, tampering with or making connection with any facilities or equipment.
(4) Using a code, prearranged scheme, or other stratagem or device whereby said person
in effect sends or receives information.
(5) Using any other contrivance, device or means to avoid payment of the lawful
charges, in whole or in part, for such service.
(b) This section shall apply when the said telecommunications service either originates or
terminates, or both, in this state, or when the charges for said telecommunications service
would have been billable, in normal course, by a person providing telecommunications
service in this state, but for the fact that said service was obtained, or attempted to be
obtained, by one or more of the means set forth in sub. (1).
SEC. 11-3-12 THEFT OF CELLULAR TELEPHONE SERVICE.
(a) DEFINITIONS. In this section:
(1) "Cellular telephone service" means any telecommunications service provided by a
company over a cellular telephone system for payment.
(2) "Company" means a cellular mobile radio telecommunications utility as defined in
Wis. Statutes 196.202(1).
(b) PROHIBITIONS. No person may intentionally do any of the following:
(1) Obtain or attempt to obtain cellular telephone service from a company by trick,
artifice, deception, use of an illegal device or other fraudulent means with the intent
to deprive that company of any or all lawful compensation for rendering each type of
service obtained. The intent required for a violation of this paragraph may be
120194
11:7
inferred from the presence on the property and in the actual possession of the
defendant of a device not authorized by the company, the major purpose of which is
to permit reception of cellular telephone services without payment. This inference is
rebutted if the defendant demonstrates that he or she purchased that device for a
legitimate use.
(2) Give technical assistance or instruction to any person in obtaining or attempting to
obtain any cellular telephone service without payment of all lawful compensation to
the company providing that service. This paragraph does not apply if the defendant
demonstrates that the technical assistance or instruction was given for a legitimate
purpose.
(3) Maintain an ability to connect, whether physical, electronic, by radio wave or by
other means, with any facilities, components or other devices used for the
transmission of cellular telephone services for the purpose of obtaining cellular
telephone service without payment of all lawful compensation to the company
providing that service. The intent required for a violation of this paragraph may be
inferred from proof that the cellular telephone service to the defendant was
authorized under a service agreement with the defendant and has been terminated by
the company and that thereafter there exists in fact an ability to connect to the
company's cellular telephone system.
(4) Make or maintain any modification or alteration to any device installed with the
authorization of a company for the purpose of obtaining any service offered by that
company which that person is not authorized by that company to obtain. The intent
required for a violation of this paragraph may be inferred from proof that, as a matter
of standard procedure, the company places written warning labels on its
telecommunications devices explaining that tampering with the device is a violation
of law and the device is found to have been tampered with, altered or modified so as
to allow the reception of services offered by the company without authority to do so.
(5) Possess without authority any device designed to receive from a company and
services offered for sale by that company, whether or not the services are encoded,
filtered, scrambled or otherwise made unintelligible, or designed to perform or
facilitate the performance of any of the acts under pars. (1) and (4) with the intent
that the device be used to receive that company's services without payment. Intent to
violate this paragraph for direct or indirect commercial advantage or private financial
gain maybe inferred from proof of the existence on the property and in the actual
possession of the defendant of a device if the totality of circumstances, including
quantities or volumes, indicates possession for resale.
(6) Manufacture, import into this state, distribute, publish, advertise, sell, lease or offer
for sale or lease any device or any plan or kit for a device designed to receive cellular
telephone services offered for sale by a company, whether or not the services are
encoded, filtered, scrambled or otherwise made unintelligible, with the intent that the
device, plan or kit be used for obtaining a company's services without payment. The
intent required for a violation of this paragraph may be inferred from proof that the
defendant has sold, leased or offered for sale or lease any device, plan or kit for a
device in violation of this paragraph and during the course of the transaction for sale
or lease the defendant expressly states or implies to the buyer that the product will
enable the buyer to obtain cellular telephone service without charge.
(d) EXCEPTION. This section does not affect the use by a person of cellular telephone
services if the services have been paid for.
120194
11:8
SEC. 11-3-13 THEFT OF SATELLITE CABLE PROGRAMMING.
(a) DEFINITIONS. In this section:
(1) "Encrypt", when used with respect to satellite cable programming, means to transmit
that programming in a form whereby the aural or visual characteristics or both are
altered to prevent the unauthorized reception of that programming by persons
without authorized equipment which is designed to eliminate the effects of that
alteration.
(2) "Satellite cable programming" means encrypted video programming which is
transmitted via satellite for direct reception by satellite dish owners for a fee.
(b) PROHIBITIONS. No person may decode encrypted satellite cable programming without
authority.
(c) EXCEPTION. This section does not affect the use by a person of satellite cable
programming if the programming has been paid for and the use is exclusive to the person's
dwelling unit.
SEC. 11-3-14 THEFT OF CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE.
(a) DEFINITIONS. In this section:
(1) "Cable television service" has the meaning given in Wis. Statutes 196.01(1p).
"Cable television service" does not include signals received by privately owned
antennas that are not connected to a cable television system whether or not the same
signals are provided by a cable television company.
(2) "Private financial gain" does not include the gain resulting to any individual from the
private use in that individual's dwelling unit of any programming for which the
individual has not obtained authorization.
(b) PROHIBITIONS. No person may intentionally do any of the following:
(1) Obtain or attempt to obtain cable television service from a company by trick, artifice,
deception, use of an illegal device or illegal decoder or other fraudulent means with
the intent to deprive that company of any or all lawful compensation for rendering
each type of service obtained. The intent required for a violation of this paragraph
may be inferred from the presence on the property and in the actual possession of the
defendant of a device not authorized by the cable television company, the major
purpose of which is to permit reception of cable television services without payment.
This inference is rebutted if the defendant demonstrates that he or she purchased that
device for a legitimate use.
(2) Give technical assistance or instruction to any person in obtaining or attempting to
obtain any cable television service without payment of all lawful compensation to the
company providing that service. This paragraph does not apply if the defendant
demonstrates that the technical assistance or instruction was given or the installation
of the connection, descrambler or receiving device was for a legitimate use.
(3) Make or maintain a connection, whether physical, electrical, mechanical, acoustical
or by other means, with any cables, wires, components or other devices used for the
distribution of cable television services for the purpose of distributing cable
television service to any other dwelling unit without authority from a cable television
company.
(4) Make or maintain a connection, whether physical, electrical, mechanical, acoustical
120194
11:9
or by other means, with any cables, wires, components or other devices used for the
distribution of cable television services for the purpose of obtaining cable television
service without payment of all lawful compensation to the company providing that
service. The intent required for a violation of this paragraph may be inferred from
proof that the cable service to the defendant's residence or business was connected
under a service agreement with the defendant and has been disconnected by the cable
television company and that thereafter there exists in fact a connection to the cable
system at the defendant's residence or business.
(5) Make or maintain any modification or alteration to any device installed with the
authorization of a cable television company for the purpose of intercepting or
receiving any program or other service carried by that company which that person is
not authorized by that company to receive. The intent required for a violation of this
paragraph may be inferred from proof that, as a matter of standard procedure, the
cable television company places written warning labels on its converters or decoders
explaining that tampering with the device is a violation of law and the converter or
decoder is found to have been tampered with, altered or modified so as to allow the
reception or interception of programming carried by the cable television company
without authority to do so. The trier of fact may also infer that a converter or
decoder has been altered or modified from proof that the cable television company,
as a matter of standard procedure, seals the converters or decoders with a label or
mechanical device, that the seal was shown to the customer upon delivery of the
decoder and that the seal has been removed or broken. The inferences under this
paragraph are rebutted if the cable television company cannot demonstrate that the
intact seal was shown to the customer.
(6) Possess without authority any device or printed circuit board designed to receive
from a cable television system any cable television programming or services offered
for sale over that cable television system, whether or not the programming or
services are encoded, filtered, scrambled or otherwise made unintelligible, or
perform or facilitate the performance of any of the acts under pars. (1) and (5) with
the intent that the device or printed circuit be used to receive that cable television
company's services without payment. Intent to violate this paragraph for direct or
indirect commercial advantage or private financial gain may be inferred from proof
of the existence on the property and in the actual possession of the defendant of a
device if the totality of circumstances, including quantities or volumes, indicates
possession for resale.
(7) Manufacture, import into this state, distribute, publish, advertise, sell, lease or offer
for sale or lease any device, printed circuit board or any plan or kit for a device or for
a printed circuit designed to receive the cable television programming or services
offered for sale over a cable television system from a cable television system,
whether or not the programming or services are encoded, filtered, scrambled or
otherwise made unintelligible, with the intent that the device, printed circuit, plan or
kit be used for the reception of that company's services without payment. The intent
required for a violation of this paragraph may be inferred from proof that the
defendant has sold, leased or offered for sale or lease any device, printed circuit
board, plan or kit for a device or for a printed circuit board in violation of this
paragraph and during the course of the transaction for sale or lease the defendant
expressly states or implies to the buyer that the product will enable the buyer to
obtain cable television service without charge.
(d) EXCEPTION. This section does not affect the use by a person of cable television services
120194
11:10
if the services have been paid for and the use is exclusive to the person's dwelling unit. This
subsection does not prohibit a board or a council of any city, village or town from specifying
the number and manner of installation of outlets used by any such person for cable television
services and does not prohibit a cable television company, in any written contract with a
subscriber, from requiring the company's approval for an increase in the number of those
outlets used.
120194
11:1
CHAPTER 4
Obscenity
SEC. 11-4-1 EXPOSING MINORS TO HARMFUL MATERIALS.
(a) DEFINITIONS. As used in this Section:
(1) "Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(2) "Nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a full opaque covering or the showing of the female breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the
nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
(3) "Sexual conduct" is defined to be acts of sexual intercourse between humans,
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, acts of masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus
and acts of excretory function, lewd exhibition of the genitals, especially in a
stimulated condition and sexual relations between human and animals.
(4) "Sexual excitement" means the condition of human male or female genitals when in
a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(5) "Sadomasochistic abuse" means flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in
undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound
or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
(6) "Harmful to minors" means that quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic
abuse, which taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex, which taken as
a whole portrays sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, and which taken as a
whole does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. Whether a
work appeals to the prurient interest and whether it depicts or describes sexual
conduct in a patently offensive way, and whether it has serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value are to be determined by applying contemporary
community standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is
suitable material for minors.
(7) "Knowingly" means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or
ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
a. The character and content of any material described herein which is
reasonably suspect under this Section; and
b. The age of the minor, provided, however, that an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
(8) "Knowledge of the minor's age" means:
a. Knowledge or information that the person is a minor; or
b. Reason to know, or a belief or grounds for belief, which warrants further
inspection or inquiry of the age of the minor.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit for a monetary consideration to a
minor or knowingly to sell to a minor an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a
minor for a monetary consideration to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion picture,
show or other presentation which in whole or in part depicts nudity, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors, unless such minor is accompanied
by his parent or legal guardian.
120194
11:2
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or loan for monetary consideration to a
minor:
(1) Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or similar visual
representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts
nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors.
(2) Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however produced, or sound
recording which contains any material enumerated in (c)(1) hereof, or explicit and
detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual
conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to
minors.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to admit a minor to any premises whereon
there is exhibited nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse which is harmful to
minors unless such minor is accompanied by his/her parent or legal guardian.
State Law Reference: Section 944.25, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 11-4-2 SEXTING PROHIBITED
(a) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
(1) “Minor” means any person under the age of 18 years.
(2) “Nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the
nipple; or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. A
mother’s breastfeeding of her baby does not under any circumstance constitute
“nudity,” irrespective of whether or not the nipple is covered during or incidental to
breastfeeding.
(3) “Harmful to minors” means any reproduction, imitation, characterization,
description, exhibition, presentation, or representation of whatever kind or form,
depicting nudity, sexual conduct, or sexual excitement when it:
a. Predominantly appeals to a prurient, shameful, or morbid interest;
b. Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a
whole with respect to what is suitable material or conduct for minors; and
c. Taken as a whole is without serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific
value for minors.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Transmission: use any device capable of electronic data transmission to transmit to a
minor any image or recording of nudity that is harmful to minors.
(2) Possession. possess an image or recording that was transmitted or distributed by a
person, regardless of age, that depicts nudity that is harmful to minors.
a. A person does not violate this paragraph if all of the following apply:
i. The person did not solicit the photograph or video; and
ii. The person took reasonable steps to report the photograph or video
to a school or law enforcement official; and
iii. The person did not re-transmit the image or recording to a third party
other than a law enforcement official.
(3) Solicitation: solicit the transmission or distribution of any image or recording that
would itself be prohibited by this ordinance.
(c) Penalties. Any person who shall violate this section shall pay a forfeiture of $200.00 plus
120194
11:3
costs.
120194
11:1
CHAPTER 5
Offenses Involving Alcoholic Beverages
SEC. 11-5-1 OUTSIDE CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC AREAS; PERMITS FOR PARK
CONSUMPTION
(a) ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC AREAS.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, give away, sell, or drink from any
open vessel containing fermented malt beverages, wine, or intoxicating liquor upon
any public street, sidewalk, public parking lot, or other public ways of the City
except, at such times and such places as may be temporarily and specifically
approved by the Common Council.
(2) No owner, lessee, or person in charge of a public place may permit the consumption
of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a public place unless the person has an
appropriate retail license or permit. This Section also applies to any patron in a place
catering to the public who brings alcoholic beverages into such place for
consumption.
(b) CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN CITY PARKS.
(1) Except as provided below, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume,
dispense, sell, or give away alcoholic beverages in City Parks or on Trails.
(2) Only fermented malt beverages and wine may be consumed, dispensed, sold, or
given away in Jefferson Park, Koslo Park, and Curtis Reed Square in accordance
with a permit having been approved by the Park and Recreation Board and if
necessary, a temporary Class “B” liquor license issued by the City Clerk.
(3) Possessing and consuming alcoholic beverages within the fenced in area of the
Menasha Marina is permitted.
(4) Selling and consuming fermented malt beverages and wine on the Trestle Trail may
be permitted for an event approved by the Park and Recreation Board and with the
issuance of a special Class “B” liquor license issued by the City Clerk.
(5) The permit fee shall be established by the Park and Recreation Board with approval
of the Common Council
(6) Before any fermented malt beverages and wine may be sold in a City Park or Trail, a
special Class “B” liquor license must be obtained from the City Clerk.
(7) No alcoholic beverages may be sold after 10:30pm or consumed after 11:00pm
(8) Any non-profit organization selling fermented malt beverages and wine must appear
at a Park and Recreation Board meeting in order to explain picnic/festival plans.
(9) When selling fermented malt beverages and wine, event organizers shall check
identification and take other necessary steps to prevent consumption of alcohol or
fermented malt beverages by minors.
(10) The sponsoring organization shall arrange for adequate security protection from the
Menasha Police Department.
(11) Fermented malt beverages and wine may be sold only through a licensed concession
stand located on the premises of Koslo Baseball Park. Alcoholic beverages may not
be brought in.
Note: Section 11-4-1(b)(4) will terminate on August 31, 2017.
(c) PRIVATE PROPERTY HELD OUT FOR PUBLIC USE. It shall be unlawful for any
person to consume any alcohol beverages upon any private property held open for public
use within the City unless the property is specifically named as being part of a licensed
120194
11:2
premises.
(d) LEAVING LICENSED PREMISES WITH OPEN CONTAINER.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any licensee, permittee or operator to permit any patron to
leave the licensed premises with an open container containing any alcohol beverage.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any patron to leave a licensed premises with an open
container containing any alcohol beverage.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any patron to remove an original unopened package,
container or bottle containing any alcohol beverage from the licensed premises
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(e) CERTAIN BEVERAGE CONSUMPTION ON SCHOOL PROPERTIES
PROHIBITED. The consumption, dispensation, vending or having in one's possession
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages on all properties under the jurisdiction of
the Menasha Joint School District No. 1 at any time is hereby prohibited.
(f) EXCEPTIONS.
(1) The provisions of this Section may be waived by the Common Council for duly
authorized events.
(2) Any organization which has been issued a special Class "B" fermented malt
beverage picnic license pursuant to this Code of Ordinances, provided that the
provisions of this Chapter and Section 7-2-16 are fully complied with.
(g) DEFINITIONS.
(1) As used in this Section, the term "alcoholic beverage" shall include all ardent,
spirituous, distilled or vinous liquors, liquids or compounds, whether medicated,
proprietary, patented, or not, and by whatever name called, as well as all liquors and
liquids made by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley
malt and hops, with or without unmalted grains or decorticated or degerminated
grains or sugar, which contain one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) or more of alcohol
by volume and which are fit for use for beverage purposes.
(2) As used in this Section, the term "public area" shall be construed to mean any
location within the City which is open to access to persons not requiring specific
permission of the owner to be at such location including all parking lots serving
commercial establishments.
(3) As used in this Chapter "underage person" shall mean any person under the legal
drinking age as defined by the Wisconsin Statutes.
Cross Reference: Sections 7-2-16 and 12-1-6.
120194
11:3
SEC. 11-5-2 SALE TO UNDERAGE OR INTOXICATED PERSONS
RESTRICTED.
(a) SALES OF ALCOHOL BEVERAGES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS.
(1) No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away any fermented malt
beverages to any underage person not accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or
spouse who has attained the legal drinking age, or procure for, sell, dispense or give
away any intoxicating liquor to any underage person.
(2) No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in fermented malt beverages
to or with any underage person not accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or
spouse who has attained the legal drinking age or sell, vend, deal or traffic in
intoxicating liquor to or with any underage person.
(b) SALE OF ALCOHOL BEVERAGES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
(1) No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away alcohol beverages to a
person who is intoxicated.
(2) No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic alcohol beverages to or with
a person who is intoxicated.
State Law Reference: Section 125.07, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 11-5-3 UNDERAGE PERSONS' PRESENCE IN PLACES OF SALE; PENALTY.
(a) Restrictions. An underage person not accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or spouse
who has attained the legal drinking age may not enter, knowingly attempt to enter or be on any
premises for which a license or permit for the retail sale of alcohol beverages has been issued, for
any purpose except the transaction of business pertaining to the licensed premises with or for the
licensee or his or her employee. The business may not be amusement or the purchase, receiving
or consumption of edibles or beverages or similar activities which normally constitute activities
of a customer of the premises. This paragraph does not apply to:
1. An underage person who is a resident, employee, lodger or boarder on the premises controlled
by the proprietor, licensee or permittee of which the licensed premises consists or is a part.
2. An underage person who enters or is on a Class "A" or "Class A" premises for the purpose of
purchasing items other than alcohol beverages. An underage person so entering the premises may
not remain on the premises after the purchase.
3. Hotels, drug stores, grocery stores, bowling centers, billiards centers having on the premises
12 or more billiards tables that are not designed for coin operation and that are 8 feet or longer in
length, indoor golf simulator facilities, service stations, vessels, cars operated by any railroad,
regularly established athletic fields, outdoor volleyball courts that are contiguous to a licensed
premises, stadiums, public facilities as defined in s. 125.51 (5) (b) 1. d. which are owned by a
county or municipality or centers for the visual or performing arts.
3m. Premises having an indoor volleyball court that measures at least 9 meters by 18 meters in
area. The exception under this subdivision does not authorize an underage person to loiter in any
room that is primarily used for the sale or consumption of alcohol beverages.
120194
11:4
3r. Any privately owned business that exists to provide recreational fishing opportunities to the
public for a fee and that is registered under s. 95.60 (3m) if the sale of alcohol beverages
accounts for less than 30 percent of the business's gross receipts.
4. Premises in the state fair park, concessions authorized on state-owned premises in the state
parks and state forests as defined or designated in chs. 27 and 28, and parks owned or operated
by agricultural societies.
5. Ski chalets, golf courses and golf clubhouses, racetracks licensed under ch. 562, curling clubs,
private soccer clubs and private tennis clubs.
6. Premises operated under both a Class "B" or "Class B" license or permit and a restaurant
permit where the principal business conducted is that of a restaurant. If the premises are operated
under both a Class "B" or "Class B" license or permit and a restaurant permit, the principal
business conducted is presumed to be the sale of alcohol beverages, but the presumption may be
rebutted by competent evidence.
6m. Premises operating under both a "Class C" license and a restaurant permit.
7. An underage person who enters or remains on a Class "B" or "Class B" premises for the
purpose of transacting business at an auction or market, if the person does not enter or remain in
a room where alcohol beverages are sold, furnished or possessed.
8. An underage person who enters or remains in a room on Class "B" or "Class B" licensed
premises separate from any room where alcohol beverages are sold or served, if no alcohol
beverages are furnished or consumed by any person in the room where the underage person is
present and the presence of underage persons is authorized under this subdivision. An underage
person may enter and remain on Class "B" or "Class B" premises under this subdivision only if
the municipality which issued the Class "B" or "Class B" license adopts an ordinance permitting
underage persons to enter and remain on the premises as provided in this subdivision and the law
enforcement agency responsible for enforcing the ordinance issues to the Class "B" or "Class B"
licensee a written authorization permitting underage persons to be present under this subdivision
on the date specified in the authorization. Before issuing the authorization, the law enforcement
agency shall make a determination that the presence of underage persons on the licensed
premises will not endanger their health, welfare or safety or that of other members of the
community. The licensee shall obtain a separate authorization for each date on which underage
persons will be present on the premises.
9. A person who is at least 18 years of age and who is working under a contract with the licensee,
permittee or corporate agent to provide entertainment for customers on the premises.
10. An underage person who enters or remains on Class "B" or "Class B" licensed premises on a
date specified by the licensee or permittee during times when no alcohol beverages are
consumed, sold or given away. During those times, the licensee, the agent named in the license if
the licensee is a corporation or limited liability company or a person who has an operator's
license shall be on the premises unless all alcohol beverages are stored in a locked portion of the
premises. The licensee shall notify the local law enforcement agency, in advance, of the times
underage persons will be allowed on the premises under this subdivision.
120194
11:5
11. An underage person who enters or remains in a dance hall or banquet or hospitality room
attached to Class "B" or "Class B" licensed premises for the purpose of attending a banquet,
reception, dance, or other similar event.
12. An underage person who enters and remains on premises for which a temporary Class "B"
license is issued under s. 125.26 (6) if the licensee is authorized by the official or body of the
municipality that issued the license to permit underage persons to be on the premises under s.
125.26 (6) and if the licensee permits underage persons to be on the premises.
13. An underage person who enters or remains in a banquet or hospitality room on brewery
premises operated under a Class "B" or "Class B" license for the purpose of attending a brewery
tour.
SEC. 11-5-4 UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS; PENALTIES.
(a) Any underage person who does any of the following is guilty of a violation:
(1) Procures or attempts to procure alcohol beverages.
(2) Knowingly possesses or consumes intoxicating liquor.
(3) Enters or is on licensed premises in violation of Section 11-5-3(a).
(4) Falsely represents his or her age for the purpose of receiving alcohol beverages from
a licensee or permittee.
(b) Any underage person not accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or spouse who has
attained the legal drinking age who knowingly possesses or consumes fermented malt
beverage is guilty of a violation.
(c) Any person violating Subsections (a) or (b) is subject to the following penalties:
(1) For a first violation, a forfeiture of not more than Fifty Dollars ($50.00), suspension
of the person's operating privilege as provided under Sec. 343.30(6)(b)1, Wis. Stats.,
participation in a supervised work program under Subsection (d) or any combination
of these penalties.
(2) For a violation committed within twelve (12) months of a previous violation, either
a forfeiture of not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), suspension of the
person's operating privilege as provided under Sec. 343.30(6)(b)2, Wis. Stats.,
participation in a supervised work program under Subsection (d) or any combination
of these penalties.
(3) For a violation committed within twelve (12) months of two (2) or more previous
violations, either a forfeiture of not more than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00),
revocation of the person's operating privilege under Sec. 343.30(6)(b)3, Wis. Stats.,
participation in a supervised work program under Subsection (d) or any combination
of these penalties.
(d) (1) If the Court orders a person to participate in a supervised work program under
Subsection (d), the Court shall set standards for the program within the budgetary
limits established by the Common Council. The program may provide the person
with reasonable compensation reflecting the market value of the work performed, or
it may consist of uncompensated community service work and shall be administered
by the County Department of Public Welfare or a community agency approved by
the court.
(2) The supervised work program shall be of a constructive nature designed to promote
the person's rehabilitation, shall be appropriate to the person's age level and physical
120194
11:6
ability and shall be combined with counseling from an agency staff member or other
qualified person. The program may not conflict with the person's regular attendance
at school. The amount of work required shall be reasonably related to the
seriousness of the person's offense.
(e) When a court revokes or suspends a person's operating privilege under Subsection (c), the
Department of Transportation may not disclose information concerning or relating to the
revocation or suspension to any person other than a court, district attorney, county
corporation counsel, city, village or town attorney, law enforcement agency or the person
whose operating privilege is revoked or suspended. A person entitled to receive
information under this paragraph may not disclose the information to any other person or
agency.
(f) A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age on the date of disposition is subject to Sec.
48.344, Wis. Stats., unless proceedings have been instituted against the person in a court of
civil or criminal justice after dismissal of the citation under Sec. 48.344(3), Wis. Stats.
(g) Subsections (a) and (b) do not prohibit an underage person employed by a licensee or
permittee from possessing fermented malt beverages during the brewing process or for sale
or delivery to customers.
(h) Subsections (a) and (b) do not prohibit an underage person employed by a brewery, a winery
or a facility for the rectifying or manufacture of intoxicating liquor or the production of fuel
alcohol from possessing alcohol beverages during regular working hours and in the course
of employment.
SEC. 11-5-5 DEFENSE OF SELLERS.
(a) DEFENSES. Proof of the following facts by a seller of alcohol beverages to an underage
person is a defense to any prosecution for a violation of this Section:
(1) That the purchaser falsely represented in writing and supported with other
documentary proof that he or she had attained the legal drinking age.
(2) That the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary and prudent person
would believe that the purchaser had attained the legal drinking age.
(3) That the sale was made in good faith and in reliance on the written representation
and appearance of the purchaser in the belief that the purchaser had attained the
legal drinking age.
(b) BOOK KEPT BY LICENSEES AND PERMITTEES. Every retail alcohol beverage
licensee or permittee shall cause a book to be kept for the purpose of this Subsection. The
licensee or permittee or his or her employee shall require any person who has shown
documentary proof that he or she has attained the legal drinking age to sign the book if the
person's age is in question. The book shall show the date of the purchase of the alcohol
beverages, the identification used in making the purchase, the address of the purchaser and
purchaser's signature.
State Law Reference: Section 125.07(6) and (7), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 11-5-6 PERSONS WHO HAVE ATTAINED THE LEGAL DRINKING AGE;
FALSE OR ALTERED IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
Any underage person who does any of the following is subject to the penalties specified under
120194
11:7
Section 11-5-4(c) or (d):
(a) Intentionally carries an official identification card not legally issued to him or her, an
official identification card obtained under false pretenses or an official identification card
which has been altered or duplicated to convey false information. A law enforcement
officer shall confiscate any card that violates this Subsection.
(b) Makes, alters or duplicates an official identification card.
(c) Presents false information to an issuing officer in applying for an official identification card.
State Law Reference: Section 125.09(3), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 11-5-7 POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL BEVERAGES ON SCHOOL GROUNDS
PROHIBITED.
(a) In this Subsection:
(1) "Motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle owned, rented or consigned to a school.
(2) "School" means a public, parochial or private school which provides an educational
program for one (1) or more grades between grades 1 and 12 and which is
commonly known as an elementary school, middle school, junior high school,
senior high school or high school.
(3) "School administrator" means the person designated by the governing body of a
school as ultimately responsible for the ordinary operations of a school.
(4) "School premises" means premises owned, rented or under the control of a school.
(b) Except as provided by Subsection (c) no person may possess or consume alcohol beverages:
(1) On school premises;
(2) In a motor vehicle, if a pupil attending the school is in the motor vehicle; or
(3) While participating in a school-sponsored activity.
(c) Alcohol beverages may be possessed or consumed on school premises, in motor vehicles or
by participants in school-sponsored activities if specifically permitted in writing by the
school administrator consistent with applicable laws and ordinances.
Cross Reference: Section 11-6-5.
SEC. 11-5-8 ADULT PERMITTING OR ENCOURAGING UNDERAGE VIOLATION.
(a) No adult may knowingly permit or fail to take action to prevent the illegal consumption of
alcohol beverages by an underage person on premises owned by the person or under the
person's control. This Subsection does not apply to alcohol beverages used exclusively as
part of a religious service.
(b) No adult may intentionally encourage or contribute to a violation of Section 11-5-4(a) or
(b).
State Law Reference: Section 125.07(1)(a)3 and 4, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 11-5-9 SOLICITATION OF DRINKS PROHIBITED.
Any licensee, permittee or bartender of a retail alcohol beverage establishment covered by a license
120194
11:8
or permit issued by the City who permits an entertainer or an employee to solicit a drink of any
alcohol beverage defined in Section 125.02(1) of the Wisconsin Statutes, or any other drink from a
customer on the premises, or any entertainer or employee who solicits such drinks from any
customer is deemed in violation of this Section.
120194
11:9
CHAPTER 6
Offenses by Juveniles
SEC. 11-6-1 CURFEW.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person under sixteen (16) years of age to be on foot, bicycle or
in any type of vehicle on any public street, avenue, highway, road, alley, park, school
grounds, swimming beach, cemetery, playground, public building or any other public place
in the City of Menasha between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless accompanied
by his or her parent or guardian, or person having lawful custody and control of his or her
person, or unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor. The fact that said child,
unaccompanied by parent, guardian or other person having legal custody is found upon any
such public place during the aforementioned hours shall be prima facie evidence that said
child is there unlawfully and that no reasonable excuse exists therefor.
(b) EXCEPTIONS.
(1) This Section shall not apply to a child:
a. Who is performing an errand as directed by his parent, guardian or person
having lawful custody.
b. Who is on his own premises or in the areas immediately adjacent thereto.
c. Whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or
public places or in any motor vehicle during such hours.
d. Who is returning home from a supervised school, church or civic function.
(2) These exceptions shall not, however, permit a child to unnecessarily loiter about the
streets, alleys or public places or be in a parked motor vehicle on the public streets.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the lawful care, custody
and control of any person under sixteen (16) years of age to allow or permit such person to
violate the provisions of (a) or (b) above. The fact that prior to the present offense a parent,
guardian or custodian was informed by any law enforcement officer of a separate violation
of this Section occurring within thirty (30) days of the present offense shall be prima facie
evidence that such parent, guardian or custodian allowed or permitted the present violation.
Any parent, guardian or custodian herein who shall have made a missing persons
notification to the police department shall not be considered to have allowed or permitted
any person under sixteen (16) years of age to violate this Section.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or organization operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business to permit any minor
under sixteen (16) years of age to loiter, loaf or idle in such place during the hours
prohibited by this Section. Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of any
place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business during the hours
prohibited by this Section shall find persons under sixteen (16) years of age loitering,
loafing or idling in such place of business, he shall immediately order such person to leave
and if such person refuses to leave said place of business, the operator shall immediately
notify the Police Department and inform them of the violation.
(e) Every law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to detain any minor violating the
provisions of above until such time as the parent, guardian or person having legal custody of
the minor shall be immediately notified and the person so notified shall as soon as
reasonably possible thereafter report to the Police Department for the purpose of taking the
custody of the minor and shall sign a release for him or her. If no response is received, the
120194
11:10
Police shall take whatever action is deemed necessary in the best interest of the minor.
(f) The first time a minor, parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a minor is
detained by a law enforcement officer of the City, as provided in Subsection (e), such
minor, parent, guardian or person having such legal custody shall be advised, personally, if
known or by registered mail, as to the provisions of this Section, and further advised that
any violation of this Section occurring thereafter by this minor or any other minor under his
or her care or custody shall result in a penalty being imposed as hereinafter provided.
(g) (1) Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a child described in
Subsections (a) through (e) who has been warned in the manner provided in
Subsection (f) and who thereafter violates any of the provisions of this Section shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in Sec. 1-1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. After a
second violation within a six (6) month period, if the defendant, in a prosecution
under this Section, proves that he or she is unable to comply with this Ordinance
because of the disobedience of the child, the action shall be dismissed and the child
shall be referred to the court assigned to exercise jurisdiction under Chapter 48, Wis.
Stats.
(2) Any minor person under sixteen (16) years of age who shall violate this Section
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than One Dollar ($1.00) nor more
than Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00), together with the cost of prosecution.
SEC. 11-6-2 POSSESSION OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES BY JUVENILES.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to possess a controlled substance
contrary to the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 161, of the Wisconsin Statutes.
SEC. 11-6-3 PETTY THEFT BY JUVENILES.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18), with intent, to steal or take
property valued at Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) or less from the person or presence of the
owner without the owner's consent and with the intent to deprive the owner of the use thereof.
SEC. 11-6-4 RECEIVING STOLEN GOODS.
It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of eighteen (18) to intentionally receive or conceal
property he knows to be stolen.
120194
11:11
SEC. 11-6-5 POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY
JUVENILES.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the Wisconsin legal drinking age to possess or consume
intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages anywhere within the City except and unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
Cross Reference: Section 11-5-7.
SEC. 11-6-6 CITY JURISDICTION OVER PERSONS 14 THROUGH 17 YEARS OF
AGE.
(a) ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTE. Section 48.17(2), Wis. Stats., is hereby adopted
and by reference made a part of this Section as if fully set forth herein.
(b) PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE APPLICABLE TO PERSONS 14 THROUGH 17
YEARS OF AGE. Subject to the provisions and limitations of Section 48.17(2), Wis.
Stats., complaints alleging a violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances against
person 14 through 17 years of age may be brought on behalf of the City of Menasha and
may be prosecuted utilizing the same procedures in such cases as are applicable to adults
charged with the same offense.
(c) NO INCARCERATION AS PENALTY. The Court shall not impose incarceration as a
penalty for any person convicted of an offense prosecuted under this Section.
(d) ADDITIONAL PROHIBITED ACTS. In addition to any other provision of the City of
Menasha Code of Ordinances, no person age 14 through 20 shall own, possess, ingest, buy,
sell, trade, use as a beverage, give away or otherwise control any intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverage in violation of Chapter 125, Wis. Stats.
(e) PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS OF SUBSECTION (d). Any person 14 through 17
years of age who shall violate the provisions of Subsection (d) shall be subject to the same
penalties as are provided in Section 1-1-7 of these Ordinances exclusive of the provisions
therein relative to commitment in the County Jail.
Cross Reference: Section 11-5-7.
120194
11:12
CHAPTER 7
Public Nuisances
SEC. 11-7-1 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance
within the City of Menasha.
SEC. 11-7-2 PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED.
A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for
such length of time as to substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or
safety of the public. Violations of the following shall also be considered a public nuisance:
(a) The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, residential and non-residential,
including fences, shall be maintained in good repair and all surfaces thereof shall be kept
painted where necessary for purposes of preservation and appearance. The same shall be
maintained free of broken, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint
or other conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance.
(b) Any junk, wood, bricks, cement, concrete blocks, abandoned vehicles or machinery or parts
thereof, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, or other unsightly debris, such as
may tend to depreciate property values in the area or create a nuisance or hazard shall not be
allowed on any property, except when such materials are properly housed and out of public
view.
(c) Any use of property, substances or things within the City of Menasha or within four (4)
miles thereof emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or
disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of
ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any
appreciable number of persons within the City.
SEC. 11-7-3 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be
public health nuisances, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health
nuisances coming within the definition of Section 11-7-2:
(a) ADULTERATED FOOD. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or
drink sold or offered for sale to the public.
(b) UNBURIED CARCASSES. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human
consumption or foods which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner
within twenty-four (24) hours after death.
(c) BREEDING PLACES FOR VERMIN, ETC. Accumulations of decayed animal or
vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or
any material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other
vermin may breed.
(d) STAGNANT WATER. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can
multiply.
120194
11:13
(e) GARBAGE CANS. Garbage cans which are not fly-tight.
(f) NOXIOUS WEEDS. All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation.
(g) WATER POLLUTION. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances.
(h) STREET POLLUTION. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or
unwholesome liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or
public place within the City.
(i) ANIMALS AT LARGE. All animals running at large.
(j) ACCUMULATIONS OF REFUSE. Accumulations of old cans, lumber, elm firewood
and other refuse.
(k) LITTER, TRASH, ETC. Filthy, littered or trash covered cellars, house yards, factory
yards, vacant areas in the rear of stores, vacant lots, houses, buildings or premises
containing trash, litter, rags, accumulation or empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases,
lumber or firewood not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal not neatly piled, or
anything in which flies or rats may breed or multiply or which may be a fire danger.
(l) ANIMAL EXCRETA. The owner or any person having immediate control of an animal
shall promptly remove and dispose of, in a sanitary manner, any excreta left or deposited by
the animal upon any public or private property.
(m) PREMISES IN VIOLATION OF BUILDING CODE. All buildings erected, repaired or
altered within the City in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the City relating to
materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures.
(n) UNAUTHORIZED STREET OBSTRUCTIONS OR EXCAVATIONS. All
obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the
same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the City or which, although made in
accordance with such ordinances are kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time
after the purpose thereof has been accomplished.
(o) UNGUARDED EXCAVATIONS, ETC. All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations
or unused basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(p) DUST CONTROL.
(1) Applicability. When applicable, this Subsection shall govern all lots except those
zoned and used for one (1) and two (2) family dwellings.
(2) Specifics. Each person, partnership or corporation owning such a lot shall conduct
his business in such a manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance
to the neighboring property owners. That person, partnership or corporation shall
take all practical measures to reduce to the utter minimum dust pollution in the area.
Said measures shall include, but not be limited to, blacktopping, seal coating,
oiling, seeding or any other measures suggested by the Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works is hereby ordered and directed to make the necessary
recommendations to the offending property owner taking into consideration the type
of activity permitted on the lot, amount of traffic and all other conditions associated
with the business. Should the aggrieved property owner feel that such order, after
being delivered in writing, is unfair or impractical, he may appeal the order of the
Director of Public Works to the Board of Public Works. All orders of the Director
of Public Works shall be in writing and delivered by certified mail. Property owners
shall be given thirty (30) days in which to comply. An appeal from any order,
however, must be made to the Board of Public Works within ten (10) days of the
delivery of the certified letter.
(3) Duties of Owners. The owner of any lot shall at all times maintain the premises free
of litter, provided, however, that this Section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in
120194
11:14
authorized private receptacles for collection.
(4) Notice to Offending Property Owner. The Health Officer is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify the owner by certified mail to properly dispose of litter located
on such owner's property which is dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare.
(q) NOXIOUS FUMES. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly
ash or industrial dust within the City limits or within one (1) mile therefrom in such
quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or
cause substantial injury to property.
(r) NOXIOUS ODORS. Any use of property, substances or things within the City or within
four (4) miles thereof emitting or causing any foul, offensive, nauseous, noxious or
disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of
ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any
appreciable number of persons within the City.
SEC. 11-7-4 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public
nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other
nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the definition of Section 11-7-2:
(a) SIGNS, BILLBOARDS, ETC. All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar
structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public,
so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety.
(b) ILLEGAL BUILDINGS. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the
provisions of the Ordinances of the City relating to materials and manner of construction of
buildings and structures within the City.
(c) UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC SIGNS. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or
devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing
which purport to be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or
signal or which, because of its color, location, brilliance or manner of operation, interferes
with the effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal.
(d) OBSTRUCTION OF INTERSECTIONS. All trees, hedges, billboards or other
obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways
from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian
crosswalk.
(e) TREE LIMBS. All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than ten (10)
feet above the surface thereof and all limbs which project over a public street less than
fourteen (14) feet above the surface thereof.
(f) DANGEROUS TREES. All trees which are a menace to public safety or are the cause of
substantial annoyance to the general public.
(g) FIREWORKS. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the State
of Wisconsin and Ordinances of the City.
(h) DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of
repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use.
(i) WIRES OVER STREETS. All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are
strung less than fifteen (15) feet above the surface thereof.
(j) NOISY ANIMALS OR FOWL. The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl which,
by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other noises shall
greatly annoy or disturb a neighborhood or any considerable number of persons within the
120194
11:15
City.
(k) OBSTRUCTIONS OF STREETS: EXCAVATIONS. All obstructions of streets, alleys,
sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the
Ordinances of the City or which, although made in accordance with such Ordinances, are
kept or maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has
been accomplished, or which do not conform to the permit.
(l) OPEN EXCAVATIONS. All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused
basements accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(m) ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS. All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from
which the doors and other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a
device for opening from the inside.
(n) FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS. Repeated or continuous violations of the Ordinances of the
City or laws of the State relating to the storage of flammable liquids.
(o) UNREMOVED SNOW. All snow and ice not removed or sprinkled with ashes, sawdust,
sand or other chemical removers, as provided in this Code.
SEC. 11-7-5 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
(a) NOTICE TO OWNER. If the Director of Community Development shall determine that a
public nuisance exists on private or public property and that there is great and immediate
danger to the public health, safety or peace, he may call upon all Department Heads to
implement his orders and the same shall cooperate fully and with the permission of the City
Attorney, serve notice on the owner or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance and to post a copy of said notice on
the premises. Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or
maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove such nuisance within seventy-two (72) hours
and shall state that unless such nuisance is so abated, the City will cause the same to be
abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting
or maintaining the same.
(b) ABATEMENT BY CITY. If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided or if the
owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the City Attorney may
cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance.
(c) COST OF ABATEMENT. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Chapter for
the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the City shall be collected as a debt from the owner,
occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, or placed as a special
tax and entered on the tax rolls.
(d) OTHER METHODS NOT EXCLUDED. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as
prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the City or its officials in accordance with
the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
081814
11:1
CHAPTER 6
Offenses by Juveniles
SEC. 11-6-1 CURFEW.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person under sixteen (16) years of age to be on foot, bicycle or
in any type of vehicle on any public street, avenue, highway, road, alley, park, school
grounds, swimming beach, cemetery, playground, public building or any other public place
in the City of Menasha between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless accompanied
by his or her parent or guardian, or person having lawful custody and control of his or her
person, or unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor. The fact that said child,
unaccompanied by parent, guardian or other person having legal custody is found upon any
such public place during the aforementioned hours shall be prima facie evidence that said
child is there unlawfully and that no reasonable excuse exists therefor.
(b) EXCEPTIONS.
(1) This Section shall not apply to a child:
a. Who is performing an errand as directed by his parent, guardian or person
having lawful custody.
b. Who is on his own premises or in the areas immediately adjacent thereto.
c. Whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or
public places or in any motor vehicle during such hours.
d. Who is returning home from a supervised school, church or civic function.
(2) These exceptions shall not, however, permit a child to unnecessarily loiter about the
streets, alleys or public places or be in a parked motor vehicle on the public streets.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the lawful care, custody
and control of any person under sixteen (16) years of age to allow or permit such person to
violate the provisions of (a) or (b) above. The fact that prior to the present offense a parent,
guardian or custodian was informed by any law enforcement officer of a separate violation
of this Section occurring within thirty (30) days of the present offense shall be prima facie
evidence that such parent, guardian or custodian allowed or permitted the present violation.
Any parent, guardian or custodian herein who shall have made a missing persons
notification to the police department shall not be considered to have allowed or permitted
any person under sixteen (16) years of age to violate this Section.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or organization operating or in charge of any place
of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business to permit any minor
under sixteen (16) years of age to loiter, loaf or idle in such place during the hours
prohibited by this Section. Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of any
place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business during the hours
prohibited by this Section shall find persons under sixteen (16) years of age loitering,
loafing or idling in such place of business, he shall immediately order such person to leave
and if such person refuses to leave said place of business, the operator shall immediately
notify the Police Department and inform them of the violation.
(e) Every law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to detain any minor violating the
provisions of above until such time as the parent, guardian or person having legal custody of
the minor shall be immediately notified and the person so notified shall as soon as
reasonably possible thereafter report to the Police Department for the purpose of taking the
081814
11:2
custody of the minor and shall sign a release for him or her. If no response is received, the
Police shall take whatever action is deemed necessary in the best interest of the minor.
(f) The first time a minor, parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a minor is
detained by a law enforcement officer of the City, as provided in Subsection (e), such
minor, parent, guardian or person having such legal custody shall be advised, personally, if
known or by registered mail, as to the provisions of this Section, and further advised that
any violation of this Section occurring thereafter by this minor or any other minor under his
or her care or custody shall result in a penalty being imposed as hereinafter provided.
(g) (1) Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a child described in
Subsections (a) through (e) who has been warned in the manner provided in
Subsection (f) and who thereafter violates any of the provisions of this Section shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in Sec. 1-1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. After a
second violation within a six (6) month period, if the defendant, in a prosecution
under this Section, proves that he or she is unable to comply with this Ordinance
because of the disobedience of the child, the action shall be dismissed and the child
shall be referred to the court assigned to exercise jurisdiction under Chapter 48, Wis.
Stats.
(2) Any minor person under sixteen (16) years of age who shall violate this Section
shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than One Dollar ($1.00) nor more
than Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00), together with the cost of prosecution.
SEC. 11-6-2 POSSESSION OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES BY JUVENILES.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to possess a controlled substance
contrary to the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 161, of the Wisconsin Statutes.
SEC. 11-6-3 PETTY THEFT BY JUVENILES.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18), with intent, to steal or take
property valued at Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) or less from the person or presence of the
owner without the owner's consent and with the intent to deprive the owner of the use thereof.
SEC. 11-6-4 RECEIVING STOLEN GOODS.
It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of eighteen (18) to intentionally receive or conceal
property he knows to be stolen.
081814
11:3
SEC. 11-6-5 POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY
JUVENILES.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the Wisconsin legal drinking age to possess or consume
intoxicating liquors or fermented malt beverages anywhere within the City except and unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
Cross Reference: Section 11-5-7.
SEC. 11-6-6 POSSESSION OR PURCHASE OF CIGARETTE, NICOTINE, TOBACCO
OR VAPING PRODUCTS BY MINORS.
(a) DEFINITIONS. In this section:
(1) Cigarette has the meaning given in Sec. 139.30(1m), Wis. Stats.
(2) Law enforcement officer has the meaning given in Sec. 30.50(4s), Wis. Stats.
(3) Nicotine product means a product that contains nicotine and is not any of the
following:
a. A tobacco product.
b. A cigarette.
c. A product that has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a smoking cessation product or for another
medical purpose and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved
purpose.
(4) Retailer means any person licensed under Sec. 134.65(1), Wis. Stats.
(5) Tobacco products has the meaning given in Sec. 139.75(12), Wis. Stats.
(6) Use a tobacco product or vaping product means to smoke, chew, suck, inhale,
exhale or otherwise consume a tobacco product or vapor product.
(b) Vaping product includes e-cigs, e-hookahs, mods, vape pens and tank systems, and refers to
any device containing or delivering nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for
human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of
nicotine or any other substance through inhaling and exhaling aerosol or vapor produced
from the product. This includes any component part of such a product whether or not sold
separately. RESTRICTIONS.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection (c), no person under 18 years of age may
purchase, attempt to purchase, use or possess any cigarette, vaping product,
nicotine product or tobacco product.
(2) No person under 18 years of age may falsely represent his or her age for the purpose
of receiving any cigarette, vaping product, nicotine product or tobacco product.
(c) EXCEPTIONS.
(1) A person under 18 years of age may purchase or possess cigarettes, nicotine
products, or tobacco products for the sole purpose of resale in the course of
employment during his or her working hours if employed by a retailer.
(2) A person under 18 years of age, but not under 15 years of age, may purchase,
attempt to purchase or possess cigarettes, vaping products, nicotine products, or
tobacco products in the course of his or her participation in an investigation
under Sec. 254.916, Wis. Stats., that is conducted in accordance with Sec.
254.916(3), Wis. Stats.
081814
11:4
(d) A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette, vaping product, nicotine product or
tobacco product that has been sold to or is in the possession of a person under 18 years of
age.
(e) PENALTY.
(1) Any person under 18 years of age who shall violate the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed Fifty ($50.00) Dollars plus any and
all court costs.
(2) Any person who receives a citation under this ordinance may be offered the
opportunity to have the citation dismissed upon attendance in a tobacco use
education program.
SEC. 11-6-7 CITY JURISDICTION OVER PERSONS 12 THROUGH 16 YEARS OF
AGE.
(a) ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTE. Section 48.17(2), Wis. Stats., is hereby adopted
and by reference made a part of this Section as if fully set forth herein.
(b) PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE APPLICABLE TO PERSONS 12 THROUGH 16
YEARS OF AGE. Subject to the provisions and limitations of Section 48.17(2), Wis.
Stats., complaints alleging a violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances against
person 12 through 16 years of age may be brought on behalf of the City of Menasha and
may be prosecuted utilizing the same procedures in such cases as are applicable to adults
charged with the same offense.
(c) NO INCARCERATION AS PENALTY. The Court shall not impose incarceration as a
penalty for any person convicted of an offense prosecuted under this Section.
(d) ADDITIONAL PROHIBITED ACTS. In addition to any other provision of the City of
Menasha Code of Ordinances, no person age 12 through 20 shall own, possess, ingest, buy,
sell, trade, use as a beverage, give away or otherwise control any intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverage in violation of Chapter 125, Wis. Stats.
(e) PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS OF SUBSECTION (d). Any person 12 through 16
years of age who shall violate the provisions of Subsection (d) shall be subject to the same
penalties as are provided in Section 1-1-7 of these Ordinances exclusive of the provisions
therein relative to commitment in the County Jail.
Cross Reference: Section 11-5-7.
Updated: 7/7/2011
CHAPTER 7
Public Nuisances
SEC. 11-7-1 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the
City of Menasha.
SEC. 11-7-2 PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED.
A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for such
length of time as to substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the
public. Violations of the following shall also be considered a public nuisance:
(a) The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, residential and non-residential, including
fences, shall be maintained in good repair and all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted where
necessary for purposes of preservation and appearance. The same shall be maintained free of
broken, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other conditions
reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance.
(b) Any junk, wood, bricks, cement, concrete blocks, abandoned vehicles or machinery or parts
thereof, refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, or other unsightly debris, such as may
tend to depreciate property values in the area or create a nuisance or hazard shall not be allowed
on any property, except when such materials are properly housed and out of public view.
(c) Any use of property, substances or things within the City of Menasha or within four (4) miles
thereof emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors,
effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy,
discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the
City.
(d) The failure of anyone who removes any flammable or combustible liquid storage tank without
also removing any contaminated soil.
(e) Substantially annoy, injure, or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public.
(f) Render the public insecure in life or in the use of the property.
(g) Offend the public morals or decency.
(h) Unlawfully interfere with, or obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any
street, alley, highway, navigable water or other public way or use of public property.
SEC. 11-7-3 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public
health nuisances, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming
within the definition of Section 11-7-2:
(a) ADULTERATED FOOD. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink
sold or offered for sale to the public.
(b) UNBURIED CARCASSES. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human
consumption or foods which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within
twenty-four (24) hours after death.
(c) BREEDING PLACES FOR VERMIN, ETC. Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable
matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material
whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed.
(d) STAGNANT WATER. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can
Updated: 7/7/2011
multiply.
(e) GARBAGE CANS. Garbage cans which are not fly-tight.
(f) NOXIOUS WEEDS. All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation.
(g) WATER POLLUTION. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other
body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances.
(h) STREET POLLUTION. Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome
liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or public place within
the City.
(i) ANIMALS AT LARGE. All animals running at large.
(j) ACCUMULATIONS OF REFUSE. Accumulations of old cans, lumber, elm firewood and
other refuse.
(k) LITTER, TRASH, ETC. Filthy, littered or trash covered cellars, house yards, factory yards,
vacant areas in the rear of stores, vacant lots, houses, buildings or premises containing trash, litter,
rags, accumulation or empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, lumber or firewood not neatly
piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal not neatly piled, or anything in which flies or rats may breed or
multiply or which may be a fire danger.
(l) ANIMAL EXCRETA. The owner or any person having immediate control of an animal shall
promptly remove and dispose of, in a sanitary manner, any excreta left or deposited by the animal
upon any public or private property.
(m) PREMISES IN VIOLATION OF BUILDING CODE. All buildings erected, repaired or
altered within the City in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the City relating to
materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures.
(n) UNAUTHORIZED STREET OBSTRUCTIONS OR EXCAVATIONS. All obstructions of
streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as
permitted by the ordinances of the City or which, although made in accordance with such
ordinances are kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose thereof has
been accomplished.
(o) UNGUARDED EXCAVATIONS, ETC. All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or
unused basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(p) DUST CONTROL.
(1) Applicability. When applicable, this Subsection shall govern all lots except those zoned
and used for one (1) and two (2) family dwellings.
(2) Specifics. Each person, partnership or corporation owning such a lot shall conduct his
business in such a manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the
neighboring property owners. That person, partnership or corporation shall take all
practical measures to reduce to the utter minimum dust pollution in the area. Said
measures shall include, but not be limited to, blacktopping, seal coating, oiling, seeding or
any other measures suggested by the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public
Works is hereby ordered and directed to make the necessary recommendations to the
offending property owner taking into consideration the type of activity permitted on the
lot, amount of traffic and all other conditions associated with the business. Should the
aggrieved property owner feel that such order, after being delivered in writing, is unfair or
impractical, he may appeal the order of the Director of Public Works to the Board of
Public Works. All orders of the Director of Public Works shall be in writing and
delivered by certified mail. Property owners shall be given thirty (30) days in which to
comply. An appeal from any order, however, must be made to the Board of Public Works
within ten (10) days of the delivery of the certified letter.
(3) Duties of Owners. The owner of any lot shall at all times maintain the premises free of
litter, provided, however, that this Section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in
authorized private receptacles for collection.
(4) Notice to Offending Property Owner. The Health Officer is hereby authorized and
Updated: 7/7/2011
empowered to notify the owner by certified mail to properly dispose of litter located on
such owner's property which is dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare.
(q) NOXIOUS FUMES. The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or
industrial dust within the City limits or within one (1) mile therefrom in such quantities as to
endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to
property.
(r) NOXIOUS ODORS. Any use of property, substances or things within the City or within four (4)
miles thereof emitting or causing any foul, offensive, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors,
effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy,
discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the
City.
SEC. 11-7-4 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances
affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances
affecting public peace or safety coming within the definition of Section 11-7-2:
(a) SIGNS, BILLBOARDS, ETC. All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures
over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or
constructed as to endanger the public safety.
(b) ILLEGAL BUILDINGS. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the provisions
of the Ordinances of the City relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and
structures within the City.
(c) UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC SIGNS. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices
placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing which purport to
be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or signal or which,
because of its color, location, brilliance or manner of operation, interferes with the effectiveness of
any such device, sign or signal.
(d) OBSTRUCTION OF INTERSECTIONS. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions
which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a
clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
(e) TREE LIMBS. All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than ten (10) feet
above the surface thereof and all limbs which project over a public street less than fourteen (14)
feet above the surface thereof.
(f) DANGEROUS TREES. All trees which are a menace to public safety or are the cause of
substantial annoyance to the general public.
(g) FIREWORKS. All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the State of
Wisconsin and Ordinances of the City.
(h) DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as
to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use.
(i) WIRES OVER STREETS. All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less
than fifteen (15) feet above the surface thereof.
(j) NOISY ANIMALS OR FOWL. The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl which, by
frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, crowing or making of other noises shall greatly
annoy or disturb a neighborhood or any considerable number of persons within the City.
(k) OBSTRUCTIONS OF STREETS: EXCAVATIONS. All obstructions of streets, alleys,
sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the
Ordinances of the City or which, although made in accordance with such Ordinances, are kept or
maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose thereof has been
Updated: 7/7/2011
accomplished, or which do not conform to the permit.
(l) OPEN EXCAVATIONS. All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements
accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(m) ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS. All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the
doors and other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for
opening from the inside.
(n) FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS. Repeated or continuous violations of the Ordinances of the City or
laws of the State relating to the storage of flammable liquids.
(o) UNREMOVED SNOW. All snow and ice not removed or sprinkled with ashes, sawdust, sand
or other chemical removers, as provided in this Code.
(p) GRAFFITI.
(1) Graffiti is described as any inscription, word, figure, or design marked, etched, scratched,
drawn or painted with spray paint, liquid paint, ink, chalk, dye, or other similar substances
on buildings, fences, structures, and other similar places without the express permission of
the owner or operator of the property.
(2) Every owner or occupant of a structure or property defaced by graffiti shall notify the
police department of the graffiti before removing or covering the graffiti.
(3) Every owner of a structure or property defaced by graffiti shall comply with the terms of a
written order of the Director of Community Development or his/her designee served
personally as specified in Sec. 801.10 and 801.11, Wisconsin Statutes.
(4) In the event any owner or occupant fails to comply with the order specified in sec. 11-7-
4(p)(3), the City shall have the graffiti covered or removed and all costs, fees and expenses
will be deemed a special charge pursuant to sec. 3-2-12 and placed on such owners' real
estate taxes if not paid.
(5) Any owner or occupant served an order under sec. 11-7-4(p)(3) may petition the Common
Council for relief of such order. Such petition must be in writing and filed not more than
thirty days from the date of service. The Administration Committee shall hold a hearing
on such petition and enter any appropriate order. The aggrieved party may be represented
at such hearing. Testimony is not required to substantiate the existence of the graffiti. The
issues shall be limited to the appropriateness of the order of the Director of Community
Development.
(6) This ordinance shall not apply to hopscotch grids or such other generally accepted game
configurations which are placed on parking lots, sidewalks, streets, or other similar areas
in chalk or other washable substance.
SEC. 11-7-5 PUBLIC NUISANCES OFFENDING MORALS AND DECENCY.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are public nuisances offending public
morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not exclude other nuisances offending public morals
and decency defined elsewhere in the Menasha City Code:
(a) DISORDERLY HOUSES. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling
a. sexual intercourse or gambling.
(b) GAMBLING HOUSES. All gambling devices and slot machines.
(c) UNLICENSED SALES OF LIQUOR AND FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGES. All
Places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored,
brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by City
ordinances.
(d) CONTINUOUS VIOLATION OF CITY ORDINANCES. Any place or premises within the
City where City ordinances or State laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or
welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated.
Updated: 7/7/2011
(e) ILLEGAL DRINKING. Any place or premises resorted to for drinking intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverage in violation of State law or City ordinance
(f) DRUG OR CRIMINAL GANG HOUSE. Any building or structure that is used to facilitate
the delivery, distribution, or manufacture, as defined in s. 961.01(6), (9), and (13) respectively,
of a controlled substance, as defined in s. 961.01(4), or a controlled substance analog, as
defined in s. 961.01(4m), and any building or structure where those acts take place, is a public
nuisance and may be proceeded against under this section. Statutory reference Ch. 823, Wis.
Stats.
SEC. 11-7-6 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
(a) ENFORCEMENT. The Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Building Inspector, Community
Development Director, Public Health Director and Sanitarian shall enforce those provisions of
this chapter that come within the jurisdiction of their offices. They shall make periodic
inspections and inspections upon complaint to insure that such provisions are not violated. No
action shall be taken under this section to abate a public nuisance unless the officer shall have
inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and have
satisfied himself that a nuisance does in fact exist.
(b) SUMMARY ABATEMENT
(1) Notice to Owner. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on
private or public property and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health,
safety or peace, morals or decency, the Mayor may direct the Chief of Police to serve
notice on the person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance or upon the owner
or occupant of the premises where such nuisance is caused, permitted or maintained and to
post a copy of such notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant
or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove such
nuisance within five (5) days after service and posting and shall state that unless such
nuisance is so abated, the City will cause the same to be abated and will charge the cost
thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance.
(2) Abatement by the City. If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided or if the
owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the officer having the
duty of enforcement shall cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance.
(c) ABATEMENT BY COURT ACTION. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public
nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance does not threaten
immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall file a written
report of his findings with the Mayor, who, upon direction of the Council, shall cause an action to
abate such nuisance to be commenced in the City’s name in the Circuit Court in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 280, Wis. Stats. If a nuisance exists, the city may maintain an action in
the circuit court to abate the nuisance and to perpetually enjoin every person guilty of creating or
maintaining the nuisance, the owner, lessee, or tenant of the building or structure where the
nuisance exists and the owner of the land upon which the building or structure is located, from
continuing, maintaining, or permitting the nuisance.
(d) OTHER METHODS NOT EXCLUDED. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the abatement
of public nuisances by the City or its officials in accordance with State Law.
(e) COURT ORDER. Except when necessary under sub. (2), no officer hereunder shall use force to
obtain access to private property to abate a public nuisance but shall request permission to enter
upon private property if such premises are occupied, and, if permission is denied, shall apply to any
Court having jurisdiction for an order assisting the abatement of the public nuisance.
(f) JUDGMENT AND ORDER OF SALE OF PROPERTY
If the existence of the nuisance is established in an action under s. 832.113, an order of abatement
shall be entered as part of the judgment in the case. In the order, the court may do all the following:
(1) Direct the removal from the building or structure of all furniture, equipment, and other
personal property used in the nuisance.
(2) Order the sale of the personal property.
(3) Order the closure of the building or structure for any purpose.
(4) Order the closure of the building or structure until all building code violations are corrected
and a new certificate of occupancy is issued if required by the City and the building or
structure is released under s. 823.15 or sold under s. 823.115.
(5) Order the sale of the building or structure and the land upon which it is located or, if the
requirements under s. 66.05(1)(b) are met, order that the building or structure be razed, the
land sold, and the expense of razing collected under s. 823.06. Statutory reference s.
823.114 Wis. Stats.
SEC. 11-7-7 COST OF ABATEMENT.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by his chapter for the erection, contrivance, creation,
continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the City shall
be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such costs shall be assessed
against the real estate as a special charge.
SEC. 11-7-8 CHRONIC NUISANCE PREMISES.
(a) DEFINITIONS. The following terms shall be defined as follows in this subchapter.
1. Chief.
2.
The Chief of Police or his/her designee.
Enforcement Action.
3.
Arrest, the issuance of a citation, the issuance of a written or verbal
warning, or an order to abate a code violation.
Nuisance Activity. Any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct whenever engaged
in by property owners, operators, tenants, occupants, or persons associated with premises:
(a) An act of harassment, as defined in 947.013, Wis. Stats.
(b) Disorderly conduct, as defined in 947.01, Wis. Stats.
(c) Crimes of violence, as defined in Chapter 940, Wis. Stats.
(d) Obstructing or resisting an officer, as defined in 946.41, Wis. Stats.
(e) Crimes against sexual morality, as defined in Chapter 944, Wis. Stats.
(f) Any gambling crimes, as defined in Chapter 945, Wis. Stats.
(g) Animal violations, as defined in Chapter 7, City of Menasha Municipal Code.
(h) Theft, as defined in 943.20, Wis. Stats.
(i) Receiving stolen property, as defined in 943.34, Wis. Stats.
(j) Damage to property, as defined in 943. 01, Wis. Stats.
(k) Arson, as defined in 943.02, Wis. Stats.
(l) Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses, as
defined in Ch. 961, Wis. Stats.
(m)Trespassing, as defined in 943.13 and 943.14, Wis. Stats.
(n) Weapons violations, as defined in Chapter 11, City of Menasha Municipal Code.
(o) Noise violations, as defined in Chapter 11, City of Menasha Municipal Code.
(p) Alcohol violations, as defined in Chapter 11, City of Menasha Municipal Code and
125.07, Wis. Stats.
(q) Loitering and curfew violations, as defined in Chapter 11, City of Menasha Municipal
Code.
(r) Reckless driving, as defined in 346.62, Wis. Stats.
(s) Any conspiracy to commit, as defined in 939.31, Wis. Stats., or attempt to commit, as
defined in 939.32, Wis. Stats., any of the activities, behaviors, or conduct enumerated in
subsections (1) (c) a. through r. above.
(t) The execution of arrest or search warrants at a particular location.
(u) City of Menasha inspection-related calls where the Police Department responds.
(v) Violations of Fire and Safety Ordinances, as contained in Chapter 5, City of Menasha
Municipal Code.
(w)Violations of Public Nuisance Ordinances, as contained in Chapter 11, City of
Menasha Municipal Code.
(x) Violations of Building Code Ordinances, as contained in Chapter 15, City of Menasha
Municipal Code.
Exception. Applicable drug, gangs, and prostitution offenses will be abated immediately as allowed
in Chapter 823, Wis. Stats.
4. Owner.
5.
The owner of the premises and his/her agents.
Persons associated with.
6.
Any person who, whenever engaged in a nuisance activity, enters,
occupies, patronizes, visits or attempts to enter, occupy, patronize or visit a property.
Includes any officer, director, customer, agent, employee or independent contractor of
a property owner, tenant, or occupant.
Premises. An individual dwelling unit, an apartment building (all units included as one
premises), or an individual business premises and associated common areas located in the
City.
(b) Notice. Whenever the Chief determines that three or more nuisance activities resulting in
enforcement action have occurred at the premises during a 12-month period, the Chief may notify
the premises owner in writing. In calculating the requisite nuisance activities, the Chief may count
separate qualifying nuisance activities resulting in enforcement action occurring on the same day (as
long as they are distinct in time) or different days, but shall never count nuisance activities that were
reported by the owner of the premises. The notice shall contain the street address or legal
description sufficient to identify the premises, a description of the nuisance activities that have
occurred at the premises, a statement indicating that the cost of future enforcement may be assessed
as a special charge against the premises, and a notice as to the appeals rights of the owner.
(c) Delivery of Notice. The notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered if sent either by certified
mail to the property owner’s last known address, or if delivered in person to the property owner. If
the property owner cannot be located, the notice shall be deemed properly delivered if left at the
property owner’s usual place of residence in the presence of a competent family member at least 14
years of age, or a competent adult currently residing there and who shall be informed of the contents
of the notice. If a current address cannot be located, it shall be deemed sufficient if a copy of the
notice is sent by certified mail to the last known address of the owner as identified by the records of
the tax roll.
(d) Abatement Plan. Any owner receiving notice pursuant to section (2) and (3), shall meet with the
Chief, or his/her designee, within five business days of receipt of such notice. The parties shall
review the nuisance activities occurring at the property and agree upon an abatement plan to end the
nuisance activity on the property. The plan shall also specify a name, address, and telephone number
of a person living within 60 miles of the property who can be contacted in the event of further
police, fire, or inspection contact.
(e) Additional Nuisance Activity. Whenever the Chief determines that additional nuisance activity has
occurred at a premises not less than 15 business days after notice has been issued, and that
reasonable efforts have not been made to abate the nuisance activity, the Chief may calculate the
cost of response and enforcement, by City personnel, for this and any subsequent nuisance
activities. It shall also cause such charges and administrative costs to be assessed against the
premises as a fee for current service authorized by 61.34 and 66.0628, Wis. Stats and collected as a
special charge which the City may impose as a lien against the real estate upon which the premises
is located.
(f) Appeal. Appeal of the determination of the Chief of Police pursuant to either the notice, abatement
plan, or the levying of special charges may be made solely to the City Council requesting a hearing.
Notice of Appeal must be in writing and submitted to the City Council in care of the Mayor with a
copy submitted to the Chief of Police within five business days. Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin
Statutes does not apply to this ordinance.
(g) Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this subchapter shall be penalized
pursuant to Section 11-7-9, City of Menasha Municipal Code, in addition to imposition of a fee for
services constituting a special charge against the real estate imposed under section (5). Additionally,
the City may pursue injunctive relief against the owner in the Circuit Court in the applicable county.
All legal costs and attorney fees incurred by the City for enforcement of this Ordinance, pursuant to
any remedy available, shall be payable to the City by the owner of the premises. Judgment for such
obligations may be obtained by the City in either the Small Claims Court or Circuit Court for the
applicable county.
(h) Severability. If any portion of this Ordinance shall be deemed invalid or unconstitutional, the
remaining portions of the Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. Any invalid or
unconstitutional provision of this Ordinance as determined by a Court of law may be severed from
the Ordinance without affecting the validity or enforceability of the remaining provisions.
SEC. 11-7-9 PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
section 1-1-7 of this Code, in addition to the specific penalties provided in this chapter. Each day in
which a violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be a separate offense. This section shall not
preclude the City from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of this
chapter.
CHAPTER 1
Park Regulations
SEC. 12-1-1 PARK REGULATIONS.
(a) PURPOSE AND DEFINITION. In order to protect the parks, parkways, recreational facilities and
conservancy areas within the City from injury, damage or desecration, these regulations are enacted.
The term "park" as hereinafter used in this Chapter shall include all grounds, structures and
watercourses which are or may be located within any area dedicated to the public use as a park,
parkway, recreation facility or conservancy district in the City.
(b) SPECIFIC REGULATIONS.
(1) Littering. No person shall litter, dump or deposit any rubbish, refuse, earth or other material
in any park.
(2) Sleeping, Camping or Lodging in Parks. Sleeping, camping or lodging in parks is forbidden.
(3) Pets. Subject to the exceptions below, dogs, cats or other pets are prohibited in all City
parks, unless permitted by the Parks and Recreation Board.
a. Animals specifically trained to assist the disabled.
b. Dogs, cats or other pets owned by Marina renters or their guests are permitted
in the fenced-in area of the Menasha Marina.
c. Dogs, cats or other pets are allowed on the Friendship Trail, provided they are
on a leash not more than five feet long that is not retractable. The owner must
also comply with sec. 7 – 1 – 10 relating to animal feces.
d. No dogs shall be allowed on the Friendship Trail in Jefferson Park on July 4th
after 12 p.m. The Chief of Police or the Director of Parks and Recreation or
their respective designee may restrict dogs from the Friendship Trail in
Jefferson Park other times if an event is scheduled that could reasonably create
a conflict between the dogs and the persons attending the event.
e. Animals sponsored or owned by individuals of a petting display, pony ride,
animal show, obedience school, wedding ceremony, funeral, or any other event
deemed appropriate by the Parks and Recreation Board may be approved to be
in parks.
(4) Advertisement in the Parks. No person shall post, paste, fasten, paint or attach any placard,
target, banner, flag, bill, notice, sign or advertising matter upon any structure, tree or other
natural object in any park, except park regulations and other signs with the written
permission of the Parks and Recreation Board.
(5) Throwing Stones and Missiles. No person shall throw stones or other missiles in or into any
park.
(6) Removal of Park Equipment. No person shall remove benches, seats, tables or other park
equipment from any park.
(7) Trapping. No person shall trap in any park unless specific written authority is first obtained
from the Parks and Recreation Board.
(8) Making of Fires. No person shall start, tend or maintain a fire except in personal grills or
designated fireplaces. Personal grills shall be used only in designated picnic areas. The use
of personal grills is permitted provided lawns and vegetation are not endangered. Unburned
fuel and ashes shall be disposed of in such a manner as to prevent fire or damage to any park
property.
(9) Protection of Park Property. No person shall kill, injure or disturb or attempt to injure or
disturb waterfowl, birds or animals, wild or domestic, within any park, except as permitted
by this Chapter. No person shall climb any tree or remove flowers or fruit, wild or
cultivated, or break, cut down, trample upon, remove or in any manner injure, deface, write
upon or ill use any tree, shrub, flower, flower bed, turf, soil, sand, fountain, ornament,
building, structure, apparatus, bench, table, official notice, sign or other property within any
park, or shall hitch any animal to park trees.
(10) Motorized Vehicles. Except for authorized maintenance vehicles, no person shall operate an
unlicensed or licensed motorized vehicle outside of areas specifically designated as parking
areas or areas where the operation of such vehicles is specifically permitted. Motor vehicles
are restricted to the roads and drives and parking areas. No motor vehicles of any nature
may be used on the seeded areas except vehicles which have a permit for shows, rides or
exhibits and then only for the purpose of loading and unloading.
(11) Snowmobiles. No person shall operate a snowmobile in a City park, except for authorized
maintenance purposes.
(12) Speed Limit. No person shall operate any vehicle in a City park in excess of 15 m.p.h.
unless otherwise posted.
(13) Glass Beverage Bottles in Parks. No person shall bring into, carry onto or possess while in
any public park glass bottles or glass containers, including those containing or normally used
for containing soda water, fermented malt beverages or alcohol.
(14) Reckless Driving in Parks. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in a reckless manner in
any of the public parks of the City.
(15) Parking in Parks. No person shall park any motor vehicle in any park in the City except in a
designated parking area.
(16) Horse and Carriages. No person shall ride a horse or drive a horse-driven vehicle in any
park, except on roads or designated bridle paths, except when approval of the Parks and
Recreation Board is first obtained. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or drive
a horse-driven vehicle in a careless, negligent or reckless manner which may endanger the
safety and well-being of others.
(17) Removing Tree Protectors. No person shall remove any device for the protection of trees or
shrubs.
(18) Golfing and Sporting Activities. No golfing or practicing of golf in City parks or recreation
areas shall be allowed, except for miniature golf and other modified forms of the game
approved by the Park and Recreation Department.
(19) Arrows. No person shall use or shoot any bow and arrow or crossbow in any City park,
except in authorized areas.
(20) Firearms; Hunting. Possessing or discharging of any firearm or weapon of any kind is
prohibited in all City parks.
(21) Fish Cleaning. Cleaning of fish is prohibited in all City parks.
(22) Controlled Substances. Possessing, using or dispensing of a controlled substance in violation
of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act is prohibited in all City parks.
(23) Trespassing in Parks.
a. No person may be present in any City of Menasha park after an order
of eviction has been made by the Park Board.
b. Service of such order of eviction shall constitute the notice that the
person has been evicted from City of Menasha parks.
c. Any person who violates Sec. 12-1-1 (b)(23) shall upon conviction
forfeit not more than $500.
SEC. 12-1-2 RADIO-CONTROLLED MODEL AIRPLANES PROHIBITED IN
PARKS.
No person shall fly a radio-controlled model airplane or helicopter in any park in the City of
Menasha except in areas specifically designated and posed for such purpose.
SEC. 12-1-3 TURF PROTECTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
Except as authorized by the Common Council, no person shall dig into the turf of any Cityowned
property for any purposes whatsoever or remove any trees or flowers. Absent
authorization by the Parks and Recreation Board, the use of metal detectors and digging for
buried objects on City property, except beaches where no vegetation is present, is
prohibited.
SEC. 12-1-4 PARK HOURS.
(a) PARK HOURS. Subject to certain exceptions listed below, all City parks shall be
closed to persons from 11:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. the following day.
(b) EXCEPTIONS TO CLOSING HOURS.
(1) Persons launching or loading a boat at a public boat ramp or a public dock.
(2) A person driving through a park on a public road; however, stopping shall
not be permitted within a park.
(3) Organized groups who shall obtain a permit from the City of Menasha for
the use of any facility under the control of the Parks and Recreation Board.
(4) The Heckrodt Wetland Reserve shall be closed from 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
the following day, unless adjusted by the Heckrodt Board of Directors.
(5) The Municipal Beach shall be closed from 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the
following day.
(6) Hart Park shall be closed from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the following day.
(7) Scheduled games shall be allowed to continue at Koslo Park until 12:00 a.m.
(8) The Kaukauna Street Fountain, Main Street Fountain, Tayco Street Fountain,
and Curtis Reed Square shall have no closing hours.
(9) Any other exception specifically approved by the Parks and Recreation
Board
(c) PARK CLOSING AND OPENING DATES. The Parks and Recreation Board
will have full authority to open and close any park, beach, facility or area because of
season, condition, construction or when, in the interest of public safety, it is deemed
necessary.
SEC. 12-1-5 RESERVATION OF PARK SPACE.
(a) POLICY ON RESERVATION. The City-owned park and park facilities and
shelter areas are primarily for the nonexclusive use of the residents and visitors of
the City. However, under proper circumstances, exclusive use of the same or parts
thereof may be permitted. This Section is intended to regulate exclusive use of
municipally-owned parks, park facilities, park shelters or parts thereof in the City to
the end that the general welfare of the City is protected.
(b) RESERVATION OF PARK SPACE. A person or group, firm, organization,
partnership or corporation may reserve the use of a park facility or a park shelter by
written application filed with the Director of Parks and Recreation for a permit for
exclusive use of the same. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall issue permits
for exclusive use of a portion of a park or park shelter. The Parks and Recreation
Board shall issue permits for events planning to sell alcohol or fermented malt
beverages or for multi-day events. Park facilities may be reserved under policies
and procedures established by the Park and Recreation Board.
(c) APPLICATION. Applications shall be filed with the Parks and Recreation
Department pursuant to the policies established under sec. 12 – 1 – 5 (b).
(d) ACTION ON APPLICATION. The Parks and Recreation Board shall act on all
applications for permits for exclusive park use (not shelter use) after consulting with
the applicant, if necessary.
(e) REASONS FOR DENIAL. Applicants may be denied for any of the following
reasons:
(1) If it is for a use which would involve a violation of Federal or State law or
any provision of this Code.
(2) If the granting of the permit would conflict with another permit already
granted or for which application is already pending.
(3) If the application does not contain the information required by Subsection (c)
above.
(4) The application is made less than the required days in advance of the
scheduled exclusive use.
(5) If it is for a use of the park or park facility at a date and time when, in
addition to the proposed use, anticipated nonexclusive use by others of the
park or park facility is expected and would be seriously adversely affected.
(6) If the law enforcement requirements of the exclusive use will require so
large a number of persons as to prevent adequate law enforcement to the
park, park facility or shelter area involved or of the rest of the City.
(7) The exclusive use will reasonably create a substantial risk of injury to
persons or damage to property.
(8) The exclusive use is so poorly organized that participants are likely to
engage in aggressive or destructive activity.
(f) INDEMNIFICATION. Prior to granting any permit for exclusive use of the park,
the City may require the permittee to file evidence of good and sufficient sureties,
insurance in force or other evidence of adequate financial responsibility, running to
the City and such other third parties as may be injured or damaged, in an amount
depending upon the likelihood of injury or damage as a direct and proximate result
of the exclusive use sufficient to indemnify the City and such third parties as may be
injured or damaged thereby, caused by the permittee, its agents or participants.
(g) PERMIT NOT REQUIRED FOR CITY ACTIVITY. A permit is not required
for exclusive use of the park or a park facility sponsored by the City.
(h) PERMIT REVOCATION. The Director of Parks and Recreation and/or Chief of
Police after granting a permit may revoke a permit already issued if it is deemed that
such action is justified by an actual or potential emergency due to weather, fire, riot,
other catastrophe or likelihood of a breach of the peace or by a major change in the
conditions forming the basis of the issuance of the permit.
(i) FORM OF PERMIT. Each permit shall be in a form prescribed by the Parks and
Recreation Board and shall designate the park, park facility or shelter area involved,
date, hours of the exclusive use, purpose of the exclusive use and the name of the
person, group, firm, organization, partnership or corporation to which the permit is
issued.
(j) CLASS B FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGE LICENSES. When fermented
malt beverages are sold at any event authorized by this section, a valid Fermented
Malt Beverage license shall be obtained and the provisions of Sections 7-2-11 and
11-5-1 shall be fully complied with. Said license must be held by the person who
filed the original license and shall be presented to any law enforcement officer upon
request.
Cross Reference: Sections 7-2-11 and 11-5-1.
SEC. 12-1-6 FEES FOR RECREATION PROGRAMS; PARK USER FEES, BOAT
STALL USER FEES, AND CEMETERY USER FEES.
(a) RECREATION PROGRAM FEES, PARK USER FEES, BOAT STALL USER
FEES, AND CEMETERY USER FEES. On or before March 1 of each calendar
year the parks and Recreation Board shall recommend to the Common Council
certain fees for the parks and recreation programs, cemetery fees, and boat stall fees.
If the same fee is not amended by the Common Council, said fee shall stand. New
certification to the Common Council is not necessary the following years if the fees
remain unchanged.
SEC. 12-1-7 BATHING AND SWIMMING REGULATIONS.
(a) No person shall wade, bathe, or swim within a park, parkway, or trail including
trestles except at such pool or beach as is provided for that purpose by the Parks and
Recreation Board.
(b) No person shall wade, bathe, swim in, or attend at any such pool or beach without
proper bathing attire as prescribed by posted rules and regulations.
(c) Persons using the pool or beach are subject to rules and regulations of such pool or
beach.
SEC. 12-1-8 ACTIVITIES AT MUNICIPAL BEACH SITE REGULATED.
(a) CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED. No activities other than swimming or
wading shall be permitted in the defined area, nor may persons enter such area
except from the beachhead.
(b) AREA DEFINED. Said area shall be defined as commencing from a point where
the easterly extremities of the property line meets the water's edge, then proceeding
in a southerly direction (onto Lake Winnebago) approximately one hundred fifty
(150) yards from the shoreline and then continuing in a westerly direction
approximately one hundred fifteen (115) yards to a point. Then proceed in a
northerly direction to where the western extremities of the property line meet the
water's edge.
(c) BUOYS TO BE INSTALLED. The Parks and Recreation Department is charged
with the installation and obtaining of said buoys according to Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources specifications.
SEC. 12-1-9 ANIMALS IN PARKS.
(a) Under no condition shall the owner of any animal be allowed to have such animal in
the parks with or without a leash with the following exceptions:
(1) Animals in an enclosed motor vehicle.
(2) Animals specifically trained to assist the disabled.
(b) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the sponsorship of pet or hobby shows, dog
obedience schools and animal shows with permission from the Parks and Recreation
Board.
SEC. 12-1-10 AMPLIFYING SYSTEMS AND DEVICES REGULATED.
No voice or music amplifying system shall be permitted in any of the parks without a
permit from the Parks and Recreation Director. Where the Parks and Recreation Director
has issued a permit for any group or sports activity this shall include the use of any music or
voice amplifying equipment. Amplifier volume must be controlled so that the sound is not
objectionable beyond the confines of the park. Sound systems must be tuned not to be heard
beyond a distance of 20 feet from the source, including those contained in motor vehicles.
SEC. 12-1-11 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN CITY PARKS.
(a) PROHIBITED HOURS. No alcoholic beverages shall be brought into the parks of
the City of Menasha or consumed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Use and consumption of alcoholic beverages at other times shall be governed by the
provisions of Section 11-5-1(b) of this Code of Ordinances.
(b) USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED AT SMITH PARK.
The use, vending, and consumption of any beverage containing alcohol is hereby
prohibited in Smith Park and the buildings thereon.
Cross-Reference: Section 11-5-1(b).
SEC. 12-1-12 SELLING OF MERCHANDISE IN PARKS AND PUBLIC
GROUNDS.
(a) SALES AND SOLICITATION FOR SALES PROHIBITED WITHOUT
PERMIT. No person shall sell or offer for sale any service, food, refreshment,
article, merchandise or thing, nor solicit for or pursue any trade, occupation,
business or profession, within any park, without first obtaining a written permit
from the Director of Parks and Recreation or designee.
(b) RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Parks and Recreation Board is directed to
enact any and all reasonable rules and regulations to carry out the intent of this
Section. Park facility sponsorships through signage or other means of recognition
may be considered.
(c) EXCEPTIONS. This Section shall not apply when the Mayor permits the same
by issuing a proclamation in regard to an event of community-wide interest that
does not involve the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages.
(d) FEES. Fees for the permits described above shall be recommended by the Parks
and Recreation Board from time to time to the Common Council.
SEC. 12-1-13 MENASHA SKATE PARK AT HART PARK.
(a) Only non-motorized wheeled equipment permissible for use at Menasha Skate
Park at Hart Park shall include:
(1) skateboards
(2) bicycle
(3) in-line skates/roller blades
(4) roller skates
(5) roller shoes
(b) Smoking shall be prohibited within five yards of the concrete of the skate deck
SEC. 12-1-14 TRAILS.
(a) All rules and regulations contained in Sec. 12-1-1 through Sec. 12-1-13 shall
apply to all trails.
(b) Sec. 12-1-14 (a) shall not apply to:
(1) Domestic animals on leashes are allowed on trails except where
Friendship Trail proceeds through Jefferson Park.
(2) Skateboards, non-motorized scooters, roller blades, bicycles are permitted
on any trail.
(3) All trail systems shall be open as posted.
Updated: 7/14/2011
CHAPTER 2
Regulation of Boating and Navigable Waters
SEC. 12-2-1 STATE BOATING AND WATER LAWS ADOPTED.
(a) STATUTES ADOPTED. The statutory provisions describing and defining regulations with
respect to water traffic, boats, boating and related water activities and safety in the following
enumerated sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to
the penalties to be imposed or the punishment for violation of said Statutes, are hereby adopted
and by reference made a part of this Section. Any future amendments, revisions or
modifications of the following statutory provisions are intended also to be made part of this
Section.
30.50 Definitions
30.60 Classification of motorboats
30.635 Motorboat prohibition
30.64 Patrol boats exempt from certain traffic regulations
30.65 Traffic rules
30.66 Speed restrictions
30.67 Accidents and accident reporting
30.675 Distress signal flag
30.68 Prohibited operation
30.69 Water skiing
30.70 Sky diving
(b) DEFINITIONS. "Slow No Wake" is defined as the slowest possible speed so as to maintain
steerage.
SEC. 12-2-2 OPERATION OF BOATS AND VESSELS.
(a) MUFFLER REQUIRED. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to operate any motorboat within the corporate limits of the City of Menasha without
having a muffler attached to and actually in use upon the motor which is being operated on such
motorboat. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate any
motorboat with the cut-out open upon such motor and to operate any motorboat with any
unusual noise which tends to cause any disturbances to the public.
(b) SPEED RESTRICTIONS. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, drive, or use a
motorboat in any of the waters referred to in Subsection (d) below at a rate of speed in excess of
six (6) miles per hour.
(c) MANNER OF OPERATION. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or use a
motorboat on the waters referred to in Subsection (a) of this Section in a careless, negligent or
reckless manner so as to endanger the property or person of others.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, drive, or use a motorboat or personal watercraft at
a speed in excess of slow-no-wake speed on the following waterways:
Fox River in the City of Menasha, Wisconsin, starting at Buoy "100" reference no. chart 14916
- 7th Edition March 7, 1987, Buoy "100" concrete fixed aid to Navigation Flashing Red 4
Updated: 7/14/2011
seconds, 18 feet North latitude, 44 degrees, 50 minutes, 40 seconds, West longitude, 88 degrees,
25 minutes, 30 seconds, under and through the Racine Street Bridge, under and through the
Tayco Street Bridge, under and through the Soo Line Railroad Bridge and continuing onto the
Menasha Locks, North latitude 44 degrees, 12 minutes, 6 seconds, West longitude, 88 degrees,
27 minutes, 35 seconds. Exception to this slow-no-wake speed limit may only be granted by
the U.S. Coast Guard or Chief of Police.
(e) It shall be unlawful to operate a canoe, rowboat, or boat propelled by an outboard or inboard
motor on the waters located within the City with more passengers aboard than there are seats in
the boat, or with more passengers aboard than is reasonably safe for the welfare and safety of
such passengers.
(f) It shall be unlawful to loan or rent any canoe, rowboat, or boat propelled or capable of being
propelled by an outboard or inboard motor or allow the same to leave the place where it is
customarily kept with more persons aboard than there are seats in the boat, or with more
passengers aboard than is reasonably safe for the welfare and safety of such passengers.
SEC. 12-2-3 CONSTRUCTION OF BOAT STALLS; USER FEES.
(a) BOAT STALL USER FEES. The fee for all boat stall rentals owned and constructed by the
City in Jefferson or Smith Parks shall be set by the Park and Recreation Board and approved by
the Common Council. Collection of such fees shall be under the direction of the Parks and
Recreation Board.
(b) BOAT TRAILER PARKING FEE.
(1) Boat Trailer Parking. Persons who launch boats or other marine vehicles at public boat
launches in the City of Menasha shall be required to pay a fee for parking the boat or
other marine vehicle trailers either at the public parking lots, at the public boat launches
or on the public streets in and around the public boat launches.
(2) Fees Set. The fees for parking boat trailers at or around public boat launches shall be set
by the Park and Recreation Board and approved by the Common Council.
(3) Permits Attached. Daily permits must be displayed on the towing vehicle’s dashboard.
Seasonal permits must be displayed and affixed to the rear of the boat trailer
(4) When and Where Available. Daily permits will be available at all Menasha boat
launches. Seasonal permits will be available at City Hall during regular office hours.
(5) The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the authority to order that all seasonal
permits be affixed to boat trailers in a specific location and that all daily permits be
affixed to vehicles in a specific location. The failure of any person to comply with this
order makes the respective boat launch permit invalid. The Chief of Police shall be
required to attach these to all boat launch applications.
(6) Any person who fails to affix the boat launch permit properly or in the proper location
may be penalized as provided in Section 10-1-61 of the Menasha Ordinances.
SEC. 12-2-4 SWIMMING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN WATERS.
Swimming is prohibited in the Fox River in the City of Menasha and in waters known as the
Government Canal owned by the Mississippi Canal Company generally bordering Water Street except
for scuba diving pursuant to the following restrictions:
(a) All scuba divers must carry a current certification from a nationally accredited scuba diving
certification agency.
Updated: 7/14/2011
(b) Scuba diving shall be allowed only between December 1 and March 31.
(c) No one may scuba dive closer than five hundred (500) feet from any lock or dam.
(d) All persons intending to scuba dive must sign-in at the Menasha Police Department on each day
they dive under rules established by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
(e) Any items removed from any water must be taken away by the scuba diver who recovers such
item.
(f) Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Section shall be punished as provided in
Section 1-1-7 of these ordinances.
113094
1:1
CHAPTER 1
Zoning Code
ARTICLE A
Introduction
SEC. 13-1-1 AUTHORITY.
This Chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Sections 62.23(7) and 87.30 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and amendments thereto.
State Law Reference: Section 62.23(7), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 13-1-2 TITLE.
This Chapter shall be known as, referred to and cited as the "Zoning Code, City of Menasha,
Wisconsin" and is hereinafter referred to as the "Code" or "Chapter."
SEC. 13-1-3 GENERAL PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the comfort, health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics
and general welfare of the people of the City of Menasha, Wisconsin.
SEC. 13-1-4 INTENT AND PURPOSES IN VIEW.
The general intent and purposes in view of this Chapter are to regulate and restrict the use of all
structures, lands and waters and to:
(a) Promote and protect the comfort, public health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and
general welfare of the people;
(b) Divide the City into zones or districts restricting and regulating herein the location, erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings, structures and land for
residence, business and manufacturing and other specified uses;
(c) Protect the character and the stability of the residential, business, manufacturing and other
districts within the City and to promote the orderly and beneficial development thereof;
(d) Regulate lot coverage, the intensity of use of lot areas and the size and location of all
structures so as to prevent overcrowding and to provide adequate sunlight, air, sanitation and
drainage;
(e) Regulate population density and distribution so as to avoid sprawl or undue concentration
and to facilitate the provision of adequate public services, utilities and other public
requirements;
(f) Regulate parking, loading and access so as to lessen congestion in and promote the safety
and efficiency of streets and highways;
(g) Secure safety from fire, panic, flooding, pollution, contamination and other dangers;
113094
1:2
(h) Stabilize and protect existing and potential property values and encourage the most
appropriate use of land throughout the City;
(i) Preserve and protect the beauty of the City of Menasha;
(j) To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or
intended uses within specified zoning districts;
(k) To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures
which are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable development in each
district;
(l) Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation and other pollution of the surface and subsurface
waters;
(m) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful water conditions;
(n) Prevent flood damage to persons and property and minimize expenditures for flood relief
and flood control projects;
(o) Provide for and protect a variety of suitable commercial and industrial sites;
(p) Protect the traffic-carrying capacity of existing and proposed arterial streets and highways;
(q) Implement those municipal, county, watershed and regional comprehensive plans or
components of such plans adopted by the City of Menasha;
(r) Provide for the administration and enforcement of this Chapter; and to provide penalties for
the violation of this Chapter.
SEC. 13-1-5 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing
easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted
or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this Chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this Chapter shall govern.
SEC. 13-1-6 INTERPRETATION.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the City and shall not be construed to be a
limitation or repeal of any other power now possessed by the City of Menasha.
SEC. 13-1-7 SEVERABILITY AND NON-LIABILITY.
(a) If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be
affected thereby.
(b) If any application of this Chapter to a particular structure, land or water is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not be
applicable to any other structure, land or water not specifically included in said judgement.
(c) The City does not guarantee, warrant or represent that only those areas designated as
floodlands will be subject to periodic inundation and hereby asserts that there is no liability
on the part of the Common Council, its agencies or employees for any flood damages,
sanitation problems or structural damages that may occur as a result of reliance upon and
conformance with this Chapter.
113094
1:3
SEC. 13-1-8 REPEAL AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the City inconsistent or conflicting with this Chapter,
to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict only, are hereby repealed.
SEC. 13-1-9 The City of Menasha Year 2030 Comprehensive Plan establishes the goals,
objectives, and strategies that shall serve as a basis for this zoning ordinance. All
regulations or amendments adapted pursuant to this ordinance shall be generally
consistent with the City of Menasha Year 2030 Comprehensive Plan as adopted and
revised or updated. It is hereby determined that the City of Menasha Year 2030
Comprehensive Plan is consistent with and meets the requirements of sec. 66.1001
wis. Stats.
SEC. 13-1-10 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
081114
ARTICLE B
General Provisions
SEC. 13-1-10 JURISDICTION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(a) JURISDICTION. The jurisdiction of this Chapter shall apply to all structures, lands,
water, and air within the corporate limits of the City of Menasha.
(b) COMPLIANCE. No new structure, new use of land, water or air or change in the use of
land, water or air shall hereafter be permitted and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter
be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally
altered without a zoning permit and without full compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter and all other applicable local, county and state regulations.
(c) DISTRICT REGULATIONS TO BE COMPLIED WITH. Except as otherwise
provided, the use and height of buildings hereafter erected, converted, moved, enlarged or
structurally altered and the use of any land shall be in compliance with the regulations
established herein for the district in which such building or land is located.
(d) YARD REDUCTION OR JOINT USE. No lot, yard, parking area, building area or other
space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as not to meet the provisions of this Chapter.
No part of any lot, yard, parking area or other space required for a structure or use shall be
used for any other structure or use, unless in accordance with Sec. 13-1-51(b)(2)i and Sec.
13-1-51(f).
(e) ONE MAIN BUILDING PER LOT. Every building hereafter erected, converted,
enlarged or structurally altered shall be located on a lot and in no case shall there be more
that one (1) main building on one (1) lot.
(f) LOTS ABUTTING MORE RESTRICTIVE DISTRICT. Any side yard, rear yard or
court abutting a district boundary line shall have a minimum width and depth in the less
restricted district equal to the average of the required minimum widths and depths for such
yards and courts in the two (2) districts which abut the district boundary line.
SEC. 13-1-11 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
(a) INTENT. It is recognized that an increasing number of new kinds of uses are appearing
daily and that many of these possess characteristics of such unique and special nature
relative to location, design, size, method of operation, circulation and public facilities that
each specific use must be considered individually.
(b) HOW DETERMINED. In granting a special use permit, the Common Council shall
consider the advice and recommendation of the Plan Commission and the effect of the
proposed use on the comprehensive plan and upon the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of occupants of surrounding lands. Among other things, the Plan Commission shall
consider the following findings where applicable:
(1) The use shall be compatible with adjacent land uses so that existing uses will not be
depreciated in value, and there will be no deterrents to development of vacant land;
(2) The use shall have an appearance that will not have an adverse effect upon adjacent
properties;
(3) The use shall be reasonably related to the overall needs of the City and to existing
land use patterns;
(4) The use will not cause traffic hazards or congestion; and
081114
(5) The use shall have adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary
facilities.
(c) SPECIAL CONDITIONS. In granting a special use permit, the Common Council may
impose additional conditions as recommended by the Plan Commission that are necessary
to protect the best interests of the surrounding area or the community as a whole. These
conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension;
(2) Limiting the height, size or location of buildings;
(3) Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points;
(4) Increasing the street width;
(5) Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces;
(6) Limiting the number, size, location or lighting of signs;
(7) Requiring additional fencing, screening, landscaping or other facilities to protect
adjacent or nearby property;
(8) Designating sites for open space; and
(9) Establishing time limits for compliance.
(d) PROCEDURE. The procedure for obtaining a special permit is as follows:
(1) The property owner or his agent shall meet with the Department of Community
Development to explain his proposal and learn whether the proposed use may be
permitted and what special requirements or standards shall be met. The applicant
shall also obtain an application form.
(2) The applicant shall file the completed application form with the Department of
Community Development and shall pay a filing fee as established by the Common
Council.
(3) Within 30 days of receipt of the application, the Department of Community
Development shall schedule an informal public hearing to be held before the Plan
Commission and shall also schedule a formal public hearing before the Common
Council. Prior to the formal public hearing, a Class Two (2) notice as provided in
Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall be published in the official newspaper
of the City of Menasha. Owners of all properties lying within one hundred (100)
feet of the proposed special use shall be notified of the public hearing via regular
mail.
(4) After holding the informal public hearing, the Plan Commission shall make a
recommendation to the Council.
(5) Following the formal public hearing and after careful consideration of the Plan
Commission's recommendations, the Common Council shall vote to grant or deny
the special use permit.
(e) REVOCATION.
(1) All special use permits shall be automatically revoked one (1) year after being
granted by Common Council action if the holder thereof does not implement the
permit. Implementation of a permit shall consist of:
a. Obtaining a building permit for a use granted by such special permit; or
b. If a building permit is not required, any action by the holder of a special
permit to implement such permit. If necessary, the Common Council shall
determine whether such action is acceptable and in good faith.
(2) Thirty (30) days prior to the automatic revocation of such permit, the Department of
Community Development shall notify the holder of the permit, by registered or
certified mail, that the permit will be revoked in thirty (30) days.
081114
SEC. 13-1-12 SITE PLANS REQUIRED.
(a) Intent. For the purpose of promoting compatible development, stability of property
values, enhancement of safety and to prevent impairment or depreciation of property
values, no person shall commence any multifamily, commercial or industrial use, or erect
any structure or change the occupancy of any structure, without first obtaining approval of
detailed site, architectural and landscaping plans, as set forth in this section, prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
(b) Review. The Plan Commission shall review site, architectural, lighting and landscaping
plans for the following activities within each zoning district:
(1) R-1A, R-1 Single Family and R-2 Two-Family Residence Districts
a. Any proposed use that is listed as requiring site plan approval or a special
use permit.
(2) R-2A, R-3 and R-4 Multi-Family Residence Districts
a. Any proposed new construction 3 units or greater.
b. Any proposed use that is listed as requiring site plan approval or a special
use permit.
c. Any proposed addition or expansion to a non-conforming lot, structure, or
use.
(3) C-1 General Commercial, C-2 Central Business District, C-3 Business and Office,
C-4 Business Park, I-1 Heavy Industrial, and I-2 General Industrial District
Districts
a. Any proposed new construction.
b. Any proposed use that is listed as requiring site plan approval or a special
use permit.
c. Any proposed addition or expansion to a non-conforming lot, structure, or
use.
(4) R-MH Residential Mobile home District
a. Any proposed mobile home park.
b. Any change or expansion to an existing mobile home park.
(c) Procedure and Requirements. All site plans shall be submitted according to the
policies, procedures, and requirements outlined in the City of Menasha Site Plan Review
Guide.
(d) General. Site development shall be compatible with existing or permissible adjacent or
surrounding development, street layout and traffic flow.
(e) Site Design.
(1) Ingress/Egress and Driveways. The design of all driveways and points of
ingress/egress shall conform to the requirements of Section 13-1-51.
(2) Parking and Loading. All off-street parking and loading shall conform to the
requirements of Sections 13-1-50 and 13-1-51. Off- street parking shall be
arranged for convenient access and safety of pedestrians, bicycles and vehicles.
(3) Fire Protection. A plan for site access shall be provided including the location of
fire hydrants, the location, width and turning radii of access drives and the type of
building for fire protection purposes.
(4) Truck Docks and Loading Areas. All buildings shall be constructed and located
such that the Fire Department can have access around the building during the
entire year.
081114
(5) Storage of Waste and Trash. Except on through lots, waste and trash receptacles
shall not be located in the front or street side yard, and shall be screened from
view enclosed by a fence or solid material, or by a combination of the fencing and
landscaping, and shall comply with the following standards:
a. The screening shall be at least six (6) feet in height.
b. Screening shall accomplish 75% opacity at the time of installation and
shall accomplish the desired screening throughout the year.
(6) Other Screening. Where it is deemed appropriate or desirable to install screening
to restrict view and/or absorb noise, the Plan Commission may require any of the
following:
a. Additional planting materials.
b. Fencing.
c. A berm. The slope of the berm shall not exceed 33% (3:1).
(f) Architectural Design and Materials.
(1) Architectural Design Plan Submittals. An architectural design plan (to scale) must
be submitted. It shall include all building elevations with dimensions, entrances,
architectural features and building materials and colors.
(2) General. Building design shall complement the building site and be compatible
with existing or permissible adjacent or surrounding buildings and development.
Building design shall be compatible with existing and proposed adjacent routes of
circulation for vehicles and pedestrians. All side and rear elevations shall be given
architectural treatment compatible with the front elevation of the building.
(3) Walls. No building shall have long expanses of uniform and flat walls. Buildings
shall have material and architectural changes in the vertical and horizontal plane.
Reasonable articulation of building facades shall be provided by using offsets,
recesses and/or projections, changes in plane, changes in height, windows,
awnings, arcades and/or colonnades. Use of awnings shall be limited to above
windows and entrances. Awnings shall be attached to a vertical wall. All sides of
a building that are open to public view from any street or highway shall receive
equivalent architectural design consideration.
(4) Roofs. No building shall have long expanses of uniform roof planes. Reasonable
articulation of roof lines shall be provided by using a pitched roof, a partial roof,
or parapet walls of varying heights, dormers, overhangs, arches, stepped roofs,
gables, or other similar devices. All flat roofs shall be screened with parapets on
all sides of the building. If no roof top equipment exists, the parapet shall be a
minimum of 18 inches high. All parapets shall feature cornice treatments and shall
provide a cap to demonstrate that the upper edge is the top of the building.
(5) Roof Equipment. The placement of rooftop mechanical equipment is discouraged.
If roof mounted mechanical equipment is necessary, it shall be screened from
view on all sides. Acceptable screening shall be accomplished by raising the
parapet on all sides of the building to be as high as the equipment, or a secondary
roof screening system that encloses groups of units. Screens shall be aesthetically
incorporated into the design of the building and have materials that are compatible
with the building. In no case shall wooden or vinyl fences, or chain-link fencing
with slats be used as rooftop equipment screens.
081114
(6) Ground Equipment. Ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened
from view with wing walls, landscaping, or a combination of both. Wing walls or
other structure used for the screening of ground equipment, shall be made with
like material to the principal structure.
(7) Customer/Public Entrances. Customer and public entrances shall be designed with
one or more of the following: canopy, overhang or arch above entrance, recess or
projection in the building facade surrounding the entrance, peaked roof, and raised
parapet structure over the door or other enhancement.
(8) Building Materials for New Construction.
a. Commercial Zoning District. Commercial or mixed use buildings within
the commercial zoning districts (C-_) shall be constructed of durable high
quality materials such as brick, stone, and decorative concrete. When
applying these materials, consideration shall be given to the use, quantity,
placement and relationship of each material as part of a comprehensive
building facade that incorporates a palette of building materials and
design.
1. The primary building façade material shall be a minimum of 50%
of the following: stone, brick, decorative concrete, brick veneer, or
stone veneer.
2. Buildings within the Central Business District (C-2) shall be
constructed of 75% stone, brick, decorative concrete, brick veneer,
or stone veneer.
3. Multifamily structures shall follow the residential district
requirements below under subsection (c).
4. The following materials shall not cover more than 25% of any
building façade: vinyl, EFIS, and/or corrugated metal or other
similar metal siding.
b. Industrial Zoning Districts. The bottom eight (8) feet of an industrial
building façade shall be stone, brick, decorative concrete, brick veneer, or
stone veneer on any side of the building fronting upon or open to view
from a public space or right-of-way.
1. An industrial parcel that has an office building 10,000 square feet
or more and meets commercial façade standards may, upon review
of the Plan Commission, have the industrial façade standards
waived.
2. Decorative precast panels and split face block shall be given
preference over metal siding and the like.
c. Residential Districts. Multifamily Residential Buildings with more than 2
units and/or Institutional buildings within residential districts (R-_) shall
use the following façade standards:
1. The building’s façade material shall be a minimum of 25% of the
following: stone, brick, decorative concrete, brick veneer, or stone
veneer. The following materials shall not cover more than 25% of
any building façade: vinyl, EFIS, and/or corrugated metal or other
similar metal siding.
d. PUD, R-MH, and TND zoning district materials. See Applicable Sections.
e. Use of EIFS. EIFS shall not be allowed on the bottom 6 feet of a building.
f. Secondary Façade Materials. Secondary façade materials may be used for
architectural details or enhancements. Such materials shall be high
081114
quality, durable, and not cover more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
building façade for all districts except the I-1 and I-2 districts. All
secondary materials shall be approved by the Plan Commission.
(9) Building Materials for Existing Structures.
1. The primary façade materials for all new additions to existing
buildings shall meet the requirements of a new structure as stated
above. The Plan Commission may consider the use of alternative
façade materials that are durable and of high quality for such
additions or expansions. The considerations for such alternative
materials shall be limited to the following criteria:
(a) Compatibility with the building materials and architecture
of the existing structure.
2. Secondary façade materials may be used for architectural details or
enhancements. Such materials shall be high quality, durable, and
not cover more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the building
façade. All secondary materials shall be approved by the Plan
Commission.
3. Exterior alterations including the replacement of existing siding or
other wall coverings or coatings, and the installation of new or
replacement windows, doors or other architectural features shall
meet the following criteria and require approval by the Community
Development Department:
(a) The new or replacement materials shall be of the same type
as used in the original construction, except that the
Community Development Department may require the use
of other durable, high quality materials if it determines that
the original materials are no longer commercially available
or have less than a 30-year durability rating. Such durability
shall be determined based on the manufacturer’s guarantee.
(b) The Community Development Department may require the
use of one or more of the following to be applied in
conjunction with the proposed exterior alteration:
1) The use of a secondary building material
2) The use of secondary colors
3) The use of materials with varying textures
4) The use of architectural embellishments
5) The use of façade modulation
(c) In commercial and residential districts, corrugated metal
panel and the like are less desirable materials and shall not
be allowed to be replaced with new metal panel on existing
buildings. Other durable high quality materials will be
approved by the Community Development Department for
the replacement of existing metal panel or the like.
b. Campus Setting. For new buildings in an existing campus setting the
primary façade materials for new buildings shall follow the guidelines of
the applicable zoning district. The Plan Commission may allow other
materials that are durable and of high quality. The consideration of such
alternative materials shall be limited to the following standards and
criteria:
081114
1. Compatibility with the common design theme of the campus.
2. Compatibility with the architecture and building materials
exhibited by other buildings in the campus.
3. Materials shall have a minimum of a 30 year durability rating as
determined by the manufacturer’s guarantee.
(10) Chain or Franchise Design. Chain or franchise design, characterized by large
logos and/or colors used over large expanses of a building or other building
formats incorporating trademarked or brand-identified design features may be
disapproved by the Plan Commission if found to be in conflict with local
architectural composition, character, vernacular, and historic context.
(11) Large Buildings. On large buildings, 3 stories or greater or 30,000 square feet, the
Plan Commission may consider the use of alternative durable high quality façade
materials.
(12) Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall be given compatible architectural
treatment to the principal structure.
(13) All façade material calculations shall be made less the façade’s glazed area.
(g) Landscaping Design and Materials
(1) Landscape Plan Submittals. A landscape plan (to scale) must be submitted. It shall
include details of all proposed landscaping, buffering and screening, including the
estimated costs. The landscape plan shall be prepared by a landscape professional
and shall show the location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures, parking, drives, rights-of-way, and any other permanent features, and
the following landscape information:
a. A plant list, with estimated costs, and a coverage chart showing the
location, quantity, size (at time of planting and at maturity), spacing, and
common names of all landscape materials used.
b. The location and type of existing trees over four inches in diameter
(measured six inches above the ground) within the area to be developed.
c. The location and percent slope of all proposed berms (using one-foot
contours).
d. Other information as stated in the Site Plan Review Guide.
(2) General. The following minimum landscape area per district shall apply:
District Minimum Landscaped Area
Special Uses in the R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, R-
3, R-4 districts
20%
R2A 25%
R-3 20%
R-4 20%
C-1 15%
C-2 5%
C-3 20%
C-4 20%
I-1 5%
I-2 5%
PUD See Section 13-1-33
R-MH See Article H
TND See Section 13-1-38
081114
(3) Landscaping Adjacent to Buildings. A landscaped buffer not less than three feet in
width shall be provided at the base of the principal building facing a public street
or parking exposure. At least 50 percent of building perimeter landscaping shall
be landscaped utilizing plant materials other than turf. Plant materials shall be
comprised of a minimum of 25 percent evergreens but no more than 50 percent
evergreens.
(4) Perimeter Landscaping. The front setback area shall be landscaped except for
points of ingress and egress approved by the Plan Commission. At least one
canopy tree, not less than 1.5 inch caliper shall be provided for every 35 linear feet
along the perimeter of the site adjacent to the street. (This provision may be
waived by the Plan Commission if the site is already wooded.) At least 25 percent
of the perimeter area shall be landscaped utilizing plant material other than turf.
Plant materials shall be comprised of a minimum of 25 percent evergreens but no
more than 75 percent evergreens.
(5) Parking Lot Landscaping.
a. Perimeter Screening. All parking lots adjacent to a street shall provide a
landscaped buffer along the street not less than 8 feet in width. At least
one canopy tree, not less than 1.5 inch caliper and five shrubs shall be
provided for every 30 linear feet within the perimeter. Shrubs shall be
maintained to a height of not less than three feet and shall be comprised of
a minimum of 50 percent evergreens. The perimeter screening may be
combined with the perimeter landscaping requirement in sub(4) above
provided, however, that plantings of this section are required.
b. Interior Landscaping Areas. Parking lots 5,000 square feet or larger shall
provide interior landscaping areas totaling not less than 10 percent of the
parking area. Interior landscaping areas may include landscape islands,
landscape peninsulas or planting strips. Each such area must be a
minimum area of 100 square feet and shall contain at least one canopy tree
not less than 1.5 inch caliper, plus shrubs and/or groundcover. Turf is
prohibited. Landscaped areas shall be protected by curbing or other means
approved by the Plan Commission. Landscaped areas shall provide a
minimum of 30 inches for vehicle overhang.
(6) Bio-retention Devices. Perimeter and Parking Lot landscaping requirements
pertaining to planting as enumerated in subsections (4) and (5) may be
supplanted, in whole or in part, by landscaping contained in bio-retention
devices if the following requirements are met:
a. Plantings contained in bio-retention devices are designed by a landscaping
professional, reviewed and approved by Plan Commission as part of the
overall landscape plan.
b. Plant materials shall reflect varying heights, textures, species, and seasonal
color, and be designed such that plantings look neat and orderly. Plantings
used for the purpose of parking lot screening shall be maintained to a
height of at least 3 feet above the finished grade at the parking lot when
fully mature.
c. Applicable requirements pertaining to the number and spacing of canopy
trees may be modified only if accommodation of the bio-retention device
expressly prohibits installation of the required amount or spacing of trees.
d. Such devices must be a permitted stormwater management practice, as
081114
approved by the Department of Public Works.
(h) Outdoor Lighting.
(1) Lighting Plan Submittals. A lighting plan is required for all areas containing
outdoor lighting, including, but not limited to, floodlighting, security lighting,
event lighting or the lighting of off-street parking and loading areas. Such plan
shall become an integral part of any site plan review application. No building
permit shall be issued without first obtaining approval of a required lighting plan.
The details of exterior lighting shall show the location and dimensions of all
existing and proposed structures, parking, drives, rights-of-way, and any other
permanent features, and the following lighting information:
a. Photometric calculations shall be detailed on an exterior lighting plan
unless waived by the Community Development Director. Photometric
calculations shall be based on the “mean’ light output per the
manufacturer’s values of the specified lamp and luminaire photometry data
formatted on Illumination Engineering Society (I.E.S.) file compiled by an
approved testing laboratory. The details provided for exterior lighting
shall include point-to-point photometric calculations at intervals of not
more than ten (10) feet, at ground level, and may also be required at six (6)
feet above ground level, depending on the applicable risk factors.
(2) General. Site lighting shall be designed to provide adequate illumination of
driveways, parking areas, pedestrian paths, building entrances and other areas to
promote public safety and prevent the glare of light on adjacent properties.
(3) Lighting Standards – Configuration, Pole Height and Timing.
a. All exterior lighting shall be of full cutoff design and directed downward
and away from adjoining property, with luminaires shielded to prevent
glare.
b. Trees and shrubs shall not interfere with the distribution of exterior
lighting necessary for security purposes as required by this section.
c. Security lighting above building entrances, parking lots, off-street loading
areas and service entrances shall have a Color Rendition Index (CRI) of 50
or higher, and be incorporated in exterior areas going to and from the
building(s) or use(s) within the site.
d. All exterior fixtures, when used for security purposes, except for parking
lot lighting, shall be illuminated from dusk until dawn, unless otherwise
specifically designated on the site plan and as approved through the site
plan process. All other exterior lighting that is not necessary for security
purposes shall be turned off one (1) hour after the close of business.
e. Any exterior lighting device designed for security lighting shall be
protected by weather and vandal-resistant covering, a managed light
source for controlling the times of illumination and fully shielded and
directed down to minimize glare and intrusiveness on adjacent properties
or rights-of-way.
f. Lighting in multi-level parking ramps shall be evaluated on a case-by-case
basis to maximize safety and to minimize unnecessary glare to adjacent or
081114
nearby residential areas.
g. Pole height shall not exceed the height of the principal building, or twentyfive
feet, whichever is less.
h. Lighting poles or luminaires may not be placed in Transitional Areas.
Poles exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height shall have a minimum setback
of thirty (30) feet where the parcel abuts a residential district or use.
(4) Minimum Illumination Guidelines – Security Lighting. All minimum illumination
guidelines for security lighting listed in this section shall be maintained from
ground level to a height of six (6) feet. The minimum to maximum uniformity
ratio may range up to 6:1 in acceptable layouts. In some circumstances, customer
convenience, closed-circuit surveillance, and commercial entertainment uses may
require a higher level of lighting.
(5) Outdoor Lighting Intensity Standards. When outdoor lighting is proposed or
required, the following standards in the table on the following page shall apply
and the “activities” as described in the table shall be assigned and evaluated by the
Menasha Police Department and Community Development Department based on
the type of use, the hours of operation and the area in which the use is located.
Light Use Minimum
Horizontal
Foot-Candles
Maximum
Horizontal
Foot-Candles
Additional Regulations
Parking Lot 0.5 5.0
(1) Areas used for parking or vehicle
storage shall be illuminated in
accordance with the requirements for
parking lot lighting.
(2) Parking lot lighting shall have a Color
Rendition Index (CRI) of 50 or higher.
Outdoor display
and sales
- 5.0 -
Canopies and drive
through facilities
5.0 20.0
(1) Luminaires mounted on or under
canopy ceilings shall be full cutoff,
unless indirect lighting is used
whereby light is directed upward and
then reflected down from the ceiling of
the structure. In this case, luminaires
must be shielded so that direct
illumination is focused exclusively on
the ceiling of the structure.
(2) Parking lot lights shall not be
mounted on the top or sides of a
canopy and the sides of a canopy shall
not be internally illuminated. Canopy
sides may, however, utilize full-cutoff
downlighting.
081114
(3) Lighting for drive-through facilities
must be fully shielded.
(4) Canopy and bay lighting shall have a
Color Rendition Index (CRI) of 50 or
higher
Outdoor activity
facility
All outdoor entertainment or recreational/sports facility lighting will be
reviewed for compliance with minimum site lighting criteria and light trespass
criteria and with regard to the intent of these exterior lighting standards to
minimize the impact of light trespass and glare on all surrounding properties
and public rights-of-way.
High Risk Activity
(e.g. bank deposit
night drop or ATM)
4.0 5.0
Lighting shall have a Color Rendition
Index (CRI) of 50 or higher
Medium Risk
Activity (e.g.
convenience store
open 24 hours)
2.0 4.0
Lighting shall have a Color Rendition
Index (CRI) of 50 or higher
Low Risk Activity
(e.g. place of
worship, office)
0.5 2.0
Lighting shall have a Color Rendition
Index (CRI) of 50 or higher
(6) Light Trespass. All areas containing outdoor lighting (except public street
lighting) shall limit light trespass onto adjacent property, when measured at any
point along a property line, to the requirements set forth below. Compliance shall
be achieved by utilizing fixture shielding, directional control designed into
fixtures, fixture location, height, or aim or a combination of these or other factors.
District Adjoining Subject Property
Maximum Light Spillage to Adjoining
Lots Measured in Foot-Candles
A-1, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4,
PUD, R-MH, TND
0.20
C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, I-1, I-2 0.50
(7) Exterior Illumination of Buildings and Other Vertical Structures. When buildings
or other structures are illuminated, the design for the illumination shall be in
accordance with the following:
a. The illumination of buildings shall be limited to security lighting or
highlighting unique architectural features.
b. Luminaries shall be located and/or aimed such that light is directed only
onto the building surface. All luminaries used to illuminate buildings shall
be fully shielded.
c. For statues, monuments, fountains, or other objects for which it may not
be possible to illuminate with downward lighting, upward lighting may be
used only in the form of spotlights that confine the illumination to the
object of interest.
d. If upward lighting is used to illuminate flags, only spotlights shall be used;
floodlights directed above the horizontal shall not be used to illuminate a
flag.
081114
(8) Neon Lighting. Light sources consisting of glass tubes filled with neon, argon,
krypton, or other similar gas (hereafter referred to as “neon lighting”) are excluded
from shielding and line-of-sight requirements. However such lighting shall be
included in the light trespass requirements of 13-1-12(h)(6). Furthermore, neon
lighting shall not be considered as security lighting.
(9) Other Outdoor Lighting.
a. Outdoor lighting not otherwise specified in this code emitting more than
one thousand two hundred (1,200) lumens (except motion detector
activated lighting) shall be full cutoff and fully shielded. Bulbs in outdoor
luminaries emitting from six hundred (600) to one thousand two hundred
(1,200) lumens may be installed in luminaries that are not full cutoff and
may be visible from the property line provided, however, such bulbs shall
be frosted glass or covered by frosted glass or other similarly translucent
material.
b. A spotlight or floodlight of less than one thousand eight hundred (1,800)
lumens need not be full cutoff or fully shielded if its center beam is aimed
at a point not beyond any property lines and no less than forty-five degrees
(45º) below horizontal, is used for security lighting purposes only, and is
motion detector activated and cycles off within five (5) minutes after the
cessation of motion within its field of view.
c. Tower or antenna lighting except those owned or operated by a
governmental entity, shall not be permitted unless required by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA).
(10) Exceptions.
a. The temporary use of low wattage or low voltage lighting for approved
festivals, celebrations, and the observance of holidays are exempt from
this section except where they create a hazard or nuisance from glare.
b. Consideration to light trespass requirements shall be demonstrated prior to
commencing the use of the temporary lighting.
c. Emergency lighting, public street lighting and traffic control lighting shall
be exempt from the requirements of this section.
(11) Removal pursuant to public order. Lighting found by a governmental agency to
create public hazard can be ordered removed or altered.
(i) Approval. Each site, architectural, landscaping, and lighting plan shall be approved by
the Plan Commission. Each approved plan shall bear the signature of the Director of
Community Development or his/her designee along with the date of approval. The
Director of Community Development may authorize plant substitution or minor changes
to the landscaping plan. Each approved site plan shall be numbered and filed with the
City Department of Community Development. Any conditions of approval shall be met
before issuance of a building permit.
(j) Site Improvement Agreement. As a condition of approval, the landowner shall enter
into a Site Improvement Agreement with the City, containing the following provisions:
a. Identifying the approved site plan.
b. Identifying the approved landscaping plan.
c. Identifying the estimated cost of required site improvements for parking,
081114
access, sidewalks, landscaping and plants, and other required
improvements.
d. Providing for a completion date for all activities.
e. Providing for reasonable and regular maintenance and replacement of
plantings necessitated by death or disease.
f. Providing for the submittal of an as-built landscaping plan after
installation.
g. Providing for a financial guarantee in the form of a cash escrow deposit
with the City, or a letter of credit for the benefit of the City and in the
name of the City in an amount not to exceed the estimated costs of the
required improvements including landscaping and plant costs, for a term
commensurate with the completion date plus:
i. Three additional months, for parking, access, sidewalks for
the purpose of ensuring that required improvements will be
timely completed.
ii. One additional year for landscaping activities, for the
purpose of ensuring that required landscaping will be
timely completed and failed plantings will be replaced.
(k) Compliance. Failure to comply with an approved site, architectural, landscaping or
lighting plan shall be deemed an ordinance violation.
SEC. 13-1-13 SITE REGULATIONS.
(a) SITE SUITABILITY. No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is
unsuitable for such use or structure by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate
drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography, or low bearing strength,
erosion susceptibility or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety,
prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of this community.
(b) STREET FRONTAGE. All lots shall abut upon a public street or other officially
approved means of access, and each lot shall have a minimum frontage of twenty-five (25)
feet.
(c) PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES. All principal structures shall be located on a lot. Only one
(1) principal structure shall be located, erected or moved onto a lot. The Common Council
may permit as a conditional use more than one (1) principal structure per lot in any district
where more than one (1) such structure is needed for the orderly development of the parcel.
Where additional structures are permitted, the Common Council, subject to the
recommendation of the Plan Commission, may impose additional yard requirements,
landscaping requirements or parking requirements, or require a minimum separation
distance between principal structures.
(d) DEDICATED STREET. No zoning permit shall be issued for a lot which abuts a public
street dedicated to only a portion of its proposed width and located on that side thereof from
which the required dedication has not been secured.
(e) LOTS ABUTTING MORE RESTRICTIVE DISTRICTS. Lots abutting more
restrictive district boundaries shall provide side and rear yards not less than those required
in the more restrictive abutting district. The street yard setbacks in the less restrictive
district shall be modified for a distance of not less than sixty (60) feet from the more
restrictive district boundary line so such street yard setbacks shall be no less than the
average of the street yards required in both districts.
(f) SITE SUITABILITY. No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is held
081114
unsuitable for such use or structure by the Common Council and Plan Commission by
reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation,
unfavorable topography, low percolation rate or bearing strength, erosion susceptibility or
any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, prosperity, aesthetics and general
welfare of this community. The Plan Commission, in applying the provisions of the
Section, shall, in writing, recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that
the land is not suitable for certain uses. The applicant shall have an opportunity to present
evidence contesting such unsuitability if he so desires. Thereafter, the Plan Commission
may affirm, modify or withdraw its determination of unsuitability when making its
recommendation to the Common Council.
(g) PRESERVATION OF TOPOGRAPHY. In order to protect the property owner from
possible damage due to change in the existing grade of adjoining lands and to aide in
preserving and protecting the natural beauty and character of landscape, no change in the
existing topography of any land shall be made which would result in increasing any portion
of the slope to a ratio greater than one and one-half (1-1/2) horizontal to one (1) vertical,
within a distance of twenty (20) feet from the property line, except with the written consent
of the owner of the abutting property and with the approval of the Plan Commission, or
which would alter the existing drainage or topography in any way as to adversely affect the
adjoining property. In no case shall any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the
material involved, and all slopes shall be protected against erosion.
(h) SHORELAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT.
1) Shoreland Jurisdictional Area
This subsection shall apply to lands lying within the following distances of navigable
waters, as defined under Sec. 281.31(2)(d) Wisconsin Statutes:
a) One thousand feet from a pond , lake or flowage. If the navigable water is a
glacial pothole lake, this distance shall be measured from the high water mark of
the lake.
b) Three hundred feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the
floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
This subsection shall not apply to an artificially constructed drainage ditch, pond, or
storm water retention basin if the drainage ditch, pond, or retention basin is not
hydrologically connected to a natural navigable body of water.
2) Use and Development Standards
a) For parcels within the corporate boundaries of the City of Menasha prior to
May 8, 1982 the following standards shall apply within the R-1, R-1A, R-2, and
R-2A, zoning districts:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high-water mark.
b) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the following
standards shall apply within all zoning districts:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
081114
whichever distance is greater.
2) Maintenance of shoreland vegetation: Except as provided in subd. a &
b, on properties containing vegetation a vegetative buffer zone shall be
maintained along the entire shoreline and extending 35 feet inland from
the ordinary high-water mark of the navigable water.
a) If the vegetation in the vegetative buffer zone contains invasive
species or dead or diseased vegetation, the owner of the shoreland
property may remove the vegetation, except that if the owner
removes all of the vegetation in the vegetative buffer zone , the
owner shall establish a vegetative buffer zone with new vegetation.
b) Owners maintaining or establishing a vegetative buffer zone
may remove all of the vegetation in a part of that zone in order to
establish a viewing or access corridor that is no greater than 30 feet
wide for every 100 feet of shoreline frontage that extends no more
than 35 feet inland from the ordinary high-water mark.
SEC. 13-1-14 HEIGHT, SETBACK AND AREA EXCEPTIONS.
The regulations contained herein relating to the height of buildings and the size of yards and other
open spaces shall be subject to the following exceptions:
(a) Churches, schools, hospitals, sanitoriums and other public and quasi-public buildings may
be erected to a height not exceeding sixty (60) feet nor five (5) stories, provided the front,
side and rear yards required in the district in which such building is to be located are each
increased at least one (1) foot for each foot of additional building height above the height
limit otherwise established for the district in which such building is to be located.
(b) Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, penthouses, stacks,
scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, steeples, radio and television towers,
telephone, telegraph and power poles and lines, and necessary mechanical appurtenances
are excepted from the height regulations of this ordinance and may be erected in accordance
with other regulations or codes of the City of Menasha.
(c) Residences in the residence district may be increased in height by not more than ten (10)
feet when all yards and other required open spaces are increased by one (1) foot for each
foot when such building exceeds the height limit of the district in which it is located.
(d) Where a lot abuts on two (2) or more streets or alleys having different average established
grades, the higher of such grades shall control only for a depth of one hundred twenty (120)
feet from the line of the higher average established grade.
(e) Buildings on through lots and extending from street to street may have waived the
requirements for a rear yard by furnishing an equivalent open space on the same lot in lieu
of the required rear yard provided that the setback requirements on both streets be complied
with.
(f) Where a lot has an area less than the minimum number of square feet per family required
for the district in which it is located and was of record as such at the time of the passage of
this Code, such lot may be occupied by one (1) family.
(g) In front yards, balconies may extend a distance of four (4) feet or less, provided they are
seven (7) feet or more above the grade at the building line. Steps, stoops, uncovered
porches, decks and patios may extend a distance of eight (8) feet or less into the front yard.
(h) Open or enclosed fire escapes and fire towers may project into a required yard not more
than five (5) feet and into a required court not more than three and one-half (3-1/2) feet,
provided it be so located as not to obstruct light and ventilation.
(i) In the C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 zoning districts, the Plan Commission may waive or modify
081114
the rear yard and/or side yard setback when internal traffic flow, parking and/or
ingress/egress are shared by contiguous, commercial uses allowed in the C-1, C-2, C-3 and
C-4 districts and that will benefit the overall development of the site(s). The property
owner shall provide and equivalent open space on the same lot in lieu of the require rear
yard or side yard setback. This exception does not apply, however, when the adjoining use
or zoning district is residential.
(j) In the C-1, C-2, C-3 districts, and Special Uses in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 districts,
covered canopies shall be allowed to extend into the front yard setback up to the right-ofway.
Such canopies shall have a seven (7) foot minimum clearance at all points. Any
portion of the canopy proposed to be extended into the right-of-way shall be subject to
review and approval from the Director of Public Works and issuance of a revocable
occupancy permit.
SEC. 13-1-15 REDUCTION OR JOINT USE.
No lot, yard, parking area, building area or other space shall be reduced in area or dimensions so as
not to meet the provisions of this Chapter. No part of any lot, yard, parking area or other space
required for a structure or use shall be used for any other structure or use, unless in accordance with
Sec. 13-1-51(b)(2)i and Sec. 13-1-51(f).
SEC. 13-1-16 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS FOR REZONINGS TO HIGHER DENSITY
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
(a) WHEN APPLICABLE. The requirements of this Section shall become applicable when
an existing structure is requested to be rezoned to a higher density residential use.
(b) DEFINITIONS. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this Section:
(1) Accessory Structure -- A detached structure which is not used or not intended to be
used for living or sleeping by human occupants and which is located on or partially
on any premises.
(2) Appropriate Authority -- That person within the governmental structure of the
corporate unit charged with the administration of the appropriate code.
(3) Approved -- Approved by the local or State authority having such administrative
authority.
(4) Dwelling Unit -- Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
(5) Multiple Dwelling -- Any dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units
and/or rooming units.
(6) Plumbing -- All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas
burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets,
sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes
washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied
fixtures and the installation thereof, together with all connections to water, sewer, or
gas lines.
(c) PRELIMINARY DUTIES. Any person desiring his property to be rezoned must contact
the Building Inspector for inspection upon payment of the required fee. The Building
Inspector shall inspect the premises to see that the terms of this Section are met, shall
outline the deficiencies to be corrected, and to the best of his ability give the property owner
an estimated cost. When this is done, said owner has the choice of petitioning the Common
081114
Council for rezoning.
(d) MINIMUM STANDARDS. No owner shall have his property rezoned to a higher
residential use from an existing use unless the building meets the minimum requirements of
the Menasha Municipal Building Code, Title 15, Chapter 1, including but not limited to the
following:
(1) All units shall provide adequate and safe electrical, heating and plumbing systems as
required in Title 15 of the Municipal Code and any State codes referenced therein.
(2) Each dwelling unit and any accessory buildings shall be maintained in a safe and
sanitary condition.
(3) The adequacy of exits, stairways, light and ventilation, smoke detectors, exit lights,
isolation of hazards, etc., shall be determined by the Building Inspector and such
shall comply prior to approval.
(4) Every dwelling unit shall have smoke alarms installed and in good repair.
(5) Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which food may be
prepared and/or cooked which shall have adequate circulation area and which shall
be equipped with the following: a kitchen sink in good working condition and
properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate
authority and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and
unheated running water under pressure, which is connected to a sewer system
approved by the appropriate authority.
(6) Within or directly accessible to every dwelling unit there shall be a nonhabitable
room which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped
with a flush water closet in good working condition. Said flush water closet shall be
equipped with easily cleanable surfaces, be connected to a water system that at all
times provides an adequate amount of running water under pressure to cause the
water closet to be properly operated and shall be connected to a sewer system which
is approved by the appropriate authority.
(7) Within or directly accessible to every dwelling unit there shall be a lavatory sink.
Said lavatory sink may be in the same room as the flush water closet or, if located in
another room, the lavatory sink shall be located in close proximity to the door
leading directly into the room in which said water closet is located. The lavatory
sink shall be in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply
system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which provides at all
times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure and
which is connected to a sewer system approved by said appropriate authority.
(8) Within or directly accessible to every dwelling unit there shall be a room which
affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a bathtub
or shower in good working condition. Said bathtub or shower may be in the same
room as the flush water closet or in another room and shall be properly connected to
a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which
provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated water under
pressure and which is connected to a sewer system approved by the appropriate
authority.
(9) Every dwelling unit shall have approved dual means of egress, leading to safe and
open space at ground level, or as required by the laws of this state and the City of
Menasha.
(10) Access to or egress from each dwelling unit shall be provided without passing
through any other dwelling or dwelling unit.
(11) Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight facing directly
outdoors which can be opened easily, or such other device as will ventilate the room
081114
adequately.
(12) Every dwelling unit and all public and common areas shall be supplied with electric
service, outlets and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in
good and safe working condition and shall be connected to a source of electric
power in a manner prescribed by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of
Menasha.
(13) Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted
by natural or electric light at all times.
(14) Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed and are
maintained in safe and good working condition and are capable of safely and
adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in
every dwelling unit.
(15) No owner or occupant shall install, operate or use an unapproved space heater
employing a flame that is not vented outside the structure in an approved manner.
(16) Every foundation, roof and exterior wall, door, skylight and window shall be
reasonably weather-tight, watertight and damp-free, and shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair. Floors, interior walls and ceilings shall be sound and in
good repair. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be
protected from the elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or
treatment.
(17) Every window, exterior door and hatchway or similar devices shall be reasonably
watertight and weather-tight.
(18) All existing fences shall be in good condition and repair protected against decay by
use of paint or other preservatives.
(19) Accessory structures shall be structurally sound and in good state of repair.
(20) Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior and interior wall, ceiling, inside and outside
stair, every porch and every appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the loads that normal use cause to be placed thereon.
(21) Every plumbing fixture and all water and waste pipes shall be properly installed and
in good sanitary working condition.
(22) The ceiling height of any habitable room shall be at least seven (7) feet, except that
in any habitable room under a sloping ceiling at least one-half (1/2) of the floor area
shall have a ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet, and the floor area of that part of
such a room where the ceiling is less than five (5) feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area in computing the total floor area.
(23) No space located partially or totally below grade shall be used as a habitable room
of a dwelling unit unless the floor and those portions of the walls are of waterproof
and damp-proof construction.
(24) There shall be no pipes, ducts or other obstruction less than six (6) feet, eight (8)
inches above the floor level so as not to interfere with the normal use of the room or
area.
(e) FURTHER CONTROLS. Every ordinance which rezones one residential use to another
residential use on existing structures shall carry the provision on the face thereof that the
ordinance shall not become effective until the Building Inspector has issued a Certificate of
Compliance showing that the terms of the Section have been met and presented to the
property owner and are on file in the office of said Inspector.
SEC. 13-1-17 TRANSITIONAL AREAS
(a) INTENT. Transitional areas shall be required to separate commercial and industrial uses
081114
from residential areas. The purpose of the transitional areas is to eliminate or minimize
adverse external effects of commercial and industrial development on neighboring
residential uses or districts. The transitional area shall be a landscaped area where no
portion of a building, loading, parking, storage or driving area may be located.
(b) APPLICABILITY. Transitional areas are required as listed in the following table:
PROPOSED
USE GU
C-1, C-2, C-
3, C-4 I-1, I-2 R-3, R-4
R-1, R-1A,
R-2, R-2A Parking Lot
Special use
Commercial
Special
Use
Industrial
GU NA NA NA Required Required NA NA NA
C-1, C-2, C-3,
C-4 NA NA NA Required Required NA NA NA
I-1, I-2 NA NA NA Required Required NA NA NA
R-3, R-4 NA NA NA NA Required NA NA NA
R-1, R-2 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Parking Lot NA NA NA Required Required NA NA NA
Special Use
Commercial NA NA NA Required Required NA NA NA
Special Use
Industrial NA NA NA Required Required NA NA NA
ADJACENT USES OR DISTRICTS
(c) GENERAL STANDARDS.
(1) Transitional areas shall be designed by a landscaping professional as part of the
site plan or special use permit review process.
(2) Transitional areas shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the property line
unless planting is prohibited by easements or other restrictions. In such cases, the
transitional area shall be located as near to the property line as practicable.
(3) Transitional areas shall be designed to achieve a minimum of seventy-five percent
(75%) screening within five (5) years of planting. Plant materials shall reflect
varying heights, textures, species, seasonal color, and both evergreen and
deciduous varieties. For the purpose of calculating the percentage of screening,
the transitional area shall be considered to be that area extending from the ground
level to 16 feet in height. Screening potential of plant materials shall be calculated
as follows:
Plant Type Screening Potential per Specimen
Deciduous Trees 150 square feet
Upright Evergreens 50 square feet
Shrubs > 4 feet in height 30 square feet
Shrubs < 4 feet in height* 10 square feet
*Mass plantings of annuals or perennials may be substituted for shrubs under four (4) feet in height
(4) To the extent practicable, transitional areas should be planted in a curvilinear
manner. Straight or staggered rows of plantings should be avoided.
(5) Where earth berms are utilized, they shall be curvilinear and undulating wherever
possible. Earth berms shall not exceed a slope of 33% (3:1) for lawn areas. Berms
planted with ground cover and shrubs shall not exceed a slope of 50% (2:1).
Berms should be graded to appear as smooth, rounded, natural forms.
(6) Transitional area landscaping shall be designed to achieve a minimum of 75%
opacity for both Commercial and Industrial Commercial transitional areas.
(7) The minimum transitional area landscaping buffers for Commercial transitional
areas is ten feet (10’), and twenty feet (20’) for Industrial transitional areas.
(d) SIZE AND TYPE OF PLANT MATERIAL. The type and minimum size of the plant
material that shall satisfy the transitional area requirements shall be:
081114
Plant Type
Single Stem Canopy Tree
Multi-Stem Clump Canopy
Understory Tree
Evergreen Tree
Deciduous shrub
Evergreen shrub
Five (5) feet in height
Twenty-four (24) inches in height
Eighteen (18) inches in height
Minimum Size or Height
One and one-half inch (1.5") caliper
Ten (10) feet in height
One inch (1") caliper
(e) MITIGATION OF OTHER VISUAL IMPACTS. The use of a screening buffer shall
be required to mitigate the adverse visual impacts which proposed land uses or site
elements will have on the subject property, adjoining properties and the community in
general. In addition to the requirements for transitional area landscaping in this Section,
the following proposed land use and site elements shall be screened from off-site view
with a transitional area landscape buffer:
a. Dumpsters, trash disposal, recycling areas, and mechanical equipment.
b. Service and loading docks.
c. Outdoor storage area or accessory buildings.
(f) APPROVAL. The Plan Commission shall approve the design and plant material content
of all required transitional areas. The Plan Commission may consider alternative plant
materials, fencing, or reducing transitional area requirements if it determines that the site
conditions warrant.
(g) ENFORCEMENT. A building permit shall not be issued until the Plan Commission has
approved the transitional area design. A plan for transitional area installation and
maintenance shall be included in the Site Improvement Agreement as part of the site plan
or special use permit process. Failure to maintain or install an approved transitional area
shall be deemed an ordinance violation.
SEC. 13-1-18 SPECIAL USE STANDARDS.
(a) INTENT. In order to insure that approved special uses adequately safeguard the health,
safety and general welfare of persons residing or working in adjoining or surrounding
property, specific standards have been developed for each special use.
(b) STANDARDS. The following table identifies the special uses and the minimum
recommended standards that should be satisfied before a special use permit is applied for.
The Plan Commission and/or the Common Council may, however, amend or waive any of
the standards.
081114
Distance
From R-1 Plan
District Commission
Churches Approval
Special Minimum Minimum Schools orTransi- Off- Site of Outdoor
Use Lot Yard Community tional Street Plan
Signage
Size Size (Ft.) Facilities Fencing Area Parking Review and Lighting
Abattoirs, No F-100 ft. 300 ft. 6 feet I-2 1 per Yes Yes
stock yards, S-100 ft. solid employee
tanneries, R-100 ft. wood
fertilizer
manufacturing
and garbage,
rubbish,
offal, dead
animal
reduction and
dumping
Acid # F-100 ft. 300 ft. N/A I-2 1 per Yes No
Manufacture S-100 ft. employee
R-100 ft.
Airport/ 1 acre # 300 ft. 4 foot C-1 N/A Yes Yes
heliport wire
mesh
Boarding # # N/A N/A C-1 # Yes Yes
and rooming
houses
lodging and
bed and
breakfast
inns
Cement, # F-100 ft. 300 ft. N/A I-2 1 per Yes No
lime or S-100 ft. employee
gypsum, R-100 ft.
etc.,
manufacture
081114
Distance
From R-1 Plan
District Commission
Churches Approval
Special Minimum Minimum Schools or Transi- Off- Site
of Outdoor
Use Lot Yard Community tional Street Plan
Signage
Size Size (Ft.) Facilities Fencing Area Parking Review and Lighting
Cemetery 40 acres # N/A N/A I-2 N/A Yes No
Church 25,000 # N/A N/A C-1 # Yes Yes
Sq. Ft.
Country 80 acres # N/A N/A C-1 1 per 2 Yes Yes
club and employees
golf plus 3
course per hole
Day care # # N/A Around C-1 1 per 2 Yes Yes
center/ play employees
nursery area plus 1
school per 5
children
Explosive # F-100 ft. 300 ft. N/A I-2 1 per Yes No
manufacturing S-100 ft. employee
and storage R-100 ft.
Farm 1 acre # N/A N/A C-1 N/A N/A No
Public # # N/A N/A C-1 # Yes Yes
building
Fuel # F-100 ft. 300 ft. N/A I-2 1 per Yes No
storage and S-100 ft. employee
refining R-100 ft.
081114
Distance
From R-1 Plan
District Commission
Churches Approval
Special Minimum Minimum Schools or Transi- Off- Site
of Outdoor
Use Lot Yard Community tional Street Plan
Signage
Size Size (Ft.) Facilities Fencing Area Parking Review and Lighting
Commercial/25,000 # N/A N/A C-1 1 per 3 Yes Yes
landscape Sq. Ft. employees
nursery plus 1
per 125
sq. ft. of
publicly
used area
Hospital 5 acres # N/A N/A C-1 # Yes Yes
Junk yard 5 acres # 300 ft 6 foot I-2 1 per 2 Yes Yes
high employees
solid
wood
Mining, 20 acres # 300 ft. 6 foot I-2 1 per 2 Yes Yes
quarrying, high employees
etc. solid
wood
Nursing 25,000 # N/A N/A C-1 # Yes Yes
home Sq. Ft.
Truck 25,000 # N/A N/A C-1 1 per Yes Yes
sales or Sq. Ft. employee
service plus 2
per service
stall
Glue # F-100 ft. 300 ft. N/A I-2 1 per Yes No
Manufacture S-100 ft. employee
R-100 ft.
081114
Distance
From R-1 Plan
District Commission
Churches Approval
Special Minimum Minimum Schools or Transi- Off- Site
of Outdoor
Use Lot Yard Community tional Street Plan
Signage
Size Size (Ft.) Facilities Fencing Area Parking Review and Lighting
Public N/A
# N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A
utility
structure
Gasoline # # N/A N/A C-1 # Yes Yes
station
Railroad N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes Yes
uses
Mobile # # # # # # Yes #
home park
Multi- # # # # # # Yes #
family apt.
with 500
sq. ft.
units
Clinics # # N/A N/A C-1 # Yes Yes
or medical
office with
40 or more
parking stalls
Office # # N/A N/A C-1 # Yes Yes
building
over 3
stories
081114
Stadium or F-100 ft. N/A N/A C-1 1 per Yes Yes
5 acre S-100 ft. 4 seats
auditorium R-100 ft.
KEY: # This refers to the district minimum requirement.
SEC. 13-1-19 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
101415
ARTICLE C
Zoning Districts
SEC. 13-1-20 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
(a) DISTRICTS. For the purpose of this Chapter, present and future, provision is hereby made for the
division of the City of Menasha into the following 16 basic zoning districts:
(1) A-1 Agricultural/Holding District
(2) R-1 Single-Family Residence District
(3) R-1A Low-Density Single Family Residence District
(4) R-2 Two-Family Residence District
(5) R-2A Multi-Family, Zero Lot Line Residence District
(6) R-3 Multi-Family, Medium Density Residence District
(7) R-4 Multi-Family, High Density Residence District
(8) C-1 General Commercial District
(9) C-2 Central Business District
(10) C-3 Business and Office District
(11) C-4 Business Park District
(12) I-1 Heavy Industrial District
(13) I-2 General Industrial District
(14) PUD Planned Unit Development District
(15) R-MH Mobile Home District
(16) TND Traditional Neighborhood Development
(17) GU Government Use District
SEC. 13-1-21 VACATION OF STREETS; ANNEXATIONS.
(a) VACATION OF STREETS. Vacation of public streets and alleys shall cause the land
vacated to be automatically placed in the same district as the abutting side to which the
vacated land reverts.
(b) ANNEXATIONS. Annexations to or consolidations with the City subsequent to the
effective date of this Chapter shall be placed in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District,
unless the annexation ordinance temporarily places the land in another district. Within six
(6) months, the Plan Commission shall evaluate and recommend a permanent classification
to the Common Council.
SEC. 13-1-22 ZONING MAP.
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this Chapter are set forth on the Official
Zoning District Map (referred to as Zoning Map) which is hereby incorporated as part of this Code
and which is on file with the Department of Community Development. The Zoning Map shall be at
a scale of one (1) inch equals five hundred (500) feet on the ground.
SEC. 13-1-23 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the
101415
following rules shall apply:
(a) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or
alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
(b) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as
following such lot lines.
(c) Boundaries indicated as approximately following City boundaries shall be construed as
following municipal boundaries.
(d) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between
the main tracks.
(e) Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines
and, in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual
shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams,
rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
(f) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in the preceding shall
be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map shall be determined
by the scale of the map.
SEC. 13-1-24 A-1 AGRICULTURAL/HOLDING DISTRICT.
(a) PURPOSE. The A-1 Agricultural/Holding District is intended to provide for the
continuation of general farming and related uses in those areas of the City that are not yet
committed to urban development. It is further intended for this district to protect lands
contained therein from urban development until their orderly transition into urban-oriented
districts is required.
(b) PERMITTED USES.
(1) General farming, including agriculture, dairying, floriculture, forestry, grazing, hay,
orchards, truck farming and viticulture (grape growing), provided, however, that
farm buildings housing animals, barnyards and feed lots shall not be located in a
floodland and shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from any navigable water or
district boundary.
(2) Keeping and raising of domestic stock for agribusiness, show, breeding or other
purposes incidental to the principal use of the premises and subject to the following
limitations:
a. The keeping and raising of hogs or fur-bearing animals is prohibited.
b. Not more than one (1) head of livestock, including horses, or twenty (20)
head of poultry shall be permitted for each two and one-half (2-1/2) acres.
(c) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
(1) Attached or detached private garages and carports accessory to permitted or
permitted accessory uses.
(2) General farm buildings including barns, silos, sheds storage bins and including not
more than one (1) roadside stand for the sale of farm products produced on the
premises. Any such stand shall conform to the setback, sign and other provisions of
this Chapter.
(3) One (1) farm dwelling.
(d) PERMITTED USES REQUIRING CONDITIONAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
(1) Utility substations.
(e) CONDITIONAL USES.
(1) Airports, airstrips and landing fields provided that the site is not less than twenty
(20) acres.
101415
(2) Commercial feed lots, livestock sales facilities and fur farms.
(3) Drive-in establishments selling fruits and vegetables.
(4) Home occupations and professional offices.
(5) Housing for farm laborers and seasonal or migratory farm workers.
(6) Transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay and microwave towers without
broadcast facilities or studios.
(7) Utilities.
(8) Veterinary clinics provided that no structure or animal enclosure shall be located
closer than one hundred (100) feet to a property boundary.
(f) LOT AREA AND WIDTH.
(1) For principal structures hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered, there shall
be required provision of a contiguous area of not less than five (5) acres, and no
farm parcel shall be less than three hundred (300) feet in width.
(2) Existing residential structures and farm dwellings remaining after the consolidation
of existing farms shall be provided with a lot area of not less than forty thousand
(40,000) square feet and a lot width of not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
(g) BUILDING HEIGHT. No building or parts of a building shall exceed sixty (60) feet in
height.
(h) YARDS.
(1) There shall be a minimum building setback of fifty (50) feet from the street right-ofway.
(2) There shall be a side yard on each side of the principal structure not less than
twenty-five (25) feet in width.
(3) There shall be a rear yard of not less than fifty (50) feet.
(4) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels within the corporate boundaries of the City of Menasha prior to
May 8, 1982 the following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high-water mark.
b) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the following
standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
whichever distance is greater.
SEC. 13-1-25 R-1 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
(a) INTENT. This district is intended to provide for low density single-family residential
development and to restrict the development of uses that generate high volumes of noise
and traffic.
(b) PERMITTED USES.
(1) Family day care home.
101415
(2) Single-family detached dwelling.
(3) Tourist Rooming House.
(4) Bed and Breakfast Establishments.
(c) PERMITTED USES REQUIRING CONDITIONAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
(1) Utility substation.
(d) SPECIAL USES.
(1) All commercial and public radio, microwave and television towers, and all private
radio and television towers exceeding fifty (50) feet in height.
(2) Cemetery.
(3) Boarding or Rooming House.
(4) Church.
(5) Day care center/nursery school.
(6) Farm.
(7) Golf course.
(8) Landscape nursery or orchard provided no office or store is maintained on premises.
(9) Park or playground.
(10) Public building.
(11) Public library, museum, art gallery or community center.
(12) Railroad rights-of-way and uses essential to their operation.
(13) School.
(14) Single-family attached dwelling.
(e) GARAGES, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
(1) One (1) detached garage. Such garage may be constructed in addition to the garage
space within the principal structure.
(2) One (1) accessory building.
(3) Any of the following accessory uses:
a. One (1) private swimming pool.
b. One (1) private tennis court.
c. One (1) satellite antenna/dish.
d. One (1) detached solar structure.
(f) STANDARDS.
(1) Minimum front yard setback -- Twenty-five (25) feet or the prevailing setback.
(2) Minimum side yard -- Six (6) feet and an aggregate minimum width on both sides of
sixteen (16) feet.
(3) Minimum rear yard -- Thirty (30) feet.
(4) Maximum height -- Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories.
(5) Minimum side yard and rear yard of detached garages, accessory buildings and uses
that are eight (8) feet or more from the principal dwelling -- Three (3) feet side yard
and three (3) feet rear yard.
(6) Minimum side yard and rear yard of detached garages, accessory buildings or uses
that are less than eight (8) feet from the principal dwelling -- Six (6) feet side yard
and eight (8) feet rear yard.
(7) Minimum lot size -- Seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet per dwelling.
(8) Minimum lot width -- Sixty (60) feet.
(9) Parking -- Refer to Article E.
(10) Keeping of not more than two (2) boarders and/or roomers by resident family.
(11) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels within the corporate boundaries of the City of Menasha prior to
May 8, 1982 the following standards shall apply:
101415
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high-water mark.
b) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the following
standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
whichever distance is greater.
(12) Minimum roof pitch -- All single family dwelling units constructed in this district
after the effective date of this ordinance shall have a roof pitch of 4/12ths or greater.
(13) GARAGES REQUIRED. On all parcels where a new dwelling unit is to be
constructed building plans shall make provision for an attached or detached
garage meeting the minimum requirements of subsection (a) of this section. No
attached garage may be converted from garage to living space unless a garage
meeting the requirements of these subsections exists or is constructed on the lot.
(a) The minimum dimensions for an attached or detached garage shall be 22
feet wide and 22 feet deep accessed by a garage door not less than 16 feet
wide and 7 feet high for a single door, or two doors not less than 9 feet
wide and 7 feet high.
No occupancy permit shall be granted for a newly constructed dwelling unit until
final inspection of a detached garage has been completed and approved by the
building inspector.
SEC. 13-1-26 R-2 TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
(a) INTENT. The purpose of this district is to provide low density development containing
single family and two (2) family dwelling units. It is also intended that uses generating
noise and high traffic volumes be restricted.
(b) PERMITTED USES.
(1) Any use permitted in the R-1 Single Family Residential District.
(2) Two (2) family dwelling units.
(c) PERMITTED USES REQUIRING CONDITIONAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
(1) Utility substation.
(d) SPECIAL USES.
(1) Boarding or Rooming House.
(2) Cemetery.
(3) Church.
(4) Day care center/nursery school.
(5) Farm.
(6) Golf course.
(7) Landscape nursery or orchard provided no office or store is maintained on premises.
(8) Park or playground.
(9) Public building.
101415
(10) Public library, museum, art gallery or community center.
(11) Railroad rights-of-way and uses essential to their operation.
(e) GARAGES, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
(1) One (1) detached garage per dwelling unit. Such garage may be constructed in
addition to the garage space within the principal structure.
(2) Any of the following accessory uses per dwelling unit:
a. One (1) private swimming pool.
b. One (1) private tennis court.
c. One (1) satellite antenna/dish.
d. One (1) detached solar structure.
(f) STANDARDS.
(1) Minimum front yard setback -- Twenty-five (25) feet or the prevailing setback.
(2) Minimum side yard -- Six (6) feet and an aggregate minimum width on both sides of
sixteen (16) feet.
(3) Minimum rear yard -- Thirty (30) feet.
(4) Maximum height -- Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories.
(5) Minimum side yard and rear yard of detached garages, accessory buildings and uses
that are eight (8) feet or more from the principal dwelling -- Three (3) feet side yard
and three (3) feet rear yard.
(6) Minimum side yard and rear yard of detached garages, accessory buildings or uses
that are less than eight (8) feet from the principal dwelling -- Six (6) feet side yard
and eight (8) feet rear yard.
(7) Minimum lot size -- Seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet total and not
less than three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet per dwelling unit.
(8) Minimum lot width -- Sixty (60) feet.
(9) Parking -- Refer to Article E.
(10) Keeping of not more than two (2) boarders and/or roomers by resident family.
(11) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels within the corporate boundaries of the City of Menasha prior to
May 8, 1982 the following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high-water mark.
b) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the following
standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
whichever distance is greater.
(12) Minimum roof pitch -- All single or two-family dwelling units constructed in this
district after the effective date of this ordinance shall have a roof pitch of 4/12ths or
greater.
(13) GARAGES REQUIRED. On all parcels where a new dwelling unit is to be
constructed building plans shall make provision for an attached or detached
101415
garage meeting the minimum requirements of subsection (a) of this section. No
attached garage may be converted from garage to living space unless a garage
meeting the requirements of these subsections exists or is constructed on the lot.
(a) The minimum dimensions for an attached or detached garage shall be 22
feet wide and 22 feet deep accessed by a garage door not less than 16 feet
wide and 7 feet high for a single door, or two doors not less than 9 feet
wide and 7 feet high.
No occupancy permit shall be granted for a newly constructed dwelling unit until
final inspection of a detached garage has been completed and approved by the
building inspector.
SEC. 13-1-27 R-3 MULTI-FAMILY, MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
(a) INTENT.
The purpose of this district is to create medium density residential areas generally
located on the fringes of one (1) and two (2) family residential neighborhoods. Uses
that generate high volumes of traffic, noise, and other disruptions are generally
restricted.
(b) PERMITTED USES.
(1) Any use permitted in the R-2a Multi Family Residential District.
(2) Multi-family dwellings.
(c) PERMITTED USES REQUIRING CONDITIONAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
(1) Utility substation.
(d) SPECIAL USES.
(1) Airport/ heliport.
(2) All commercial and public radio, microwave and television towers and all
private radio and television towers exceeding sixty (60) feet in height.
(3) Boarding or Rooming House.
(4) Church.
(5) Hospital
(6) Mobile home park.
(7) Nursing home.
(8) Park or playground.
(9) Private club, fraternity, or lodge.
(10) Public library, museum, art gallery, or community center.
(11) Railroad right-of-way and uses essential to their operation.
(12) School.
(e) SITE, ARCHITECTURAL, LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING REVIEW
(1) Review shall be required for projects and uses listed in 13-1-12(b)
(f) GARAGES ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
(1) Not more than one (1) nor more than three (3) garage stalls per dwelling unit.
(2) Not more than one (1) accessory building per lot or per principal structure if
more than one principal structure is located on a lot.
(3) Not more than one of the following accessory uses per lot or per principal
structure if more than one principal structure is located on a lot:
a. Private swimming pool.
b. Private tennis court.
c. Satellite antenna dish.
101415
d. Detached solar structure.
(g) GENERAL STANDARDS.
(1) Setbacks.
a. Minimum front yard setback – Twenty (20) feet or the prevailing setback.
b. Minimum side yard – Eight (8) feet on each side. For a single or two (2)
family dwelling, minimum side yards are the same as the R-1 District
requirements.
c. Minimum rear yard – Twenty-five (25) feet.
d. Maximum height – Forty-five (45) feet or three (3) stories.
e. Minimum side and rear yard of detached garages, accessory buildings and
uses – Three (3) feet side yard and three (3) feet rear yard.
f. Minimum lot size – Seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet for a
single family dwelling, not less than three thousand six hundred (3,600)
square feet per unit for a two (2) family dwelling and not less than two
thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet per unit for a three (3) or more
family dwelling unit.
g. Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982
the following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet
as measured from the ordinary high water mark, except that
a principal structure may be constructed or placed within
the shoreland setback area if all of the following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed
on a lot or parcel of land that is immediately
adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel of land
containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed
within a distance equal to the average setback of the
principal building on the adjacent lots or 35 feet
from the ordinary high-water mark, whichever
distance is greater.
(2) Design Standards.
a. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply with
the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
b. The following shall apply to additions or expansions not required to obtain
site plan approval;
i. The primary façade material for all additions or expansions shall be
brick or natural stone. Where there is an addition or an expansion
to an existing building, the façade materials on the portion of the
building being altered or added must visually match or
complement the appearance of the existing building. The Plan
Commission may consider the use of alternative façade materials
that are durable and of high quality for such additions or
expansions.
ii. Secondary façade materials may be used for architectural details or
enhancements to additions or expansions. Such materials shall be
high quality, durable, and cover not more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the building façade. The Plan Commission shall
approve all secondary materials.
101415
(3) Screening. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(4) Landscaping. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(5) Lighting. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(6) Parking. The parking requirements listed in Section 13-1-51(b) shall apply to this
district.
(7) GARAGES REQUIRED. On all parcels where a new dwelling is to be
constructed building plans shall make provision for an attached or detached
garage meeting the minimum requirements of subsection (a) of this section for
one or two family dwelling units. For dwellings with 3 or more units in a
structure building plans shall make provisions for an attached or detached garage
meeting the minimum requirements of subsection (b) of this section for each unit.
No attached garage may be converted from garage to living space unless a garage
meeting the requirements of these subsections exists or is constructed on the lot.
(a) The minimum dimensions for an attached or detached garage shall be 22
feet wide and 22 feet deep accessed by a garage door not less than 16 feet
wide and 7 feet high for a single door, or two doors not less than 9 feet
wide and 7 feet high.
(b) For newly constructed dwellings with 3 or more units in a structure the
minimum dimensions of garage spaces within an attached or detached
garage shall be 12 feet wide and 22 feet deep accessed by a garage door
not less than 9 feet wide and 7 feet high for each unit.
No occupancy permit shall be granted for a newly constructed dwelling unit until
final inspection of a detached garage has been completed and approved by the
building inspector.
SEC. 13-1-28 R-4 MULTI-FAMILY, HIGH DENSITY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
(a) INTENT.
The purpose of this district is to create high-density residential development that is
readily accessible to thoroughfares, shopping and employment. Similar to the R-3
District, it is the intent to restrict uses that generate high volumes of traffic and noise.
(b) PERMITTED USES.
Any use permitted in the R-3 Multi-Family Residence District.
(c) PERMITTED USES REQUIRING CONDITIONAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
Utility substation.
(d) SPECIAL USES.
(1) Airport/ heliport.
(2) All commercial and public radio, microwave and television towers and all private
radio and television towers exceeding sixty (60) feet in height.
(3) Boarding or Rooming House.
(4) Church.
(5) Daycare center/ nursery school.
(6) Hospital
(7) Mobile home park.
(8) Multi-family dwelling containing units of less than five hundred fifty (550) square
feet of gross area.
(9) Nursing home.
101415
(10) Park or playground.
(11) Private club, fraternity, or lodge.
(12) Public library, museum, art gallery, or community center.
(13) Railroad right-of-way and uses essential to their operation.
(14) School.
(e) SITE, ARCHITECTURAL, LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING REVIEW
(1) Review shall be required for projects and uses listed in 13-1-12(b)
(f) GARAGES ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
(1) Not more than one (1) nor more than three (3) garage stalls per dwelling unit.
(2) Not more than one (1) accessory building per lot or per principal structure if more
than one principal structure is located on a lot.
(3) Not more than one of the following accessory uses per lot or per principal
structure if more than one principal structure is located on a lot:
a. Private swimming pool.
b.Private tennis court.
c. Satellite antenna dish.
d.Detached solar structure.
(g) GENERAL STANDARDS.
(1) Setbacks.
a. Minimum front yard setback – Twenty (20) feet or the prevailing setback.
b. Minimum side yard – Eight (8) feet on each side. For a single or two (2) family
dwelling, minimum side yards are the same as the R-1 District requirements.
c. Minimum rear yard – Twenty-five (25) feet.
d. Maximum height – Forty-five (45) feet or three (3) stories.
e. Minimum side and rear yard of detached garages, accessory buildings and uses –
Three (3) feet side yard and three (3) feet rear yard.
f. Minimum lot size – Six thousand (6,000) square feet for a single-family dwelling;
three thousand (3,000) square feet per unit for a two (2) family unit; one thousand
five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit for a three (3) or more family unit; and
seven hundred fifty (750) square feet per unit for a dwelling unit containing less
than five hundred fifty (550) square feet.
g. Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the
following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
whichever distance is greater.
(2) Design Standards.
a. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply with the
requirements of Section 13-1-12.
b. The following shall apply to additions or expansions not required to obtain site
plan approval;
101415
i. The primary façade material for all additions or expansions shall
be brick or natural stone. Where there is an addition or an
expansion to an existing building, the façade materials on the
portion of the building being altered or added must visually
match or complement the appearance of the existing building.
The Plan Commission may consider the use of alternative façade
materials that are durable and of high quality for such additions
or expansions.
ii. Secondary façade materials may be used for architectural details
or enhancements to additions or expansions. Such materials shall
be high quality, durable, and cover not more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the building façade. The Plan Commission shall
approve all secondary materials.
(3) Screening. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(4) Landscaping. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(5) Lighting. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(6) Parking. The parking requirements listed in Section 13-1-51(b) shall apply to this
district.
(7) GARAGES REQUIRED. On all parcels where a new dwelling is to be constructed
building plans shall make provision for an attached or detached garage meeting
the minimum requirements of subsection (a) of this section for one or two family
dwelling units. For dwellings with 3 or more units in a structure building plans
shall make provisions for an attached or detached garage meeting the minimum
requirements of subsection (b) of this section for each unit. No attached garage
may be converted from garage to living space unless a garage meeting the
requirements of these subsections exists or is constructed on the lot.
(a) The minimum dimensions for an attached or detached garage shall be 22
feet wide and 22 feet deep accessed by a garage door not less than 16 feet
wide and 7 feet high for a single door, or two doors not less than 9 feet
wide and 7 feet high.
(b) For newly constructed dwellings with 3 or more units in a structure the
minimum dimensions of garage spaces within an attached or detached
garage shall be 12 feet wide and 22 feet deep accessed by a garage door
not less than 9 feet wide and 7 feet high for each unit.
No occupancy permit shall be granted for a newly constructed dwelling unit until
final inspection of a detached garage has been completed and approved by the
building inspector.
SEC. 13-1-29 C-1 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
(a) INTENT. The purpose of this district is to accommodate a wide range of retail and
commercial service and product establishments. It is also intended to accommodate the
development of mixed land uses which will allow the association of commercial and
residential land uses in the same zoning district.
(b) PERMITTED USES.
(1) Administrative, management, and support services.
(2) Arts, entertainment, and recreation facilities and services, indoor only.
101415
(3) Constructions services and contractors offices.
(4) Day care facilities.
(5) Education services and schools serving thirty (30) students or less.
(6) Financial and insurance services.
(7) Food services and drinking establishments.
(8) Health, medical and social services.
(9) Hotels and motels.
(10) Parks and playgrounds.
(11) Personal services.
(12) Professional, scientific, and technical services.
(13) Public administration buildings.
(14) Real estate services.
(15) Religious, grant making, civic, professional, and similar organizations.
(16) Rental and leasing services, excluding mini-warehousing.
(17) Retail trade:
a. Automotive, truck, recreational vehicle, and heavy equipment parts and
accessory stores, excluding facilities with repair or maintenance facilities.
b. Furniture and home furnishings stores.
c. Electronics and appliance stores.
d. Building material, garden equipment and supplies dealers, indoor only.
e. Food and beverage stores.
f. Health and personal care stores.
g. Clothing and clothing accessories stores.
h. Sporting goods, hobby, book, music, and similar stores.
i. General merchandise and retail stores.
(18) Repair services, excluding automotive, truck, recreational vehicle, and heavy
equipment repair and maintenance services.
(19) Utility substations.
(20) Other permitted uses.
a. Adult establishments which are more than five hundred (500) feet from
schools, churches, community living arrangements, day care centers, nursery
schools, family day care homes, parks, playgrounds, other community
facilities, and other adult establishments.
b. Uses not explicitly enumerated in the section as permitted uses, but
determined by the Community Development Director to be closely similar
thereto provided that these uses are not specified elsewhere as requiring a
special use permit.
(c) SPECIAL USES.
(1) Airport/heliport.
(2) Amusement and recreation facilities, outdoor only.
(3) Automotive, truck, recreational vehicles, and heavy equipment sales, rental, and
leasing.
(4) Automotive, truck, recreation vehicle, and heavy equipment repair and maintenance
services.
(5) Bed and breakfast facilities.
(6) Building and garden equipment and supply dealers with outdoor displays.
(7) Gasoline stations.
(8) Landscape nurseries, orchards, and commercial greenhouses.
(9) Light Manufacturing and Assembly (maximum building size of 25,000 SF)
(10) Manufactured or mobile home dealers.
101415
(11) Multi-family uses permitted in the R-4 Multi-Family District.
(12) Museums, historical sites, and similar institutions, outdoor only.
(13) Printing, Publishing and Engraving (maximum building size of 25,000 SF)
(14) Radio and television broadcasting facilities.
(15) Railroad right-of-way and uses essential to railroad operation.
(16) Research, Laboratory, Testing, and Technology Based Uses
(17) RV Parks and recreational camps.
(18) Schools serving more than thirty (30) students.
(19) Spectator sport facilities, outdoor only.
(20) Other uses requiring a special use permit:
a. Any use which utilizes outdoor storage or outdoor display of merchandise or
equipment. This requirement does not apply to outdoor display items which are
removed each night.
b. Office buildings exceeding three (3) stories in height.
c. Major telecommunications facilities in accordance with 13-1-81.
(21) Expansion of mini warehouse facilities in existence prior to January 1, 1991.
(22) All permitted uses in the R-2 Two Family Residence District.
(d) SITE, ARCHITECTURAL, LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING REVIEW
(1) Review shall be required for projects and uses listed in 13-1-12(b)
(e) ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES
(1) Accessory building and uses customary with and incidental to the principal use are
permitted unless otherwise excluded by this chapter.
(2) Warehousing customarily incidental to any of the preceding permitted uses or
special uses.
(f) GENERAL STANDARDS.
(1) Minimum Lot Width. Eight (80) feet for lots established after the effective date of
this ordinance.
(2) Minimum Lot Size. Nine thousand five hundred (9,500) square feet for lots
established after the effective date of this ordinance.
(3) Minimum Front Yard Setback. Ten (10) feet for all structures, parking, and paving,
except for points of ingress and egress approved by the Plan Commission. For
properties abutting a residential district, the front yard setback requirement of the
adjacent residential district shall apply.
(4) Minimum Side Yard. None, unless abutting a residential use or district, then
transitional area requirements apply.
(5) Minimum Rear Yard. Ten (10) feet, unless abutting a residential use or district, then
transitional area requirements apply.
(6) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the
following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
101415
whichever distance is greater.
(7) Maximum Height. Forty-five (45) feet or three (3) stories, except as provided
herein.
(8) Maximum lot coverage of buildings shall not exceed thirty percent (30%). The Plan
Commission, upon review, may reduce this requirement by up to fifty percent
(50%).
(9) If residential development is the principal use, then all requirements and standards
of the applicable residential district apply.
(10) Design Standards.
a. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply with
the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
b. The following shall apply to additions or expansions not required to obtain
site plan approval;
i. The primary façade material for all additions or expansions shall
be brick or natural stone. Where there is an addition or an
expansion to an existing building, the façade materials on the
portion of the building being altered or added must visually
match or complement the appearance of the existing building.
The Plan Commission may consider the use of alternative façade
materials that are durable and of high quality for such additions
or expansions.
ii. Secondary façade materials may be used for architectural details
or enhancements to additions or expansions. Such materials
shall be high quality, durable, and cover not more than twentyfive
percent (25%) of the building façade. The Plan Commission
shall approve all secondary materials.
(11) Screening. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(12) Landscaping. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12. Requirements set forth in Sec. 13-1-17
for commercial transitional landscaping areas shall apply to this district. If multifamily
residential development is the principal use, then transitional area
requirements apply.
(13) Lighting. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(14) Parking. The parking requirements listed in Section 13-1-51(b) shall apply to this
district.
(15) Loading. No loading shall be allowed in between any building and any street
right-of-way. The loading requirements stated in Section 13-1-50 shall apply to
this district.
(g) NUISANCE CONTROL. No operation, process, manufacturing, or building shall produce
or create excessive noise, light, odor, smoke, vibration, heat, glare, dust, gas, electronic
interference, toxic matter, industrial waste, or other external nuisance.
(h) SIGNS. Refer to Article F.
SEC. 13-1-30 C-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
(a) INTENT. The purpose of this district is to provide a centrally located, pedestrianoriented
business district with a wide range of retail and commercial service and product
establishments. It is also intended to accommodate the development of mixed land uses
101415
that will allow the association of commercial and residential uses in the same zoning
district.
(b) PERMITTED USES.
(1) Administrative, management, and support services.
(2) Arts, entertainment, recreation and sport facilities and services, indoor only.
(3) Construction services and contractors offices.
(4) Day care facilities.
(5) Educational services and schools serving thirty (30) students or less at any one
time.
(6) Financial and insurance services.
(7) Food services and drinking establishments.
(8) Health, medical, and social services.
(9) Hotels and motels.
(10) Museums, historical sites, and similar institutions, indoor only.
(11) Parks and playgrounds.
(12) Personal services.
(13) Professional, scientific, and technical services.
(14) Public administration buildings.
(15) Real estate services.
(16) Religious, grant making, civic, professional, and similar organizations.
(17) Rental and leasing services, excluding mini-warehousing.
(18) Residential uses coincident with or secondary to the commercial use and
occupancy of the premises; single-family and two-family dwelling units as a
principal use are prohibited. Accessory structures coincident with or secondary to
non-conforming residential structures existing at the date of adoption of this
ordinance may be constructed in accordance with the setback regulations of the
residential district most closely associated with the existing use of the property.
(19) Retail trade:
a. Automotive, truck, recreational vehicle, and heavy equipment parts and
accessory stores, excluding facilities with repair or maintenance facilities.
b. Furniture and home furnishings stores.
c. Electronics and appliance stores.
d. Building material, garden equipment and supplies dealers, indoor only.
e. Food and beverage stores.
f. Health and personal care stores.
g. Clothing and clothing accessories stores.
h. Sporting goods, hobby, book, music, and similar stores.
i. General merchandise and retail stores.
(20) Repair services, excluding automotive, truck, recreational vehicle, and heavy
equipment repair and maintenance services.
(21) Utility substations.
(22) Other permitted uses.
a. Adult establishments which are more than five hundred (500) feet from
schools, churches, community living arrangements, day care centers,
nursery schools, family day care homes, parks, playgrounds, other
community facilities, and other adult establishments.
b. Uses not explicitly enumerated in the section as permitted uses, but
determined by the Community Development Director to be closely similar
thereto provided that these uses are not specified elsewhere as requiring a
special use permit.
101415
(c) SPECIAL USES.
(1) Airport/heliport.
(2) Arts, entertainment, recreation, and sport facilities and services, outdoor only.
(3) Bed and breakfast facilities.
(4) Gasoline stations.
(5) Multi-family uses permitted in the R-3 Multi-Family District.
(6) Museums, historical sites, and similar institutions, outdoor only.
(7) Radio and television broadcasting facilities.
(8) Railroad right-of-way and uses essential to railroad operation.
(9) Schools serving more than thirty (30) students at any one time.
(10) Other uses requiring a special use permit:
a. Any use which utilizes outdoor storage or outdoor display of merchandise
or equipment. This requirement does not apply to outdoor display items,
which are removed each night.
b. Office buildings exceeding (3) three stories in height.
(d) USES REQUIRING CONDITIONAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL
(1) Any proposed new construction.
(2) Any proposed addition or expansion to a non-conforming lot, structure or use.
(3) Any proposed addition or expansion which exceeds five percent (5%) of the
building square footage or five hundred (500) square feet, whichever is less.
(4) A change in occupancy; this requirement does not include a change in tenant or
proprietorship of a substantially similar use to that which existed previously.
(e) SITE, ARCHITECTURAL, LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING REVIEW
(1) Review shall be required for projects and uses listed in 13-1-12(b)
(f) ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
(1) Accessory building and uses customary with and incidental to the principal use are
permitted unless otherwise excluded by this chapter.
(g) GENERAL STANDARDS.
(1) Maximum front yard setback. Structures or additions constructed after the
effective date of this ordinance shall be built no more than (10) feet from the front
yard property line or at the prevailing setback. The Plan Commission may modify
this requirement in instances where the structure would encroach into a vision
control area, where a lot has multiple street frontages, when outdoor seating or
plaza areas are proposed, or other similar instances as deemed appropriate by the
Plan Commission.
(2) Minimum front yard setback. Five (5) feet for all parking and paved areas, except
for pedestrian paths or plazas and points of ingress and egress approved by the
Plan Commission.
(3) Minimum side yard. None, unless abutting a residential district, then transitional
area requirements apply.
(4) Minimum rear yard. None, unless abutting a residential district, then transitional
area requirements apply.
(5) Minimum waterfront setback. Ten (10) feet for parking and paved areas, except
for pedestrian paths or plazas approved by the Plan Commission.
(6) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the following
standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured from
the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may be
constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
101415
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel of land
that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel of land
containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance equal
to the average setback of the principal building on the adjacent lots or
35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark, whichever distance is
greater.
(7) Minimum height. Twenty-four (24) feet or two stories.
(8) Maximum height. One hundred (100) feet or six (6) stories.
(9) Parking.
a. No off-street parking is required for the C-2 District; however, provisions
for such parking are encouraged.
b. If multi-family development is the principal use, parking shall be provided
as required in Article E.
c. If off-street parking is provided for, the parking design standards listed in
Section 13-1-51 shall apply.
(10) Screening. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(11) Landscaping. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12. The Plan Commission may reduce the
landscaping requirement when the requirement cannot be reasonably met due to
limitations unique to the site.
(12) Lighting. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(13) Design Standards.
a. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply with
the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
b. The following shall apply to additions or expansions not required to obtain
site plan approval:
1. The primary facade materials for all additions or expansions shall
be brick or natural stone. Where there is an addition or expansion
to an existing building, the facade materials on the portion of the
building being altered or added must visually match or
complement the appearance of the existing building. The Plan
Commission may consider the use of alternative facade materials
that are durable and of high quality for such additions or
expansions. Vinyl siding, aluminum siding, enameled steel, and
non-decorative concrete masonry units are prohibited as primary
facade materials for any building elevation.
2. Secondary facade materials may be used for architectural details or
enhancements to additions or expansions. Such materials shall be
high quality, durable, and not cover more than twenty-five (25)
percent of the building facade. Vinyl siding, aluminum siding,
enameled steel, and non-decorative concrete masonry units are
prohibited as secondary facade materials for any building
elevation. All secondary materials shall be approved by the Plan
Commission.
(h) NUISANCE CONTROL. No operation, process, manufacturing, or building shall
produce or create excessive noise, light, odor, smoke, vibration, heat, glare, dust, gas,
101415
electronic interference, toxic matter, industrial waste, or other external nuisance.
(i) SIGNS. Refer to Article F.
SEC. 13-1-31 I-1. HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
(a) PERMITTED USES.
(1) Manufacture, assembly, compounding, processing and packaging of goods,
materials and products (excluding automotive wrecking and junk yards).
(2) Printing, publishing and engraving.
(3) Research, laboratory and testing facilities.
(4) Transportation, trucking facilities or terminals and enclosed repair facilities.
(5) Wholesale, warehousing, storage and distribution.
(b) PERMITTED USES REQUIRING CONDITIONAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
(1) Radio, microwave or television tower.
(2) Railroad rights-of-way and uses essential to railroad operation.
(3) Retail trade, finance, insurance, real estate, office and other services incidental and
complementary to local industry.
(c) SPECIAL USES.
(1) Public utility structures.
(2) Commercial telecommunication facilities in accordance with Section 13-1-81.
(3) Auto/Truck Sales and Service.
(d) ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USES.
(1) Accessory buildings and uses customary with and incidental to the principal use are
permitted unless otherwise excluded by this Code.
(2) Dwellings for watchman.
(e) STANDARDS.
(1) Minimum area to be zoned Heavy Industrial District – Twenty (20) acres.
(2) Minimum lot size – One (1) acre.
(3) Minimum lot depth – Two hundred thirty-five (235) feet.
(4) Minimum lot width – One hundred eighty (180) feet.
(5) Minimum front yard setback – Thirty (30) feet for buildings and ten (10) feet for
parking.
(6) Minimum side yard – Ten (10) feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard – Ten (10) feet.
(8) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the
following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
whichever distance is greater.
(9) Maximum building height – One hundred (100) feet.
(10) Maximum lot coverage of buildings shall not exceed sixty percent (60%). The Plan
101415
Commission, upon review, may reduce this requirement up to fifty percent (50%).
(11) Minimum landscaping requirement.
a. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply with
the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
b. Requirements set forth in Sec. 13-1-17 for industrial transitional
landscaping areas shall apply to this district.
c. The Plan Commission, upon review, may reduce the required landscaping
area as set forth in 13-1-12 by up to fifty percent (50%) when the
requirement cannot be reasonably met due to limitations unique to the site.
(12) Parking and Loading. The parking and loading requirements listed in Article E
shall apply to this district.
(13) When the Heavy Industrial District is adjacent to a residential district or use, the
transitional area requirements shall apply.
(14) Lighting. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(15) Screening. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(16) Design Standards. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall
comply with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(17) Residential use is prohibited.
SEC. 13-1-32 I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
(a) INTENT. The purpose of this district is to encourage manufacturing, warehousing and
other similar uses in areas already established for such uses.
(b) PERMITTED USES.
(1) Insurance, real estate, office and other services incidental and complementary to
local industry.
(2) Manufacture, assembly, compounding, processing and packaging of goods,
materials and products.
(3) Printing, publishing and engraving.
(4) Research, laboratory and testing facilities.
(5) Transportation, trucking, facilities or terminals and enclosed repair facilities.
(6) Wholesale, warehousing, storage and distribution.
(c) PERMITTED USES REQUIRING CONDITIONAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
(1) Public utility structures.
(2) Railroad rights-of-way and uses essential to railroad operations.
(d) SPECIAL USES.
(1) Abattoir, stockyard, tannery, fertilizer manufacture, and garbage, rubbish, offal,
dead animal reduction or dumping.
(2) Saw and grist mill.
(3) Explosives manufacture and storage.
(4) Fuel storage and refining.
(5) Junk yard.
(6) Glue manufacture.
(7) Mining, quarrying, etc., activities.
(8) Acid manufacture.
(9) Smelting of ferrous or nonferrous metals.
(10) Commercial telecommunication facilities in accordance with Section 13-1-81.
(11) Auto/Truck Sales and Service
101415
(e) ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
(1) Dwellings for watchman.
(2) Accessory buildings and uses customary with and incidental to the principal use are
permitted unless otherwise excluded by this Code.
(f) STANDARDS.
(1) Minimum front yard setback -- Ten (10) feet.
(2) Minimum side yard -- None.
(3) Minimum rear yard -- Ten (10) feet.
(4) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the
following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
whichever distance is greater.
(5) Maximum building height -- One hundred (100) feet.
(6) Maximum lot coverage -- Sixty percent (60%) for all buildings. The Plan
Commission, upon review, may reduce this requirement by up to fifty percent
(50%).
(7) Minimum landscaping requirement.
a. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply with
the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
b. Requirements set forth in Sec. 13-1-17 for industrial transitional
landscaping areas shall apply to this district.
c. The Plan Commission, upon review, may reduce the required landscaping
area as set forth in 13-1-12 by up to fifty percent (50%) when the
requirement cannot be reasonably met due to limitations unique to the site.
(8) Parking and Loading. The parking and loading requirements listed in Article E
shall apply to this district.
(9) When the General Industrial District is adjacent to a residential district or use, the
transitional area requirements shall apply.
(10) Lighting. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(11) Screening. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(12) Design Standards. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall
comply with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(13) Residential use is prohibited.
SEC. 13-1-33 PUD (PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT) DISTRICT.
(a) INTENT. It is the intent of the City of Menasha that planned development be encouraged
for those areas of the community now undeveloped or undergoing redevelopment, and in
101415
those areas which, in time, would be annexed to the City. More specifically, it is the intent
to:
(1) Promote and permit flexibility that will encourage a more creative and imaginative
approach in development and result in a more efficient, aesthetic, desirable and
economical use of land, while maintaining intensity of use consistent with the
adopted comprehensive plan.
(2) Provide minimal effect upon adjacent properties and existing development. To this
end, the Plan Commission may make appropriate requirements.
(3) Promote development that can be conveniently, efficiently and economically served
by existing municipal utilities and services or by their logical extension.
(4) Promote flexibility in design, placement of buildings and use of open space,
pedestrian and vehicular circulation facilities and off-street parking areas in a
manner that will best utilize the potential of sites characterized by special features of
geography, geology, topography, size or shape.
(5) Provide, where it is shown to be in the public interest, for the preservation of
historical features and such natural features as streams, drainage ways, floodplains,
ponds/lakes topography, rock outcroppings, unique areas of vegetation, stands of
trees and other similar natural assets.
(6) Provide for more adequate recreational facilities and other public and common
facilities than would otherwise be provided under conventional land development.
(7) Provide for the enhancement of the natural setting through careful and sensitive
placement of man-made facilities and plant materials.
(b) REVIEW AND APPLICATION PROCEDURE. The review and processing of any
proposed PUD shall be as follows:
(1) Preapplication Conference. Prior to any application for PUD plan approval, contact
shall be made with the Department of Community Development for a preapplication
conference. The conference should occur prior to any extensive financial
expenditure on the part of the developer. The purpose of the meeting is to inform
appropriate City staff of the proposed development and to inform the developer
about various City codes, applicability of the proposed development, timing and
procedure, and any other pertinent information appropriate to the proposal. To this
end, the developer must outline the proposal in schematic and/or written form for
discussion purposes. Areas of consideration include, but are not limited to:
a. General discussion of project, building types, timing of development;
b. Proposed land uses and density ranges;
c. Conformance to the comprehensive plan;
d. Utility and street arrangements and patterns; and
e. Proposed open space and recreational facilities and review of natural
amenities to be preserved such as hill forms, wetlands, wooded areas and
water courses.
Subsequent to the meeting, the developer will be furnished, as appropriate, any
comments regarding the meeting, including recommendations to assist the developer
in processing the proposed plan. No oral, written or schematically illustrated
statements made during the course of the conference shall be held as legally binding.
(2) Application for PUD Plan Approval. After the preapplication conference,
application for PUD plan approval may be made on forms obtained from the
Department of Community Development. Upon receipt, the application will be
forwarded to the Plan Commission for review and recommendation. Such
recommendations shall be forwarded to the Common Council within sixty (60)
days. Upon written request and approval by the Common Council, an additional
101415
sixty (60) days may be granted for a recommendation. The application shall include
the following written and visual materials:
a. A written statement concerning the proposed development, including the
nature of the project, proposed land uses, building types, density ranges,
conformance with the comprehensive plan and description of the open space
and recreational system.
b. A site development plan containing the following:
1. Legal description of the total site being developed along with the
name(s) of the owner(s) and seal of the registered land surveyor
making the plat;
2. A topographical survey of the site at an interval of not more than five
(5) feet, unless characteristics of the site indicate a greater or shorter
interval appears appropriate;
3. Dimensions and bearings of external property boundaries;
4. The location of all existing structures, easements, utilities, proposed
utilities and public dedications, either contained upon or adjacent to
the site;
5. The existing and proposed public and/or private street and sidewalk
system; and
6. A statement of quantitative data including total number and types of
structures to be constructed on the site, individual parcel sizes, lot
coverages, gross and net residential densities, areas reserved for open
space and recreation and off-street parking areas.
c. Supporting information, if required by the Department of Community
Development, including:
1. Any water course areas.
2. Unique natural features.
3. Unique historical sites.
4. General vegetation cover.
5. Soil suitability.
d. A landscape plan delineating the proposed treatment of the site.
e. Representative floor plans and exterior elevations of proposed structures and
buildings.
(c) DESIGN STANDARDS. Even though PUD's purpose is to permit flexibility of design,
certain standards must be applied to insure compatibility of the project with the intent of
this Chapter. These standards are:
(1) Permitted Uses. Uses eligible for inclusion in the PUD include any use listed as a
permitted use or special use in the zoning district that the subject property (ies) was
(were) located within immediately prior to the requested zoning classification
change to PUD.
(2) Harmony With Surrounding Uses: The uses and design of the PUD will be
harmonious with the character or the surrounding area in terms of density, intensity
of use, size and heights of buildings, architecture and other impacts.
(3) Tract. Size. The minimum size tract for a PUD is one (1) acre.
(4) Parking. All parking shall generally comply with the requirements as set forth in
Article E. Any variation from these requirements shall be noted on the PUD plan
and any subsequent approval thereof. Parking lot design consideration shall be as
follows:
a. Parking areas shall be treated as an integral part of the development in scale,
101415
location and character;
b. Parking areas shall be so arranged to discourage through traffic;
c. As appropriate, parking areas shall be screened from adjacent structures and
streets with hedges, plantings, fences, earth berms, changes in grade and/or
other similar examples; and
d. Parking areas shall be so designed to allow for drainage of surface water
without erosion, flooding and other inconveniences.
(5) Open Space. A major portion of any PUD is its open space. The desirability is
closely tied to the integration of open space with the total development. The intent
statement of this Section sets forth the overall objective desired for PUDs.
Therefore, no quantitative standards are stated in this Section. Quality standards
acknowledge the separate and multiple functions of open space: active recreation,
passive recreation and preservation of natural site amenities. In designing the PUD,
consideration shall be given to such functions.
(6) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the
following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
whichever distance is greater.
(d) DESIGNATION OF THE PUD DISTRICT. If the Common Council approves the PUD
plan, then the land may be designated as a PUD District in accordance with the rezoning
procedures described in this Code. Thereafter, building permits may be issued in
accordance with the approved PUD plan.
(e) CHANGES IN APPROVED PLAN. Changes of a minor nature may be approved by the
Department of Community Development. However, any proposed change of major
consequence may only be authorized by the Common Council upon recommendation by the
Plan Commission. Major changes shall include:
(1) Non-conformance to the original approved overall statement of intent;
(2) Any increase in density, numbers and/or types of dwelling units; and
(3) Any change in maximum height or change in location of structures or buildings.
If any proposed change is questionable, whether it is of major or minor consequence, such
determination shall be made by the Common Council. A PUD plan runs with the land and
is binding on any and all interested parties from and after the time a PUD is approved.
(f) GUARANTEE OF COMPLETION. At the time of final approval of the PUD plan, the
Plan Commission may require a contract, with safeguards satisfactory to the City Attorney,
guaranteeing completion of the development prior to a present date. If the development is
to be constructed in stages, the Plan Commission may require a contract, with safeguards
satisfactory to the City Attorney, guaranteeing completion of any stage; such contract shall
be signed prior to the issuance of building permits for any stage. The Plan Commission
shall notify the developer in writing, prior to preliminary plan approval of the Commission's
101415
intention to require a guarantee of completion for any stage.
SEC. 13-1-34 R-MH MOBILE HOME DISTRICT.
The requirements for property in the R-MH Mobile Home District shall be as provided in Article H
of this Chapter.
SEC. 13-1-35 R-2A MULTI-FAMILY, ZERO LOT LINE RESIDENCE DISTRICT
(a) INTENT. The purpose of this district is to provide small scale and moderate density multifamily
development. This district is intended to serve in a transitional capacity between
higher and lower intensity land uses.
(b) PERMITTED USES.
(1) Any use permitted in the R-1 Single Family Residence District and the R-2 Two
Family Residence District.
(2) Single family attached dwellings and zero lot line attached dwellings.
(c) PERMITTED USES REQUIRING SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
(1) Structures with three or more units.
(2) Utility substation.
(3) Any use listed as requiring a special use permit.
(d) SPECIAL USES.
(1) Boarding or Rooming House.
(2) Bed and breakfast.
(3) Cemetery.
(4) Church.
(5) Day care center/nursery school.
(6) Farm.
(7) Golf course.
(8) Park or playground.
(9) Public building.
(10) Public library, museum, art gallery, or community center.
(11) Railroad rights-of way and uses essential to their operation.
(12) Nursing home.
(13) School.
(e) SITE, ARCHITECTURAL, LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING REVIEW
(1) Review shall be required for projects and uses listed in 13-1-12(b)
(f) GARAGES, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
(1) One (1) private garage per dwelling unit. Such garage may be constructed in
addition to the garage space within the principal structure. A minimum of one
garage or underground parking stall shall be provided for each unit.
(2) One (1) accessory building per lot.
(3) Any of the following accessory uses per lot:
a. One (1) private swimming pool.
b. One (1) private tennis court.
c. One (1) satellite antenna/dish.
d. One (1) detached solar structure.
(g) GENERAL STANDARDS.
101415
(1) Uses requiring special use permits shall comply with the requirements of 13-1-12.
(2) The following design standards shall be applied to structures with three or more
attached or zero lot line residential units:
a. Architecture. Architectural design shall be provided for all building facades.
All side and rear elevations shall be given architectural treatment compatible
with the front elevation of the building. Buildings shall be finished in an
attractive manner in keeping with the accepted standards used for the type of
building. Principal buildings shall be faced in stone, brick, or other
decorative masonry material.
b. Screening. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall
comply with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
c. Landscaping. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall
comply with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
d. Lighting. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall
comply with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
e. Parking. The parking requirements listed in Section 13-1-51 shall apply to
this district.
(3) Parking. Refer to Article E.
(4) GARAGES REQUIRED. On all parcels where a new dwelling is to be
constructed building plans shall make provision for an attached or detached
garage meeting the minimum requirements of subsection (a) of this section for
each dwelling unit. No attached garage may be converted from garage to living
space unless a garage meeting the requirements of these subsections exists or is
constructed on the lot.
(a) The minimum dimensions for an attached or detached garage shall be 22
feet wide and 22 feet deep accessed by a garage door not less than 16 feet
wide and 7 feet high for a single door, or two doors not less than 9 feet
wide and 7 feet high.
No occupancy permit shall be granted for a newly constructed dwelling unit until
final inspection of a detached garage has been completed and approved by the
building inspector.
(h) SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLINGS.
(1) Maximum Density. Thirty-six hundred (3,600) square feet per dwelling unit.
(2) Minimum Lot Width. Sixty (60) feet.
(3) Minimum Front Yard Setback. Twenty (20) feet or the prevailing setback.
(4) Minimum Side Yard Setbacks.
a. Eight (8) feet for the principal structure, parking lots, or attached garages.
b. Three (3) feet for detached garages and accessory buildings located eight (8)
feet or more from the principal structure.
c. Six (6) feet for detached garages and accessory buildings located less than
eight (8) feet from the principal structure.
(5) Minimum Rear Yard Setbacks.
a. Thirty (30) feet for the principal structure.
b. Three (3) feet for detached garages and accessory buildings located eight (8)
feet or more from the principal structure.
c. Eight (8) feet for detached garages and accessory buildings located less than
eight (8) feet from the principal structure.
d. Eight (8) feet for parking lots.
(6) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels within the corporate boundaries of the City of Menasha prior
101415
to May 8, 1982 the following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as
measured from the ordinary high-water mark.
b) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the following
standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as
measured from the ordinary high water mark, except that a
principal structure may be constructed or placed within the
shoreland setback area if all of the following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot
or parcel of land that is immediately adjacent on each side
to a lot or parcel of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a
distance equal to the average setback of the principal
building on the adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary
high-water mark, whichever distance is greater.
(7) Maximum Height. Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories for the
principal structure.
(8) Parking. Refer to Article E.
(i) ZERO LOT LINE ATTACHED DWELLINGS.
(1) Maximum Density. One (1) dwelling unit per lot.
(2) Minimum Lot Size. Thirty-six hundred (3,600) square feet.
(3) Minimum Lot Width. Thirty (30) feet.
(4) Minimum Front Yard Setback. Twenty (20) feet or the prevailing setback.
(5) Minimum Side Yard Setbacks.
a. Principal Structure. Minimum side yard of zero (0) feet provided that:
1. Not more than six (6) units may be attached in series. The required
side yards for lots located on either end of such a series shall be ten
(10) feet for that side which is not attached to the adjoining unit.
2. The adjoining side yard setback of the lot adjacent to the zero (0)
side yard is also zero (0).
3. The adjacent lots with zero (0) side yards are held under the same
ownership at the time of initial construction of the attached
dwellings.
4. All units of the attached dwelling are completed prior to occupancy
of any unit.
5. Restrictive covenants shall be recorded at the Calumet or Winnebago
County Register of Deeds as determined by the location of the
proposed development, providing declarations and/or bylaws similar
to those typically recorded on a Declaration of Condominium. Said
covenants shall provide for mediation of any and all disputes
between owners of each unit and any third party with regard to
construction, use, and maintenance of the real property. Furthermore,
said covenants shall specifically state that the City of Menasha and
all approving authorities shall not be held responsible for same, and
that said covenants shall inure to all heirs and assigns.
b. Detached Garages and Accessory Structures.
1. Minimum side yard of three (3) feet if located eight 9*0 feet or more
from the principal.
2. Minimum side yard of six (6) feet if located less than eight (8) feet
101415
from the principal structure.
c. Parking Lots. Three (3) feet.
(6) Minimum Rear Yard Setbacks.
a. Thirty (30) feet for the principal structure.
b. Three (3) feet for detached garages and accessory buildings located eight (8)
feet or more from the principal structure.
c. Eight (8) feet for detached garages and accessory buildings located less than
eight (8) feet from the principal structure.
d. Eight (8) feet for parking lots.
(7) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels within the corporate boundaries of the City of Menasha prior
to May 8, 1982 the following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high-water mark.
b) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the
following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
whichever distance is greater.
(7) Maximum Height. Thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2-1/2) stories for the
principal structure.
(8) Parking. Refer to Article E.
SEC. 13-1-36 C-3 BUSINESS AND OFFICE DISTRICT.
(a) INTENT. The purpose of this district is to accommodate a limited range of general
business and light industrial uses. These provisions are intended to promote aesthetically
pleasing and harmonious overall development by establishing minimum standards for site
development and building design.
(b) PERMITTED USES:
(1) Research, laboratory, testing, and technology-based uses.
(2) Day care centers.
(3) Medical, dental and other health services.
(4) Professional, general business, contractors and public administration offices.
(5) Recreational/fitness facilities.
(6) Research, testing, and technology-based uses.
(7) Service industries such as personal, education, business, and financial services.
(8) Utility substations.
(c) SPECIAL USES:
(1) Landscape nurseries.
(2) Light manufacturing and assembly.
(3) Outdoor recreational facilities.
101415
(4) Printing, publishing, and engraving.
(5) Radio or television stations.
(6) Retail.
(7) Multi-Family housing as permitted in the R-4 Multi-Family Residential District
(d) SITE, ARCHITECTURAL, LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING REVIEW
(1) Review shall be required for projects and uses listed in 13-1-12(b)
(e) USES REQUIRING CONDITIONAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL
(1) Any proposed new construction.
(2) Any proposed addition or expansion to a non-conforming, lot, structure or use.
(3) Any proposed addition or expansion which exceeds five percent (5%) of the
building square footage or five hundred (500) square feet, whichever is less.
(4) A change in occupancy; this requirement does not include a change in tenant or
proprietorship of a substantially similar use to that which existed previously.
(f) GENERAL STANDARDS.
(1) Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum front yard setback: twenty-five (25) feet for structures, ten (10) feet for
parking and paved areas.
(3) Minimum side yard: ten (10) feet for structures, parking and paved areas.
(4) Minimum rear yard: twenty-five (25) feet for structures, ten (10) feet for parking or
paved areas.
(5) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the
following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
whichever distance is greater.
(6) Maximum lot coverage: thirty percent (30%) covered by buildings.
(7) Maximum building height: forty-five (45) feet or three (3) stories.
(8) If residential development is the principal use, then all requirements and standards
of the applicable residential district apply.
(9) Design Standards.
a. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply with
the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
b. The following shall apply to additions or expansions not required to obtain
site plan approval;
i. The primary façade material for all additions or expansions shall
be brick or natural stone. Where there is an addition or an
expansion to an existing building, the façade materials on the
portion of the building being altered or added must visually
match or complement the appearance of the existing building.
The Plan Commission may consider the use of alternative façade
101415
materials that are durable and of high quality for such additions
or expansions.
ii. Secondary façade materials may be used for architectural details
or enhancements to additions or expansions. Such materials
shall be high quality, durable, and cover not more than twentyfive
percent (25%) of the building façade. The Plan Commission
shall approve all secondary materials.
(10) Screening. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(11) Landscaping. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12. Requirements set forth in Sec. 13-1-17
for commercial transitional landscaping areas shall apply to this district. If multifamily
residential development is the principal use, then transitional area
requirements apply.
(12) Lighting. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(13) Parking. The parking requirements listed in Section 13-1-51(b) shall apply to this
district.
(14) Loading. No loading shall be allowed in between any building and any street rightof-
way. The loading standards stated in Section 13-1-50 shall apply to this district.
(g) NUISANCE CONTROL. No operation, process, manufacturing, or building shall
produce or create excessive noise, light, odor, smoke, vibration, heat, dust, gas, electronic
interference, toxic matter, industrial waste, or other external nuisance.
(h) SIGNS. Refer to Article F.
SEC. 13-1-37 C4 - BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT.
(a) INTENT. The purpose of this district is to accommodate a limited range of general
business and light industrial uses. These provisions are intended to promote aesthetically
pleasing and harmonious overall development by establishing a minimum standards for site
development and building design.
(b) PERMITTED USES.
(1) Administrative, management, and support services.
(2) Construction services and contractors offices.
(3) Educational services and schools serving thirty (30) students or less.
(4) Financial and insurance services.
(5) Light manufacturing and assembly.
(6) Medical, dental and other health services.
(7) Personal services.
(8) Printing, publishing, and engraving.
(9) Professional, scientific, and technical services.
(10) Research, laboratory, testing, and technology-based uses
(11) Utility substations.
(12) Wholesale and distribution facilities.
(13) Uses not explicitly enumerated in the section as permitted uses, but determined by
the Plan Commission to be closely similar thereto provided that these uses are not
specified elsewhere as requiring a special use permit.
(c) SPECIAL USES.
(1) Day care centers.
(2) Radio or television broadcasting facilities.
101415
(3) Recreation and fitness facilities.
(4) Retail.
(5) Expansion of mini warehouse facilities in existence prior to January 1, 1991.
(d) SITE, ARCHITECTURAL, LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING REVIEW
(1) Review shall be required for projects and uses listed in 13-1-12(b)
(2) Outdoor storage and outdoor display areas shall be prohibited.
(e) USES REQUIRING CONDITIONAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
(1) Any proposed new construction.
(2) Any proposed addition or expansion to a non-conforming lot, structure, or use.
(3) Any proposed addition or expansion which exceeds five percent (5%) of the
building square footage or five hundred (500) square feet, whichever is less.
(4) A change in occupancy; this requirement does not include a change in tenant or
proprietorship of a substantially similar use to that which existed previously.
(f) GENERAL STANDARDS.
(1) Minimum lot size: twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
(2) Minimum front yard setback: twenty-five (25) feet for structures, ten (10) feet for
parking and paved areas.
(3) Minimum side yard: ten (10) feet for structures, parking, and paved areas.
(4) Minimum rear yard: twenty-five (25) feet for structures, ten (10) feet for parking or
paved areas.
(5) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the following
standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured from the
ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may be constructed or
placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel of land
that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel of land
containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance equal
to the average setback of the principal building on the adjacent lots or 35
feet from the ordinary high-water mark, whichever distance is greater.
(6) Maximum lot coverage: thirty percent (30%) covered by buildings.
(7) Maximum building height: forty-five (45) feet or three (3) stories.
(8) Design Standards.
a. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply with
the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
b. The following shall apply to additions or expansions not required to obtain
site plan approval:
i. The primary façade material for all additions or expansions shall be
brick, natural stone or decorative concrete masonry units. Where there
is an addition or an expansion to an existing building, the façade
materials on the portion of the building being altered or added must
visually match or complement the appearance of the existing building.
The Plan Commission may consider the use of alternative façade
materials that are durable and of high quality for such additions or
expansions.
ii. Secondary façade materials may be used for architectural details or
enhancements to additions or expansions. Such materials shall be
high quality, durable, and cover not more than twenty-five percent (25%)
101415
of the building façade. The Plan Commission shall approve all
secondary materials.
(9) Screening. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(10) Landscaping. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12. Requirements set forth in Sec. 13-1-17
for commercial transitional landscaping areas shall apply to this district.
(11) Lighting. Permitted uses requiring conditional site plan approval shall comply
with the requirements of Section 13-1-12.
(12) Parking. The parking requirements listed in Section 13-1-51(b) shall apply to this
district.
(13) Loading. No loading shall be allowed in between any building and any street
right-of-way. The loading requirements stated in Section 13-1-50 shall apply to
this district.
(g) NUISANCE CONTROL. No operation, process, manufacturing, or building shall
produce or create excessive noise, light, odor, smoke, vibration, heat, glare, dust,
gas, electronic interference, toxic matter, industrial waste, or other external
nuisance.
(h) SIGNS. Refer to Article F.
SEC. 13-1-38 TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT
Section 1: Applicability and Purpose
(a) STATUTORY AUTHORITY. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority
contained in section 62.23 and 66.1027 of the Wisconsin State Statutes.
(b) PURPOSE. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the development and
redevelopment of land in the City of Menasha consistent with the design principals of
Traditional Neighborhoods. A traditional neighborhood is:
(1) Compact;
(2) Designed for the human scale;
(3) Provides for a mix of uses, including residential, commercial, civic, and open
space in close proximity to one another within a neighborhood;
(4) Provides for a mix of housing types, and styles that will accommodate households
of various ages, sizes, and incomes;
(5) Provides for a mix of transportation methods for motorists, bicyclists, and
pedestrians in a compact pattern of narrow, interconnected streets;
(6) Consistent with the City of Menasha’s comprehensive plan.
(c) APPLICABILITY. This ordinance is an alternative set of standards for development
within the City of Menasha for new developments and redevelopment, or infill
developments generally incorporating an area of one hundred (100) acres or more.
Section 2: Definitions
The following definitions shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
(a) ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or a portion of the main building
that is located on the same lot of parcel as the main building and the use of which is
clearly incidental to that of the main building or the use of the premises. This definition
101415
excludes private garages.
(b) AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Housing in which mortgages, amortization, taxes,
insurance, and condominium and association fee, if any, constitute no more than [28]
percent of gross household income for a household of the size which may occupy the unit.
In the case of dwelling units for rent, housing that is affordable means housing for which
the rent and utilities constitute no more than [30] percent of gross annual household
income for a household of the size that may occupy the unit.
(c) ARTERIAL. A major street for carrying a large volume of through traffic in the area,
normally controlled by traffic signs and signals.
(d) BLOCK. A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public
land, railroad right-of-ways, waterways, or any other barrier to the continuity of
development.
(e) BUILDING SETBACK, FRONT. The distance from the street right-of-way line to the
closest point of the foundation of a building or projection thereof.
(f) COLLECTOR. A street designed to carry moderate volumes of traffic from local streets
to arterial streets or from arterial to arterial.
(g) COMMON OPEN SPACE. A squares, greens, neighborhood parks, and linear
environmental corridors owned and maintained by the city, or otherwise held for public
use.
(h) CURB RADIUS. The curved edge of streets at an intersection measured at the outer edge
of the street curb or of the parking lane.
(i) ENVIRONMENTAL CORRIDORS. Tracts of land intentionally left undeveloped to
conserve natural environments for indigenous plants and animals.
(j) LOT. A tract of land, designated by meters and bounds, registered land survey, or plat,
and separated from other tracts of land by legal description approved by the City of
Menasha and recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds.
(k) LOT LINE. A lot line that is the property line bounding a lot, except that where any
portion of a lot extends into the public right of way or a proposed right or way, the line of
such public right of way shall be the lot line.
(l) PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which the primary use of the lot on which the
building is located is conducted.
(m) QUEUING LANE. One lane on a local street that is reserved for parking, but may be
used as a regular travel lane when not being used for parking.
(n) TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD. A compact, mixed use neighborhood where
residential, commercial, and civic buildings are within close proximity to each other.
Section 3: Traditional Neighborhood Development Design Standards
(a) NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGN. To achieve the goals of Traditional Neighborhood
Design, the development should be arranged to form neighborhoods centered on
commercial and civic buildings. Areas designated as residential shall include
opportunities for commercial use (i.e. coffee shops, bed and breakfasts, home businesses,
etc.). With a design objective that every resident of that neighborhood is within a
maximum ten-minute walk from such facilities. Traditional neighborhoods shall be
designed to have a mix of residential, commercial, civic, and open space, as prescribed
below:
(1) Mixed Residential Use. The following types of residential uses should be
incorporated into traditional neighborhoods:
a. Single-family detached dwellings;
101415
b. Single-family attached dwellings, including duplexes, townhouses, and row houses;
c. Multi-family dwellings, including senior housing;
d. Secondary dwelling units (i.e. “granny flats,” “live/work” units that combine
residential space with commercial space in the same building);
e. “Special needs” housing such as community living arrangements or assisted
living facilities.
(2) Mixed Use Areas. Incorporated into every neighborhood should be a mix of
commercial (e.g. food services, retail stores, services, and accommodations, etc.),
civic buildings (e.g. libraries, museums, city offices, places of worship, schools,
etc.), residential, and open space.
(3) Open Space. Open (e.g. plazas) and/or green space (e.g. environmental corridors,
parks, playgrounds, community squares, and storm water management areas)
should be incorporated wherever possible. Larger outdoor recreational areas
should be located at the periphery of the neighborhood rather than at the center.
(b) DEVELOPMENT DENSITY AND OPEN SPACE. The number of residential,
commercial, civic, and open space shall be determined as follows:
(1) Mixed Residential Use:
a. The number of single-family attached and detached units shall be no more
than 8 dwelling units per net acre;
b. The number of multi-family units shall be no more than eighteen (18)
dwelling units per net acre;
c. Secondary dwelling units shall be permissible in addition to the number of
dwelling units authorized under this section. However, the total number of
secondary dwelling units shall not be more than ten (10) percent of the total
number of single family attached and detached units.
d. For each affordable housing unit provided under this section, one additional
dwelling unit shall be permitted, up to a maximum fifteen (15) percent
increase in dwelling units.
e. All residential lots shall face parks or squares whenever possible, or local
streets.
(2) Mixed Use Areas:
a. The number of single-family and multi-family dwelling units permitted shall
be calculated the same as above plus an additional number of units not to
exceed ten percent (10%) of the amount permitted above.
b. All dwelling units constructed above commercial uses shall be permissible in
addition to the number of dwelling units authorized under this section.
However, the total number of dwelling units shall not be increased by more
than ten (10) dwelling units or ten percent (10%), whichever is greater.
c. The amount of nonresidential development should range from a minimum of
one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet of commercial floor area per
residential dwelling unit to a maximum of three hundred (300) square feet of
commercial floor area per dwelling unit.
e. No commercial building shall exceed six thousand (6000) square feet.
f. Civic lots shall be within or adjacent to squares or parks, or on lots terminating
street vistas.
(3) Open Space.
a. At least fifteen percent (15%) or two acres, whichever is greater, of the gross
acreage of the Traditional Neighborhood Development must be open space.
Each Neighborhood shall have at least one moderately sized open space for
101415
public consumption.
b. Open space may include undeveloped areas such as steep slopes, wetlands,
and storm water management areas. At least twenty-five percent (25%) of the
open space must be common open space dedicated to the public for parkland.
c. Ninety percent (90%) of the lots within the areas devoted to mixed residential
uses shall be within a one-fourth (¼) mile or five (5) minute walk from
common open space.
d. Neighborhoods along waterfronts shall provide a park or square along the
waterfront.
(c) BUILDING SETBACKS AND LOT LINES. Street layouts should provide for
perimeter blocks that are generally in the range of two hundred (200) to four hundred
(400) feet deep and four hundred (400) and eight hundred (800) feet long. A variety of
lot sizes shall be provided to facilitate housing diversity and choice and meet the
projected requirements of people with different housing needs.
(1) Lot Widths. Lot widths should create a relatively symmetrical street cross section
that reinforces the public space of the street as a simple, unified public space.
(2) Front Building Setback for Mixed Use Areas. Commercial buildings should abut
the sidewalk. Civic buildings have no setback requirements.
(3) Front Building Setback for Mixed Residential Areas. Single-family detached
residences shall have buildings setback in the front of fifteen (15) feet. Singlefamily
attached residence and multi-family residences shall have a building
setback in the front of twenty (20) feet.
(4) Rear Building Setback for Rear Mixed Residential Areas. The principal building
on lots devoted to single-family detached residences shall be setback no less than
thirty (30) feet from the rear lot line.
(5) Side Setbacks. Provisions for zero lot-line single-family dwelling should be
made, provided that a reciprocal access easement is recorded for both lots and
townhouses or other attached dwellings, provided that all dwellings have
pedestrian access to the rear yard through means other than the principal structure.
(6) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels within the corporate boundaries of the City of Menasha prior to
May 8, 1982 the following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high-water mark.
b) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the following
standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
whichever distance is greater.
101415
(d) TRANSPORTATION. The circulation system shall provide for different forms of
transportation. The circulation system will allow for functional and visual links within
the residential and mixed-use areas. Aside from providing adequate traffic capacity, the
circulation system shall also provide pedestrian and bicycle routes. Lot access shall be
off streets with low volumes of traffic.
(1) Pedestrian transportation. Pedestrian walkways should minimize pedestrian-motor
vehicle conflicts. All sidewalks shall be buffered from a parallel roadway by a
parking lane and/or an evenly spaced row of trees or shrubs.
a. Clear and well-lighted sidewalks, three (3) to five (5) feet in width shall connect
all dwelling entrances to the adjacent public walkway in residential areas.
1. Clear and well-lighted walkways, a minimum of five (5) feet in width, shall
connect building entrances to the adjacent public sidewalks and to associated
parking areas in mixed use areas.
2. Sidewalks shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act.
3. Intersection of sidewalks with streets shall be designed with clearly defined
edges as crosswalks. Crosswalks shall be well lit and clearly marked with
contrasting materials at the edge or with striping.
(2) Bicycle transportation. Pathways for bicycle transportation shall be provided
either in combination with pedestrian routes, or on streets. Bicycle paths sharing
street space shall be well marked and no less than four (4) feet wide.
(3) Motor Vehicle Transportation. Motor vehicle transportation shall be designed to
minimize conflicts with pedestrians and bicycles. Traffic calming features such as
queuing streets, curb extensions, traffic circles, and medians may be used to
encourage slow traffic speeds. Long vistas shall be interrupted whenever possible
by civic buildings or gentle curves in the road whereby slowing traffic and giving
civic buildings more prominence within the community. Streets design is outlined
below as well as in Table 1.1.
a. Each street within a traditional neighborhood development shall be classified
according to the following (arterial streets should not bisect traditional
neighborhood developments):
1. Collector. This street provides access to commercial or mixed use buildings,
but is also part of the City of Menasha’s major street network. On-street
parking, whether diagonal or parallel, helps slow traffic;
2. Subcollector. This street provides primary access to individual residential
properties and connects streets of lower and higher function. Design speed is
25mph;
3. Local street. This street allows primary access to individual residential
properties. Traffic volumes are relatively low with a design speed of 25mph;
4. Alley. These streets provide secondary access to residential properties where
street frontages are narrow, where the street is designed with narrow width to
provide limited on-street parking, or where alley access development is
desired to increase residential densities. Alleys may provide delivery access
or alternate parking access to commercial properties.
101415
Table 1.0
Collector Subcollector Local Street Alley
Average
Daily Trips
750 or more 750-1500 Less than 250 Not applicable
Right-of-
Way
76-88 feet 48-72 feet 3 5 - 50 feet 12-16 feet
Auto Travel
Lanes
Two or three 12'
lanes
Two 10' lanes Two 10' lanes, or
one 14' (queuing)
lane
Two 8' lanes
for two-way
traffic, or one
12' lane for
one-way
traffic
Bicycle
Lanes
Two 6' lanes
combined with
parking lanes
4' lanes with no
parking or 6'
lanes combined
with parking
None None
Parking Both sides 8' None, one, or
both sides, 8'
None or one side None
Curb and
Gutter
Required Required Not required
Planting
Strips
Minimum 6' Minimum 6' Minimum 6' None
Sidewalks Both sides 5'
minimum
Both sides 3-5
feet
Both sides, 3-5
feet
None
(4) Street Layout. All streets shall connect to other streets; streets shall terminate
only in open spaces or civic buildings. Streets should follow the natural contours
of the land, and whenever possible form a grid-like pattern.
(5) Intersection. Intersections should be at right angles whenever possible, but in no
case less than 75 degrees. Low volume streets may form three-way intersections
with the through street receiving the precedence.
(6) Corner Radii. A tangential arc shall round the roadway edge at street intersections
with a maximum radius of fifteen (15) feet for local streets and twenty (20) feet
for intersections involving collector or arterial streets. The intersection with local
streets or allies shall have radii of ten (10) feet.
(7) Curb Cuts. Curb Cuts for private driveways shall be prohibited along arterial
streets. Curb cuts shall be limited to intersections with other streets or access
drives to parking areas for commercial, civic, or multi-family residential uses.
Vision clearance shall be maintained at intersection, as provided by Menasha
ordinance.
(8) Parking. Parking areas for community use should be encouraged.
a. In a mixed-use area, a parking lot shall be located at the rear or side of a
building. If located at the side, the parking shall be screened by the use of a
hedge or other barrier as described in section 3.6 of this ordinance.
b. In a mixed-use area, a commercial use must provide one parking space for
every five hundred (500) square feet of gross building area.
c. Parking lots or garages shall not be adjacent to or opposite a street intersection.
101415
d. In parking areas, one bicycle parking space shall be provided for every ten (10)
motor vehicle parking spaces.
e. Multi-family uses must provide one and one half (1.5) parking space for every
dwelling unit.
(e) ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN
(1) Existing Structures
a. Existing structures, if determined to be historic or architecturally significant,
shall be protected from demolition or encroachment by incompatible structures
or landscape development.
b. Renovation or restoration of the historic or significant building shall adhere to
the U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic
Properties.
(2) New Structures
a. New structures within a Traditional Neighborhood Development shall be no
more than three (3) stories for a single-family residential, or five (5) stories for
commercial, multi-family residential, or mixed-use buildings.
b. All commercial and multi-family buildings will comply with the requirements
per the C-2 zoning ordinance. The primary façade materials shall be brick or
natural stone. The Plan Commission shall consider alternative building
materials that are durable and of high quality. Vinyl siding, aluminum siding,
enameled steel, non-decorative concrete masonry units, and glass are prohibited
as primary façade materials. Secondary façade materials will likewise be
durable and of high quality material pending approval of the Plan Commission.
c. Configurations
1. The architectural features, materials, and articulation of a façade of a
building shall be continued on all sides visible from a public street.
2. The front façade of the principal building on any lot shall face onto a
public street. The front façade shall not be oriented to face directly
toward a parking lot.
3. Porches, pent roofs, roof overhangs, hooded front doors, or other similar
architectural elements shall define the entrance to all residences.
4. For commercial buildings, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the front
façade on the ground floor shall be transparent, consisting of window or
door openings allowing views into and out of the interior.
(3) Garages and Secondary Dwelling Units. Garages and secondary dwelling units
may be placed on a single-family detached residential lot within the principal
building or an accessory building provided that the secondary dwelling unit shall
not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet.
(4) Exterior Signage. In mixed-use areas, all exterior signs shall be wall-mounted, or
projecting signs as per the C-2 zoning ordinance. Cantilever signs shall be
mounted perpendicular to the wall and shall not exceed eight (8) square feet.
Awnings or overhangs may extend over the sidewalk a maximum of six (6) feet
and may also be used for advertisement purposes.
(f) LIGHTING AND LANDSCAPING
(1) Exterior Lighting
a. Street lighting shall be provided along all streets. Numerous smaller lights are
preferable to fewer high intensity lights. All lights shall be placed on both sides
of the street at approximate intervals of seventy-five (75) feet. Street lighting
101415
design should comply with the minimum standards of the Illumination
Engineering Society.
b. Exterior lighting shall be directed downward in order to reduce glare onto
adjacent properties.
(2) Street Trees. There shall be a minimum of one deciduous canopy tree per thirty
(30) to thirty-five (35) feet of street frontage, or fraction thereof. Whenever
possible, trees shall be planted in the landscaped area of a boulevard, or between
the street right-of-way and the sidewalk.
(3) Parking Area Landscaping and Screening.
a. All parking and loading areas fronting public streets, or abutting residential
districts, shall have a landscaped area at least five (5) feet wide along the
public street or sidewalk. Screening materials may consist of trees or shrubs,
or architectural features such as walls or fences no less than five (5) feet in and
no more than eight (8) feet in height. The use of barbwire shall be used only in
areas that are not within public view.
b. The corners of parking lots and all other areas not used for parking or vehicular
circulation shall be landscaped. Vegetation should include grasses or other
perennial flowing plants, vines, shrubs, or trees. Such space may also include
architectural features such as benches, kiosks, or bicycle parking.
c. In large parking lots containing more than two hundred (200) spaces, an
additional landscaped area of at least three hundred (300) square feet shall be
provided for each twenty five (25) spaces, containing one canopy tree and
additional grasses, flowers, or shrubs.
(4) Landscaping Materials. All plant material must meet minimum standards set by
the American Association of Nurserymen. Landscape species shall be indigenous
and proven adaptable to the climate, but shall not be invasive species.
(5) Maintenance of Landscaping
a. All landscape material shall be installed to current industry standards.
b. Maintenance and replacement of landscape material shall be the responsibility
of the property owner. Landscape maintenance should incorporate
environmentally sound management practices, such as water and energyefficient
irrigation systems.
(g) STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. All designs for Traditional Neighborhood
Development shall indicate a stormwater management plan. This plan should minimize
off-site stormwater runoff, promote on-site filtration, and minimize the discharge of
pollutants to ground and surface water. Natural topography and existing land cover
should be maintained/protected to the maximum extent practicable. New development
and redevelopment shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Untreated, direct stormwater discharges to wetlands or surface waters are not
permissible except where traditional neighborhood development is established as
part of a re-development of infill project.
(2) Post development peak discharge rates should not exceed predevelopment conditions.
(3) Post development patterns of stormwater runoff should approximate
predevelopment conditions.
(4) Erosion and sediment controls must be implemented to remove eighty percent
(80%) of the average annual load of total suspended solids.
(5) Areas for snow storage should be provided unless a satisfactory alternative plan
can be devised.
(6) Redevelopment stormwater management systems should improve existing
101415
conditions and meet standards to the extent practicable.
(7) All treatment systems or BMPs must have operation and maintenance plans to
ensure that systems function as designed.
Section 4: Application Procedures and Approval Process
(a) APPLICATION. Applications for a Traditional Neighborhood Development shall
follow the procedures as outlined in the Site Plan Review Guide.
(b) AMENDMENTS TO THE APPLICATION. Minor changes to the Specific
Implementation Plan adopted by the Common Council may be approved by the Planning
Department, provided that the changes do not involve:
(1) Increases of decreases or less that ten percent (10%) in floor area of structures or
number of dwelling units.
(2) Change in exterior building material.
(3) Alternation of any conditions attached or modification to the Specific Implementation
Plan made by the Common Council.
(c) SUBDIVISION OF LAND. If the Traditional Neighborhood Development involves the
subdivision of land as defined in the City of Menasha’s subdivision ordinance, the
applicant shall submit all required land division documents in accordance with the
requirements of the subdivision ordinance and Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes. If
there is a conflict between the design standards of the subdivision ordinance and the
design guidelines of this ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance shall apply.
(d) OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC SPACE. Provisions shall be
made for the ownership and maintenance of streets, squares, parks, open space, and other
public spaces in Traditional Neighborhood Development by public dedication, or other
means acceptable, to the City of Menasha.
SEC. 13-1-39 LOW DENSITY R-1A SINGLE- FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
(a) INTENT. The purpose of this district is to provide for low-density single-family
residential development and to restrict the development of uses that generate high
volumes of noise and traffic.
(b) PERMITTED USES.
(1) Any use permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residence District.
(c) PERMITTED USES REQUIRING CONDITIONAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
(1) Utility substation.
(d) SPECIAL USES.
(1) All commercial and public radio, microwave and television towers and all private radio
and television towers exceeding sixty (60) feet in height.
(2) Cemetery.
(3) Boarding or Rooming House.
(4) Church.
(5) Daycare center/ nursery school.
(6) Farm
(7) Golf Course.
(8) Landscape nursery or orchard provided no office or store is maintained on premises.
(9) Park or playground.
(10)Public building.
(11)Public library, museum, art gallery, or community center.
(12)Railroad rights-of-way and uses essential to their operation.
101415
(13)School.
(14)Single-family attached dwelling.
(e) GARAGES ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
(1) One (1) detached garage. Such garage may be constructed in addition to the garage
space within the principal structure.
(2) One (1) accessory building.
(3) Any of the following:
a. One (1) private swimming pool.
b. One (1) private tennis court.
c. One (1) satellite antenna dish.
d. One (1) detached solar structure.
(f) GENERAL STANDARDS.
(1) Minimum front yard setback – Twenty (25) feet or the prevailing setback.
(2) Minimum side yard – Six (6) feet and an aggregate width on both sides of sixteen (16) feet.
(3) Minimum rear yard – Thirty (30) feet.
(4) Maximum height – Forty-five (45) feet or three (3) stories.
(5) Minimum side and rear yard of detached garages, accessory buildings and uses –
Three (3) feet side yard and three (3) feet rear yard.
(6) Minimum lot size – Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
(7) Minimum lot width – Eighty (80) feet.
(8) Parking – Refer to Article E.
(9) Roomers/Boarders – No more than two (2) boarders and/or roomers shall be kept by
resident family.
(10)Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels within the corporate boundaries of the City of Menasha prior to
May 8, 1982 the following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high-water mark.
b) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the following
standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
whichever distance is greater.
(11)Minimum roof pitch – All single family dwelling units constructed in this district n
shall have a roof pitch of 4/12 or greater.
(12)GARAGES REQUIRED. On all parcels where a new dwelling unit is to be
constructed building plans shall make provision for an attached or detached
garage meeting the minimum requirements of subsection (a) of this section. No
attached garage may be converted from garage to living space unless a garage
meeting the requirements of these subsections exists or is constructed on the lot.
(a) The minimum dimensions for an attached or detached garage shall be 22
feet wide and 22 feet deep accessed by a garage door not less than 16 feet
101415
wide and 7 feet high for a single door, or two doors not less than 9 feet
wide and 7 feet high.
No occupancy permit shall be granted for a newly constructed dwelling
unit until final inspection of a detached garage has been completed and
approved by the building inspector.
SEC. 13-1-40 GU GOVERNMENT USE DISTRICT
(a). PURPOSE.
This district is intended to apply to those lands where federal, state and city governmental
activities are conducted and where governments or quasi-governmental units hold title to
such lands. Any lawful governmental activity is permissible in this district.
It is not the intent to classify all lands owned by government into this district but only
those lands particularly and peculiarly related to public welfare and infrastructure. It is
generally intended to use this district for “community facilities” and “public facilities”.
(b). PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
(1) Parks, parkways, golf courses, playgrounds and the like.
(2) Preserves, arboretums and the like.
(3) Museums, libraries, and cultural and historic exhibits and the like.
(4) Government administrative buildings.
(5) Public navigation and flood control facilities and installations.
(6) Public cemeteries.
(7) Water supply facilities and installations.
(8) Public parking facilities.
(9) Public docks and piers.
(10) Public Works and Maintenance facilities.
(11) Public Protection Buildings
(c). SPECIAL USES.
(1) Landfills and solid waste transfer stations.
(2) Public power generating facilities and electrical substations.
(3) Wastewater Treatment facilities.
(4) Commercial telecommunications facilities in accordance with Section 13-1-81.
(5) Public Schools, Colleges and Universities.
(d). PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and
subordinate to permitted and permissible uses and structures. (There shall be no height
limitation for security fencing).
(e). STANDARDS
(1) There are no minimum lot area, setback, or lot width requirements and no lot
coverage or height limitations. A site plan shall be submitted pursuant to Section
13-1-12. The Plan Commission may apply reasonable requirements concerning
lot coverage, height of structures, parking, landscaping, and any other relevant
requirements.
(2) When adjacent to a residential use or district, the commercial transitional area
101415
requirements shall apply.
(3) Shoreland Setbacks.
a) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the
following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured
from the ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may
be constructed or placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the
following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel
of land that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel
of land containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance
equal to the average setback of the principal building on the
adjacent lots or 35 feet from the ordinary high-water mark,
whichever distance is greater.
(f) SIGNS
No signs intended to be read from off the premises shall be permitted except
identification, information or directional signs erected by public or quasi-public bodies in
connection with permitted and permissible principal or accessory uses or for other public
purposes.
101415
1:1
ARTICLE D
Non-conforming Uses, Structures and Lots
SEC. 13-1-43 PURPOSE
(a) The purpose of this Article is to establish regulations for the following nonconforming
situations legally created prior to the effective date of this Article: nonconforming uses,
nonconforming structures, and nonconforming and substandard lots.
SEC. 13-1-44 NONCONFORMING USES
(a) DEFINITION. Any use of a lot or structure legally permitted or existing at the time of
adoption of this Article which now does not comply with all the regulations of the
Menasha Code of Ordinances or any amendments hereto governing the zoning district in
which such use is located.
(b) CONTINUANCE OF A NONCONFORMING USE.
(1) Any nonconforming use which existed lawfully at the time of the adoption of this
Article or amendment thereto may be continued at the size and manner of operation
except as provided herein although such use does not conform with the provisions
of the Menasha Code of Ordinances.
(2) If a lot contains an existing nonconforming use, the addition of a new conforming
use on that lot shall require a Special Use Permit, subject to the standards, criteria,
and procedures prescribed by Section 13-1-11, in order to ensure compatibility
with the existing nonconforming use.
(3) In the absence of a Special Use Permit, a nonconforming use shall be discontinued
before a new conforming use may be added to a lot.
(c) LIMITATIONS ON NONCONFORMING USES.
(1) Public Nuisance. Any nonconforming use which constitutes a public nuisance, as
outlined in Title 11, Chapter 7 of the Menasha Code of Ordinances, shall not be
permitted to continue as a legal nonconforming use.
(2) Modification of a Nonconforming Use. A structure containing a nonconforming
use shall not be enlarged or increased to occupy a greater area of lot, parcel, site,
and/or structure than was occupied at the time of the effective date of this Article.
(3) Relocation of a Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming use shall not be moved in
whole or in part to any other portion of the lot, parcel, site and/or structure than
was occupied upon the effective date of this Article.
(4) Termination of a Nonconforming Use. If a nonconforming use is discontinued or
terminated for a period of twelve (12) months or a structure or lot containing a
nonconforming use remains vacant for a period of twelve (12) months, any future
use of the lot and/or structure shall conform to all applicable requirements of the
Menasha Code of Ordinances.
a. The property owner has the burden to prove that the nonconforming use
has been continuously maintained over time. Potential forms of
documentation include but are not limited to utility bills; tax records;
101415
1:2
business licenses; advertisements in dated publications; building permits;
insurance policies; or leases.
(d) MAINTENANCE OF STRUCTURES ON LOTS CONTAINING
NONCONFORMING USES.
(1) Ordinary maintenance and repairs made to a structure on lots containing a
nonconforming use is permitted. Ordinary maintenance and repairs are defined as:
a. The repair or replacement of doors, windows, nonbearing walls, fixtures,
heating and air conditioning components, wiring, plumbing, siding,
roofing, or other nonstructural components.
b. Refreshing existing parking stall paint, cleaning, routine seal coating,
and/or crack sealing of parking facilities provided nonconforming aspects
of the parking facility are not increased as a result of maintenance efforts.
(2) In no instance shall said maintenance and repairs exceed, over the life of the
structure, 50 percent of the present equalized assessed value of said structure or
property prior to said repairs, in accordance with Wis. Stats. 62.23(7)(h).
SEC. 13-1-45 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
(a) DEFINITION. A structure existing lawfully prior to the adoption or any amendment of
this Article which does not now conform to one or more of the development regulations of
the Menasha Code of Ordinances. “Development regulations” means the parts of this the
Menasha Code of Ordinances that apply to elements including but not limited to setback,
heights and lot coverages.
(b) EXISTING NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
(1) Continuation of a Nonconforming Structure. A lawful nonconforming structure
existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Article may be continued
although its size or location does not conform to the development regulations of the
Menasha Code of Ordinances. However, it shall not be extended, enlarged, or
structurally altered except as provided for in this Article.
(2) Relocation of a Nonconforming Structure. The lawful nonconforming structure
existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Article shall not be moved
or relocated in whole or in part to any other location on the same or any other site
unless the structure complies with all of the provisions of the Menasha Code of
Ordinances.
(3) Unsafe Conditions. Nothing in this Articvle shall preclude the City from remedial
or enforcement actions when said structure or building is declared unsafe.
(c) ALTERATIONS TO NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
(1) Nonconforming structures in the A-1, R-1, R-1A, R-2 OR R-2A zoning districts
existing at the time of the adoption of this Article or amendment thereto may be
expanded, enlarged, or improved provided that such addition or alteration shall not
increase the degree of nonconformity of the existing structure.
(2) Nonconforming structures in the R-3, R-4, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, I-1, I-2, R-MH, TND
or GU zoning districts existing at the time of the adoption of this Article may be
expanded, enlarged, or improved upon application and approval of a Special Use
Permit pursuant to Sec. 13-1-11. Any addition or alteration shall not increase the
101415
1:3
degree of nonconformity of the existing structure.
(3) Alterations to nonconforming structures shall meet all other provisions of the
Menasha Code of Ordinances including but not limited to maximum lot coverage,
off-street parking and loading, lighting, and landscape standards.
(d) EXCEPTIONS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
(1) New garages and accessory structures may be constructed in conformance with all
applicable requirements of the Menasha Code of Ordinances as follows:
a. On lots legally created prior to the adoption of this Article that do not meet
the minimum requirements for area and width;
b. On lots legally created prior to the adoption of this Article where the
existing principal structure does not meet the dimensional requirements; and
c. On lots legally created prior to the adoption of this Article maintaining a
nonconforming use.
(2) Nonconforming detached garages and accessory structures may be expanded,
enlarged, or improved provided that the existing side or rear yard setback
dimensions are within fifty percent (50%) of the applicable zoning requirements.
Such alteration or enlargement shall be made in conformance with all other
applicable zoning requirements.
(e) MAINTENANCE ON NONCONFROMING STRUCTURES. The ordinary
maintenance and repairs made to a nonconforming structure is permitted. Ordinary
maintenance and repairs are defined as follows:
(1) The repair or replacement of doors, windows, nonbearing walls, fixtures, heating
and air conditioning components, wiring, plumbing, siding, roofing, or other
nonstructural components.
(2) Refreshing existing parking stall paint, cleaning, routine seal coating, and/or crack
sealing of parking facilities provided nonconforming aspects of the parking
facility are not increased as a result of maintenance efforts.
(f) DESTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF NONCONFORMING
STRUCTURES.
(1) Any nonconforming structure damaged or destroyed by violent wind, vandalism,
fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, infestation, or other act identified by Wis. Stats.
62.23(7) on or after March 2, 2006 may be restored to, or replaced at, the size,
location, and use that it had immediately before sustaining damage or destruction
without any limits on the costs of the repair, reconstruction, or improvement.
a. The structure may be restored or replaced at a larger size than it was
immediately before the damage or destruction if necessary for the structure
to comply with applicable state or federal requirements.
(2) The burden of proof in regard to the location, dimensions, configuration, and
exterior building materials of the damaged or removed structure shall be upon the
property owner to demonstrate prior to the issuance of a building permit.
SEC. 13-1-46 NONCONFORMING AND SUBSTANDARD LOTS
(a) DEFINITION. Any legally established lot established prior to the effective date of this
Article or subsequent applicable amendments thereto which would not be permitted under
101415
1:4
the current terms of the Menasha Code of Ordinances.
(b) USE OF NONCONFORMING AND SUBSTANDARD LOTS. This Subsection
ensures that lots legally created prior to the adoption of this Article do not encounter
difficulty because the lots would otherwise be considered nonconforming or substandard.
(1) Lot Use. Any lot legally created prior to the adoption of this Article which does
not meet the minimum zoning requirements as to area or lot dimensions may be
utilized for uses permitted within the applicable zoning district provided that such
development complies with all of the development regulations for that zoning
district.
(c) ALTERATIONS TO NONCONFORMING AND SUBSTANDARD LOTS. After the
effective date of this Article, no lot shall be altered or new lot created which does not
meet the development regulations of the Menasha Code of Ordinances.
(1) Lot Reductions. No lot legally created prior to the adoption of this Article shall be
so reduced that the dimensional and setback requirements of the applicable zoning
district cannot be met.
(2) Lot Divisions. No lot legally created prior to the adoption of this Article shall be
divided unless the lots resulting from said division conform to all applicable zoning
requirements.
SEC. 13-1-47 CHANGES AND SUBSTITUTIONS TO NONCONFORMING USES,
STRUCTURES, OR LOTS.
(a) Once a nonconforming use, structure, or lot has been changed to a conforming use,
structure, or lot, it shall not revert back to a nonconforming use, structure, or lot.
(b) If the Board of Zoning Appeals has permitted the substitution of a more restrictive
nonconforming use for an existing nonconforming use, the substituted use shall lose its
status as a legal nonconforming use and become subject to all the conditions required by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
SEC. 13-1-48 THROUGH 13-1-49 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
Updated: 9/26/2016
ARTICLE E
Traffic Visibility, Loading, Parking and Access
SEC. 13-1-50 LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
(a) LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS. On every lot on which a business, trade or
industrial use is hereafter established, space with access to a public street or alley shall be
provided as indicated below for the loading and unloading of vehicles off of the public
right-of-way:
Floor Area Loading
Use (sq. ft.) Space
Retail, wholesale 2,000 - 10,000 1
warehouse, service 10,000 - 20,000 2
manufacturing, and 20,000 - 40,000 3
industrial establishments 40,000 - 60,000 4
Each additional 50,000 1
Hotels, offices, 5,000 - 10,000 1
hospitals, places of 10,000 - 50,000 2
public assembly 50,000 - 100,000 3
Each additional 25,000 1
Funeral homes 2,500 - 4,000 1
4,000 - 6,000 2
Each additional 10,000 1
(b) MULTIPLE OR MIXED USES. Where a building is devoted to more than one (1) use or
for different uses and where the floor area for each use is below the minimum required for a
loading space but the aggregate floor area of such uses is above such a minimum, then offstreet
loading space shall be provided as if the entire building were devoted to that use in the
building for which the most loading spaces are required.
(c) LOCATION. Required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot with the
principal use requiring such space. Ordinarily, no loading dock or overhead doors shall face
a public street. No loading space shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the nearest point
of intersection of two (2) streets or require any vehicle to back into a public street. Loading
spaces shall not be positioned such that vehicles parked in the loading spaces block public
right-of-way.
(d) DESIGN STANDARDS. Each off-street loading space shall have a width of at least
twelve (12) feet, a length of at least forty-five (45) feet, and a vertical clearance of at least
fourteen (14) feet. Dimensions for loading spaces in connection with funeral homes shall
be reduced to ten (10) feet in width, twenty-five (25) feet in length, and eight (8) feet in
vertical clearance. Every loading space shall be sufficiently screened in the form of a solid
fence or shrubbery to protect neighboring residences.
SEC. 13-1-51 OFF-STREET PARKING.
(a) INTENT. It is the purpose of this Section to provide standards that insure adequate parking
areas in conjunction with the various uses permitted in this Code. This is accomplished by
Updated: 9/26/2016
encouraging effectively developed parking areas which will provide sufficient quantities of
parking spaces and ample area for automotive maneuvering.
(b) DISTRICT REGULATIONS. The following regulations shall be applied to each of the
described zoning districts:
(1) R-1, R-1A, R-2 and R-2 A Districts.
a. No tractors, tractor-trailers, semi-trailers, school buses, farm tractors in
excess of six (6) feet in width, dump trucks, construction equipment, auto
wreckers or road machinery shall be kept or parked on any lot, whether or
not they are enclosed in buildings, except for the purposes of servicing the
premises.
b. No motor vehicle, utility trailer, boat, snowmobile, motor home or trailers
used to transfer any of the above shall be parked or stored in the front
setback area, except upon a driveway providing access to a garage, carport
or rear yard parking area. Any vehicle parked within the front yard shall
have all wheels on the driveway surface. In no case shall a driveway be
widened to extend in front of the dwelling unit within the front setback.
c. No self-propelled or towed vehicles of eight (8) tons or more gross weight
shall be allowed.
d. No parking shall be allowed in the vision clearance area.
e. All driveways, parking areas, and driveway aprons constructed after July
1, 2011 shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, brick, or other durable
dust-free material acceptable to the Department of Public Works.
Driveways and parking areas shall be installed in compliance with the
minimum standards set forth in the City of Menasha Driveway Installation
Policy as approved by the Common Council. This requirement shall not
apply to parking areas utilized solely for storage of recreational vehicles in
compliance with Sec. 13-1-52.
f. On parcels with newly constructed one and two family residential
structures, such surfacing shall be completed within nine (9) months of
receiving an occupancy permit for the dwelling unit(s). Driveway aprons
shall be paved within nine (9) months of installation of the permanent
street.
g. A Driveway Permit from the Department of Community Development and
a Grade Request from the Department of Public Works shall be obtained
prior to installation of any driveway, driveway extension, or parking area.
Permit applications shall include a site plan drawn to scale showing the
location and dimensions of the driveway in relation to all property lines,
structures, service walks, sidewalks, and street rights of way along with
specifications showing proposed materials and cross sectional dimensions.
h. An Excavation Permit from the Department of Public Works shall be
required prior to installation of any driveway apron per Sec. 6-2-3.
(2) R-3, R-4, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, I-1 and I-2 and GU Districts.
a. General Parking Standards
1. All driveways, parking areas, and driveway aprons shall be surfaced
with asphalt, concrete, brick, or other durable dust-free material
acceptable to the Department of Public Works in compliance with
the minimum standards set forth in this Section.
(a) For new driveways, parking areas, and driveway aprons, such
surfacing shall be completed prior to an occupancy permit
being granted for the principal use, or, if conditions are not
conducive to paving, in accordance with a timeline
established in the Site Improvement Agreement on file with
Updated: 9/26/2016
the Community Development Department. Driveway aprons
shall be paved within nine (9) months of installation of the
permanent street. If a site plan review is not required, a
parking lot plan shall be submitted and approved in
accordance with Sec. 13-1-51(b)(2)b prior to surfacing.
(b) For properties with existing driveways, parking areas, and
driveway aprons that are not surfaced with a durable dustfree
material, such surfacing shall be completed prior to the
sale of the property or within nine (9) months of sale of the
property or, when applicable, in accordance with the timeline
established in the Site Improvement Agreement on file with
the Community Development Department. For properties
without an approved site plan and/or Site Improvement
Agreement, a parking lot plan shall be submitted in
accordance with Sec. 13-1-51(b)(2)b prior to surfacing.
Areas to be surfaced shall comply with all applicable zoning
requirements.
2. Parking spaces shall be in conformance with the required district
setback regulations;
3. No parking shall be allowed in the vision clearance area;
4. A minimum six (6) inch curb wall shall be constructed in the
following parking lot areas:
(a) The edge of a parking lot or driving areas adjacent to a building
or pedestrian path, except for areas where access ramps have
been designed;
(b) Planting areas or islands within the parking lots;
(c) Other areas where deemed appropriate by the Plan Commission
including driveways or portions of driveways.
5. Any lights used to illuminate a parking area shall be so arranged and
screened according to the requirements of Section 13-1-12 (h);
6. General off-street parking and driveways shall be arranged so that
no vehicle shall be required to back onto a public street or primary
circulation route.
7. Required parking spaces shall be adequately marked;
8. No addition or enlargement of an existing building or use shall be
permitted unless all parking requirements are met for the entire
building or use;
9. All required parking spaces shall be located on the lot which the use
is located or on a contiguous lot. Parking within three hundred (300)
feet from the principal use or building may be permitted on existing
developed sites where a parking plan and an easement and
maintenance agreement and/or lease agreement are submitted,
subject to approval by the Department of Community Development.
Shared parking and/or ingress/egress on a contiguous lot or within
300 feet from the principal use or building may be permitted for new
developments through the site plan review process. In conjunction
with the site plan submittal, an easement and maintenance agreement
and/or lease agreement shall be required. Upon Plan Commission
approval of the site plan and agreement, the agreement shall be
recorded.
10. No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in such
parking areas.
11. Driveways shall ordinarily intersect with streets at right angles. For
Updated: 9/26/2016
high intensity uses and/or on parcels with access to streets with
posted speeds of 45 miles per hour or greater, a channelized T
driveway intersection may be required, or an acceleration or
deceleration lane may be required. Where a parcel abuts two streets,
access may be limited to the street with the lowest function
classification, i.e., arterial, collector, and local.
12. Generally, driveway access points shall be limited in number.
Driveways shall be located maximize distances from local street
intersections. Driveways shall be located to minimize potential
interference and conflicts with the use of buildings and driveways on
opposite sides of the street. Minimum driveway widths of 12 feet
are required for one-way driveways and minimum driveway widths
of 24 feet are required for two-way driveways.
13. To the extent practicable, driveways shall be combined or
coordinated between adjacent properties. Reasonably compatible
uses may be required to provide cross access.
14. All off-street parking and loading shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, or other approved dust-free surfaces with the following
minimum standards:
Type Minimum Thickness Minimum Base Thickness
Asphalt (Blacktop) 3 inches 6 inches
Concrete (no semi-traffic) 6 inches 3 inches
Concrete (with semi-traffic) 8 inches 6 inches
15. Each parking space shall be not less than 9 feet in width and not
less than 171 square feet in area. Minimum aisle width shall be as
follows:
Angle of Parking One Way Aisle Two Way Aisle
Parallel 12 feet 20 feet
30° 11 feet 18 feet
45° 13 feet 18 feet
60° 18 feet 18 feet
70° 19 feet 19 feet
80° 24 feet 24 feet
90° 25 feet 25 feet
b. Parking Approval for changes to existing developed sites. For existing
parking lots and driveways, any change in parking configuration, flow of
traffic, parking lot size, or reestablishment of parking on a non-conforming
lot, shall require prior approval and a Parking Lot Permit. Parking lot plans
shall be designed in conformance with the design standards in 13-1-51.
Parking lots and driveways to be resurfaced shall be brought into compliance
with all applicable zoning requirements. The procedure to obtain parking lot
approval for existing developed sites shall be:
1. A parking lot plan drawn to proper scale and a review fee as
established by Council shall be presented to the Department of
Community Development. The parking lot plan shall contain the
following information:
Updated: 9/26/2016
(a) The location of all parking and loading areas with each space
delineated;
(b) The location and dimensions of all driveway access points;
(c) The distances between driveways and any lot lines or street
intersections;
(d) The direction of internal traffic flow;
(e) The location of landscaped areas and islands;
(f) The location of all required setbacks;
(g) The location of all new and existing luminaires and point-topoint
photometric plan;
(h) Drainage, Erosion Control and Stormwater Management
information if required.
2. The plan will be reviewed to determine if it is adequate for parking
space arrangement, drainage, lighting, driveway location and other
applicable regulations; and,
3. If the plan is approved, the Community Development Department
shall then issue a permit. No work shall commence until such permit
has been issued.
4. If the Zoning Administrator and/or designee determines that an
existing non-conforming parking lot and/or driveway cannot be
brought into compliance with applicable requirements due to
physical constraints of the site, the parking lot plan may be
reviewed through application for a Special Use Permit pursuant to
Sec. 13-1-11; however, such resurfacing may not increase the
degree of nonconformity of the property.
(c) REQUIRED PARKING SPACES. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as
follows:
(1) Single Family Dwellings: At least one (1) parking space, but no more than a total of
four (4) parking spaces for each single-family dwelling.
(2) Two (2) Family and Multiple Family Dwellings: At least one and one-half (1-1/2)
spaces for each dwelling unit. For two (2) family dwellings, no more than a total of
four (4) parking spaces.
(3) Automobile Service Stations: At least one (1) parking space for each employee,
plus two (2) for each service stall.
(4) Banks: At least one (1) parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of
publicly used floor area.
(5) Boarding or Rooming Houses and Bed and Breakfast Establishments: At least two
(2) parking spaces, plus one (1) parking space for each three (3) persons for whom
living accommodations are provided.
(6) Bowling Alleys: At least five (5) parking spaces for each alley, plus such additional
spaces as may be required for affiliated uses.
(7) Business and Professional Offices or Public Administration Buildings: At least one
(1) parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of publicly used floor area.
(8) Churches and Synagogues: At least one (1) parking space for each four (4) seats in
the main auditorium.
(9) Establishments Handling the Sale and Consumption of Food and Refreshment on
the Premises: At least one (1) parking space for each seventy-five (75) square feet
of publicly used floor area.
(10) Furniture and Appliance Stores, Motor Vehicle Sales, Stores for Repair of
Household Equipment or Furniture: At least one (1) parking space for each six
hundred (600) square feet of publicly used floor area.
(11) Hospitals: At least one (1) parking space for each two (2) hospital beds, plus one
Updated: 9/26/2016
(1) parking space for each four (4) employees, other than doctors, plus one (1)
parking space for each two (2) doctors assigned to the staff.
(12) Hotels and Motels: At least one (1) space for each separate room and suite, plus
such additional spaces as may be required for affiliated uses.
(13) Libraries and Museums: At least one (1) parking space for each five hundred (500)
square feet of publicly used floor area.
(14) Manufacturing, Fabricating, General Industrial Buildings and Processing Plants Not
Engaged in Retail Trade: At least two (2) parking spaces per three (3) employees on
a maximum shift or one (1) parking space for each four thousand (4,000) square feet
of gross floor area, whichever is greater.
(15) Medical and Dental Clinics: At least one (1) space for each examining or treatment
room, plus one (1) for each doctor and employee in the building.
(16) Private Clubs and Lodges: One (1) parking space for each sixteen (16) square feet
of assembly area or one (1) parking space for every two and one-half (2-1/2) seats,
whichever is greater.
(17) Public Utility and Public Service Uses: At least one (1) parking space for each three
(3) employees, plus spaces in adequate number as determined by the Department of
Community Development to serve the visiting public.
(18) Recreational Buildings or Community Centers: Spaces in adequate number as
determined by the Department of Community Development.
(19) Schools, Elementary, Junior High, Public or Private: At least one (1) parking space
for each faculty member and full-time employee, plus adequate off-street parking for
students who are permitted to drive.
(20) Supermarkets, Discount Houses, Mail Order Outlets, Retail Stores and Other Stores
with High Customer Volume: At least one (1) parking space for each four hundred
(400) square feet of publicly used floor area.
(21) Theaters: At least one (1) parking space for each four (4) seats in the theater.
(22) Undertaking Establishments and Funeral Parlors: At least ten (10) parking spaces
for each chapel or parlor, plus one (1) parking space for each funeral vehicle
maintained on the premises.
(23) Warehouse and Storage Establishments and Freight Terminals: At least one (1) offstreet
parking space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area or
one (1) parking space for each employee, whichever is greater.
(24) Other Uses: Parking spaces on the same basis as required for the most similar use.
(d) FRACTIONAL SPACES. When determination of the numbers of parking stalls required
results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction to one-half (1/2) or less may be
dropped, while a fraction in excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one (1) parking
space.
(e) PARKING NOT CONFORMING TO THIS CHAPTER.
(1) Authority to Continue. Any lawful parking lots located within the City at the
effective date of this section or which shall come to be located in the City as a result
of annexation after the effective date of this code, which does not conform to the
provisions of this section, may continue provided the parking remains in
conformance with the provisions of this subsection.
(2) Ordinary Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in this subsection shall relieve the
owner or beneficial user of legal nonconforming parking, or the owner of the
property on which the legal nonconforming lighting is located, from the provisions
of this section regarding safety, maintenance and repair. Normal maintenance,
including refreshing existing parking stall paint, cleaning, or routine seal coating or
crack sealing, shall not be deemed to be a condition that triggers a loss of lawful
status described below, unless such maintenance increases the nonconforming
aspects of the parking.
(3) Loss of Lawful Status. Legal nonconforming status shall terminate under the
Updated: 9/26/2016
following conditions:
a. If a nonconforming parking lot is no longer used by the property owner or a
tenant for a period of twelve (12) months or longer it shall be deemed
abandoned and shall not thereafter be reestablished without following
procedures set forth in Section 13-1-51(b)(2)(b); or
b. If a nonconforming parking lot is altered such that its nonconforming aspects
increase; or
c. If the parking configuration, flow of traffic, or parking lot size is altered; or
d. If the parking lot is damaged and the cost of repair exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of its replacement value.
Upon the event of any of the aforementioned, the parking lot shall be immediately
brought into compliance with this section, or the parking lot shall be deemed in
violation and subject to penalties as set forth in Section 1-1-7.
SEC. 13-1-52 STORAGE AND PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
(a) DEFINITIONS -- RECREATIONAL VEHICLES. For purposes of this Section, the
following definitions shall apply:
(1) Mobile Home. Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which is eight (8) body feet or more in width and is thirty-two (32) body
feet or more in length, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
systems contained therein. Length of a mobile home means the distance from the
exterior of the front wall (nearest to the exterior of the drawbar and coupling
mechanism) to the exterior of the rear wall (at the opposite end of the home) where
such walls enclose living or other interior space and such distance includes
expandable rooms but not bay windows, porches, drawbars, couplings, hitches, wall
and roof extensions or other attachments. Width of a mobile home means the
distance from the exterior of one (1) side wall to the interior space and such distance
includes expandable rooms but not bay windows, porches, wall and roof extensions
or other attachments.
(2) Recreational Vehicle. Recreational vehicle means any of the following:
a. Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and on
wheels that is between ten (10) and thirty-six (36) feet long, including the
hitch, and eight (8) feet or less in width, designated to be used as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation or other uses and towed
by a car, station wagon or truck. It includes so-called fifth-wheel units.
b. Pick-up coach means a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis
for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation or other uses.
c. Motor home means a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel,
recreation, vacation or other uses, constructed as an integral part of a
self-propelled vehicle.
d. Camping trailer means a canvas or folding structure mounted on wheels and
designed for travel, recreation, vacation or other uses.
e. Chassis mounts, motor homes and mini-motor homes means recreational
structures constructed integrally with a truck or motor-van chassis and
incapable of being separated therefrom.
f. Converted and chopped vans means recreational structures which are created
by altering or changing an existing auto van to make it a recreational vehicle.
g. Boat or snowmobile trailer means a vehicle on which a boat or snowmobile
Updated: 9/26/2016
may be transported and is towable by a motor vehicle. When removed from
the trailer, a boat or snowmobile, for purposes of this Article, is termed an
unmounted boat or snowmobile.
h. All-terrain Vehicle (ATV) means a commercially designed and
manufactured motor-driven device that has a weight, without fluids, of 900
pounds or less, has a width of 50 inches or less, is equipped with a seat
designed to be straddled by the operator, and travels on 3 or more lowpressure
tires or non-pneumatic tires.
i. Snowmobile means an engine-driven vehicle that is manufactured solely for
snowmobiling that has an endless belt tread and sled-type runners, or skis, to
be used in contact with snow.
(3) Boat. Boat means every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a
means of transportation on water.
(4) Yard, Front, means that part of a lot between the front lot line and front(s) of the
principal building on the lot and extended to both side lot lines.
(5) Yard, Rear, means that part of a lot between the rear lot line and the back(s) of the
principal building on the lot and extended to both side lot lines.
(6) Yard, Side, means that part of a lot not surrounded by a building and not in the front
or rear yard.
(b) PERMITTED PARKING OR STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES. In all
residential and commercial districts provided for in this Zoning Code, it is permissible to
park or store a recreational vehicle or boat and boat trailer on private property in the
following manner:
(1) Parking is permitted inside any enclosed structure, which structure otherwise
conforms to the zoning requirements of the particular zoning district where located.
(2) Parking is permitted outside in the side yard or rear yard provided it is not nearer
than five (5) feet to the lot line.
(3) Parking is permitted in the front setback area on a driveway during loading or
unloading [no more than three (3) consecutive days], provided the body of a vehicle
is at least fifteen (15) feet from the face of any street curb. On corner lots or through
lots, parking is permitted in the front setback area on one street frontage where a
fence or hedge has been approved and installed pursuant to Section 13-1-88(c). The
boat or recreational vehicle shall be substantially screened from the adjoining street
by such fence or hedge.
(4) The body of the recreational vehicle or boat must be at least fifteen (15) feet from
the face of any curb.
(5) No part of the unit may extend over the public sidewalk or public right-of-way.
(6) Parking is permitted only for storage purposes. Recreational vehicles or boats shall
not be:
a. Used for dwelling purposes, except for overnight sleeping for a maximum of
fourteen (14) days in anyone (1) calendar year. Cooking is not permitted at
any time.
b. Permanently connected to sewer lines, water lines or electricity. The
recreational vehicle may be connected to electricity temporarily for charging
batteries and other purposes.
c. Use for storage of goods, materials or equipment other than those items
considered to be part of the unit or essential for its immediate use.
(7) The recreational vehicle or boat shall be owned by the resident on whose property
the unit is parked for storage.
State Law Reference: Sec. 30.50, Wis. Stats., and HSS 177 and 177, Wis. Adm. Code.
SEC. 13-1-53 VISION CLEARANCE AT INTERSECTIONS.
Updated: 9/26/2016
(a) OBSTRUCTION BY TREES, SHRUBS, FENCES, WALLS, SIGNS OR OTHER
STRUCTURES. No person shall maintain trees, shrubs, fences, walls, signs, or other
structures in the vision control area which obstruct the necessary view of the driver of a
motor vehicle on a public street or private driveway or which interfere with the driver’s
control. The vision control area is defined as the minimum sight triangle for the appropriate
intersection/driveway set of conditions, as established by the current effective AASHTO
sign distance references. In said vision control area, fences, walls, signs, or other structures
shall not exceed three (3) feet in height and shall be two-thirds (2/3) open to vision equally
distributed throughout the vision control area. In the vision control area, trees and shrubs
shall be maintained to provide unobstructed vision from two and one-half (2-1/2) feet above
the centerline of the abutting pavement to ten (10) feet above the said centerline elevation.
(b) DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. It shall be the duty of the
Director of Public Works or his representative to enforce this Section by appropriate order
giving the offending party thirty (30) days to remove or correct the situation. Said order
shall be served by certified mail. Where the home is in joint tenancy, service on one (1) of
the homeowners shall be presumed service on the other.
(c) APPEALS OF ORDERS OF THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. All appeals of
orders of the Director of Public Works shall be made within fifteen (15) days of the service
of the order and shall be addressed to the City Clerk and the matter heard by the Board of
Public Works.
SEC. 13-1-54 THROUGH SEC. 13-1-59 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
ARTICLE F
Signs
SEC. 13-1-60 APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE OF SIGN REGULATIONS
(a) Applicability. This ordinance shall apply to all outdoor/exterior signs. The standards of
the ordinance shall apply to all persons, firms, partnerships, associations, and
corporations owning, occupying, or having control or management of any premises
located within the limits of the City of Menasha.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate signs and outdoor advertising
within the City of Menasha in order to protect public safety, health, and welfare;
minimize abundance and size of signs; reduce motorist distraction and loss of safe sight
distance; promote public convenience; preserve property values; support and complement
land use objectives as set forth in the city’s zoning ordinance; and enhance the aesthetic
appearance and quality of life within the city. The standards contained herein are
intended to achieve the following objectives:
(1) Establish a sign permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in the
community and prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this ordinance.
(2) Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication.
(3) Enable the public to locate goods, services, and facilities without excessive
difficulty and confusion by restricting the number and placement of signs.
(4) Protect the public right to receive messages, especially non-commercial messages
such as political, religious, economic, social, philosophical, and other types of
information protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.
(5) Recognize that the principal intent of commercial signs, to meet the purpose of
these standards and serve the public interest, should be for identification of an
establishment on the premises, and not for advertising special events, brand
names, or off-premise activities. Alternative channels of advertising
communication and media are available which do not create visual blight and
compromise the safety of the motoring public.
(6) Recognize that the proliferation of signs is unduly distracting to motorists and
non-motorized travelers, reduces the effectiveness of signs directing and warning
the public, causes confusion, reduces desired uniform traffic flow, and creates
potential for vehicular accidents.
(7) Maintain and improve the image of the city by encouraging signs that are
compatible with existing signs, have good viewing qualities with passing
motorists, and are compatible with buildings and streets, through the
establishment of specific standards for various zoning districts in the city.
(8) Prevent signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to structural
deficiencies, disrepair, or distraction to motorists.
(9) Reduce visual pollution and physical obstructions caused by a proliferation of
signs that could diminish the city’s image, property values, and quality of life.
(10) Prevent placement of signs that will conceal or obscure signs of adjacent uses.
(11) Limit the use of portable commercial signs in recognition of their collective
significant negative impact on traffic, safety, and aesthetics of the community.
(c) The regulations and standards of this ordinance are considered the minimum amount of
regulation necessary to achieve a substantial government interest for public safety,
aesthetics, and protection of property values.
SEC. 13-1-61 DEFINITIONS
(a) Accessory Structure Sign. Any sign permanently attached to an accessory structure.
(b) Animated Sign. Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or
create a special effect or scene.
(c) Awning/Canopy. A permanently-mounted durable hood or cover which projects from
the wall of the building and may or may not be retracted, folded, or collapsed against the
face of a supporting structure.
(d) Banner. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to the ground,
pole, sign, or structure and is designed to be easily moved from one location to another.
Government-related flags shall not be considered banners.
(e) Bench Sign. A sign attached to or painted on any bench that is located in any right-ofway
or is in view from any right-of-way.
(f) Billboard. A sign directing attention to a use, facility, activity, message, product, or
service which is not conducted on or related to the premises upon which the sign is
located.
(g) Blanketing. The unreasonable obstruction of view of a sign caused by the placement of
another sign.
(h) Building Exposure. For the purposes of this ordinance only, a building exposure shall
be determined by enclosing the most protruding points or edges of a structure within a
square or rectangle that will encompass the extreme limits of the structure. Each side of
such square or rectangle shall be designated a building exposure.
(i) Business. A person, partnership, organization, cooperative, association, trust,
corporation, or similar entity which has a legal existence and functions for commercial,
industrial, professional, or philanthropic purposes.
(j) Business Center. Multiple businesses located on a unit or units of contiguous property
meeting any of the following criteria:
(1) utilizing shared or inter-connected parking areas;
(2) utilizing shared access drives.
(k) Business Center Sign. A monument sign identifying the entrance to a business center
and/or the names of the businesses located within the business center.
(l) Commercial Message. Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that directly or
indirectly names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other
commercial activity.
(m) Commercial Vehicle Sign. A commercial vehicle containing sign copy which is parked
in such a manner and for such duration as to demonstrate its intention to serve as a sign.
This definition does not include any commercial vehicle that is used in the normal day-today
operations of the business and is parked in any parking space approved for such
parking by the City of Menasha.
(n) Construction Sign. Construction signs are temporary signs which consist of two types:
(1) Signs erected on the premises where a building permit has been issued or other
city approval has been granted. Such signs may indicate the name of the business,
or the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors, or similar artisans,
and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms
having a role or interest with respect to the business, structure, or project.
(2) Signs erected either on or off-premises for the purposes of facilitating traffic flow
or identifying businesses whose access has been temporarily disrupted by rightof-
way construction activities such as street or utility projects.
(o) Directional Sign. Signs limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, such as “one-way,” “entrance,” or “exit.”
(p) Electronic Message Center. A permanent sign whose informational content can be
changed or altered by electronic means.
(q) Erect. Shall mean to build, construct, attach, hang, place, install, suspend, affix,
reconstruct, or relocate.
(r) Flag. Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols,
used as a symbol of a government, school, or other political subdivision.
(s) Frontage. The boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street.
(t) Hanging Sign. A small pedestrian-oriented sign that is permanently suspended below a
horizontal plane surface such as a marquee or canopy.
(u) Integral Sign. A sign containing the names of buildings, dates or erection and other
similar monumental citation, when carved into stone, concrete, or similar material or
made of bronze, aluminum, or other non-combustible material and made an integral part
of the structure.
(v) Landmark Sign. An older sign of artistic or historic merit, uniqueness, or extraordinary
significance to the city or a sign which describes state or national designation of an
historic site or structure. Such signs shall be identified by the Landmarks Commission.
(w) Legal Non-Conforming Sign. A sign lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of
this ordinance, or amendment thereto, which does not conform to this ordinance.
(x) Marquee Sign. A sign attached to or consisting in part of an interchangeable copy
reader on a permanent overhanging shelter which projects from the face of a building.
(y) Monument Sign. A sign in which the entire bottom is in contact with or is close to the
ground and is independent of any other signs.
(z) Non-Commercial Sign. Signs containing non-commercial messages, such as those
designating the location of public telephones, restrooms, restrictions on smoking, and
restrictions on building entrances.
(aa) Off-Premise Sign. A sign directing attention to a use, business, commodity, service, or
activity not conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where the sign is located.
(bb) On-Premise Sign. A sign which identifies the occupant(s) of the premises or relates
solely to the use, business, or profession conducted, or to a principal commodity, service,
or entertainment sold, offered, or provided upon the premises.
(cc) Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a
message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, sometimes in series,
designed to move in the wind. Flags as defined in this Section shall not be considered
pennants.
(dd) Plaque Sign. A small, pedestrian-oriented version of a wall sign that is permanently
attached to surfaces adjacent to store front entries.
(ee) Pole Sign. A sign in which the bottom is not in contact with or close to the ground and
that is mounted on a freestanding pole(s), column(s), or similar support.
(ff) Political Sign. A temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues
in connection with any national, state, or local election or political event, or expressing a
political opinion.
(gg) Portable Sign. Any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved or transported,
including, but not limited to the following signs:
(1) banners;
(2) non-government related flags;
(3) pennants;
(4) sandwich board signs;
(5) signs with wheels or wheels removed;
(6) signs with chassis or support constructed without wheels;
(7) signs designed to be transported by trailer or wheels;
(8) signs attached temporarily to the ground, structure, or other signs;
(9) searchlights and stands;
(10) hot-air or gas-filled balloons or umbrellas used for advertising; and,
(11) substantially similar signs as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(hh) Premises. Shall mean a unit or units of contiguous property meeting any of the
following criteria:
(1) utilizing shared or inter-connected parking areas;
(2) utilizing shared access drives;
(ii) Projecting Sign. A pedestrian-oriented sign that is permanently affixed to the face of a
building or structure and projects in a perpendicular manner more than twelve (12) inches
from the wall surface of that portion of the building or structure to which it is mounted.
(jj) Real Estate Sign. A temporary sign which is used to offer for sale, lease, or rent the
property, business, or structure upon which the sign is placed.
(kk) Restaurant Menu Sign. A small, pedestrian-oriented sign which incorporates a menu
containing a list of products and prices offered by the restaurant.
(ll) Roof Sign. A sign located on a roof or projecting above any portion of a roof or exterior
wall of the structure.
(mm) Sandwich Board Sign. A portable sign having two separate and opposite facing sign
faces which are hinged at the top, and supported be spreading the sign faces into an
upside down “V” formation.
(nn) Sidewalk Sign. A portable sign placed on a public sidewalk.
(oo) Sign. Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or
indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an
object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by
any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination, or projected images.
(pp) Static Display. A sign display whose characters or images are not changed more than
once in a 24-hour period.
(qq) Store Front. A store front shall be determined by measuring the linear feet of that
portion of a building exposure that corresponds to the interior ground level space
occupied by a single tenant and abutting a public street, parking area, access drive, or
pedestrian walkway.
(rr) Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a permanent
location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the
ground.
(ss) Temporary Sign. Any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved from one
location to another and which are only planned to be in use for time periods of limited
duration. Under this ordinance, real estate signs, political signs, and construction signs
shall be considered temporary signs. Portable signs as defined in this Section are not
included in this definition.
(tt) Tenant Directory Sign. A sign used to identify multi-tenant buildings and businesses
that do not have direct frontage on a public street.
(uu) Wall Sign. A sign fastened to the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that
the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of, the
sign and that does not project more than twelve (12) inches from such buildings or
structure.
(vv) Window Sign. Any sign that is placed inside a window or upon window panes or glass
and is visible from the exterior of the window.
SEC. 13-1-62 SIGNS EXEMPT FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
(a) Artwork. Works of art which do not identify a business, product, or service.
(b) Construction Signs. Temporary construction signs shall be permitted in accordance
with the following standards:
(1) Construction signs in single and two family residential districts shall not exceed
six (6) square feet per sign face, twelve (12) square feet per sign, and six (6) feet
in height, and are limited to one (1) per lot. The sign shall be removed within
three (3) days of the end of construction activity.
(2) Construction signs in multi-family and other districts shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet per sign face, sixty-four (64) square feet per sign. Such signs
shall be limited to one (1) sign per street frontage per business. The signs shall be
removed within fifteen (15) days of the end of construction activity.
(3) In instances where temporary signs are necessary in commercial and industrial
districts due to right-of-way or similar construction, the following standards shall
apply:
a. Signs shall be used to facilitate business identification and traffic flow
only for lots temporarily impacted by right-of-way construction.
b. Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face, sixtyfour
(64) square feet per sign and shall be limited to one (1) sign per
access point.
c. In no instance shall signs be placed within vision control areas. When
necessary, signs may be placed off premise on private property with
permission of the property owner. The Director of Public Works may
grant permission for signs to be temporarily placed in the right-of-way
when deemed necessary and appropriate.
d. Such signs shall not be placed more than ten (10) days before construction
commences and shall be removed within three (3) days of the end of rightof-
way construction activity.
(c) Directional Signs. Directional signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following
standards:
(1) Each premises shall be permitted two (2) directional signs per driveway, plus
additional directional signs to improve circulation on-site provided they are not
placed within the front yard.
(2) Directional signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet per sign face, twentyfour
(24) square feet per sign, and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
(3) Directional signs may be placed in the vision control area provided they do not
exceed three (3) feet in height.
(4) The sign may contain the following information only:
a. name of business or symbol (not both);
b. directional arrows;
c. the words “entrance” or “exit” or similar terms.
(d) Flags. Government-related flags.
(e) Government Signs. Signs erected by a governmental body.
(f) Hanging Signs. Hanging signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following
standards:
(1) One sign is allowed per business
(2) Signs may not exceed four (4) sq. ft. per sign face excluding supports
(3) Signs may not be illuminated
(4) Signs must be pedestrian-oriented and positioned in a perpendicular manner to the
building’s wall surface.
(5) Hanging signs may be used only at ground floor locations except for upper floor
businesses with covered entry porches or balconies.
(g) Holiday Lighting. Temporary lighting and displays that are part of customary holiday
decoration, provided that they contain no commercial message and are not located in the
right-of-way. Holiday displays and lighting in commercial, industrial, or multi-family
districts may be displayed up to sixty (60) days prior to the holiday and shall be removed
within fifteen (15) days after the holiday.
(h) Integral Sign. Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citation,
commemorative tablets when carved into stone, concrete, or similar material, or made of
bronze, aluminum, or other non-combustible material and made an integral part of the
structure. Such signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area.
(i) Landmark Signs. Landmark signs as defined in this ordinance.
(j) Nameplate. Address, owner, or occupant nameplate and other signs of up to two (2)
square feet in area attached to a mailbox, light fixture, or an exterior wall.
(k) Off-Premise Special Event Signs. Announcements by public or non-profit
organizations of fund raising events, special events, or activities of interest to the general
public which are located off-premise, other than political signs, provided that they meet
the following:
(1) Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet per sign face, twelve (12) square
feet per sign in residential districts and thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face
for other districts.
(2) Such signs may be placed in the right-of-way at the discretion of and with
authorization by the Director of Public Works.
(3) Signs may be erected up to two (2) weeks before the event and shall be removed
within three (3) days after the event.
(l) Parking Lot Signs. Parking lot signs indicating restrictions on parking, when placed
within approved parking lots.
(m) Plaque Signs. Plaque signs shall be permitted in compliance with the following
standards:
(1) Signs must be located adjacent to a business entrance;
(2) One (1) sign shall be allowed per business entrance;
(3) Signs shall not exceed two (2) sq. ft. maximum and shall not project from wall
surfaces more than two (2) inches;
(4) Signs may not be illuminated.
(n) Political Signs. Temporary political signs shall be removed within fifteen (15) days after
the election or event.
(o) Portable Signs. Portable signs as defined in Sec. 13-1-61 shall be permitted in
compliance with the following standards.
(1) The use of a portable sign shall be limited to thirty (30) days at a time, and not
more frequently than three (3) times per calendar year at any one business. The
placement of one portable sign constitutes one (1) event.
(2) For a special event, such as a grand opening or special sale, multiple portable
signs may be used (such as banners, flags, or pennants). Use of multiple portable
signs for special events shall be permitted one (1) time per calendar year per
business, not to exceed (30) days at a time. This time period will be counted
towards the allowable portable sign use of three (3) times per calendar year.
(3) The maximum size of any portable sign shall be thirty-two (32) square feet per
sign face, sixty-four (64) square feet per sign.
(4) Portable signs shall be securely mounted, legible, and maintained in good
condition.
(5) Portable signs with commercial messages are prohibited on properties employing
the use of electronic message centers.
(p) Real Estate Signs. Real estate signs are permitted in compliance with the following
standards:
(1) Real estate signs in residential districts are limited to one (1) sign per street
frontage and may not exceed six (6) square feet per sign face, twelve (12) square
feet per sign, and six (6) feet in height.
(2) Real estate signs in nonresidential district are limited to one (1) sign per street
frontage and may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face, sixty-four
(64) square feet per sign, and eight (8) feet in height.
(3) Real estate signs shall be removed on or before fifteen (15) calendar days after the
sale, lease, or rental of the premises or structure, property, subdivision, or
condominium. The date of the acceptance of an offer to purchase, to lease, or to
rent by the current owner, or the date of a placement of a sold, leased, or rented
sign on the premises, whichever date is earlier, shall determine the beginning of
the fifteen (15) day period.
(q) Restaurant Menu Sign. Restaurant menu signs shall be permitted in compliance with
the following standards:
(1) Signs must be located adjacent to the business entrance;
(2) One (1) sign shall be allowed per business entrance;
(3) Signs shall not exceed six (6) sq. ft. maximum;
(4) Menus shall be located within a permanently mounted display area and protected
from the elements;
(5) Menus may be illuminated from an exterior source only.
(r) Rummage Sale and Seasonal Home Occupation Signs. Signs announcing rummage
sales or seasonal home occupations in accordance with Section 13-1-86 are permitted in
compliance with the following:
(1) One (1) sign is allowed per street frontage.
(2) Signs may be located off-premises but must be on private property; such signs in
the public right-of-way are prohibited.
(3) Signs may not exceed six (6) square feet per sign face, twelve (12) square feet per
sign.
(4) Such signs may be erected no more than seven (7) days before and shall be
removed within three (3) days after the announced sale.
(s) Window Signs. Window signs and other signs within a building provided such signs
shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the window space.
(t) Warning Signs. Signs that provide warning messages, such as no trespassing or warning
of electrical currents or animals.
(u) Certain Non-Commercial Signs. Signs containing non-commercial messages, such as
those designating the location of public telephones, restrooms, restrictions on smoking,
and restrictions of building entrances, provided that such signs do not exceed a maximum
of four (4) square feet.
(v) Certain Incidental Commercial Signs. Vending machines, automatic tellers, gasoline
pumps, and similar devices which display prices and/or the name, trademark, or logo of a
company or brand, provided the display is an integral part of the device and does not
exceed four (4) square feet in area per side of the device.
SEC. 13-1-63 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
(a) Animated Signs. Animated signs, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Signs having moving members or parts, excluding barber poles and time and
temperature signs which do not contain commercial messages.
(2) Signs using high intensity or flashing lights.
(3) Signs or lighting which in any way simulate or could be confused with the
lighting of emergency vehicles or traffic signals.
(b) Bench Signs. Signs attached to or painted on any bench that is located in any right-ofway
or is in view from any right-of-way or public area.
(c) Commercial Vehicle Signs. Commercial vehicle signs as defined in Sec. 13-1-61.
(d) Off-Premise Signs and Billboards. Off-premise signs and billboards erected for the
purposes of directing attention to a use, facility, activity, message, product, or service
which is not conducted on or related to the premises upon which the sign is located,
except as provided for in this ordinance.
(e) Pole Signs. Except as allowed in 13-1-67, a sign in which the bottom is not in contact
with or close to the ground and that is mounted on a freestanding pole(s), column(s), or
similar support.
(f) Roof Signs. Signs located on a roof or projecting above any portion of a roof or exterior
wall of a structure.
(g) Signs Obstructing Access or Egress. Signs which obstruct free access or egress from
any building, including those that obstruct any fire escape, required exit way, window, or
door opening or that prevent free access to the roof by firefighters.
(h) Signs in Vision Control Area. Signs located in any vision control area as defined in
Sec. 13-1-53, except signs that are three (3) feet or lower or are pole-mounted (with a
pole diameter of twelve (12) inches or less) and maintain ten (10) feet in height to the
bottom of the sign. This vision control area shall be applied to any intersection of street
right-of-way, driveways, or combination thereof.
(i) Signs in the Right-of-Way. Signs placed in, or projecting into any public street right-ofway,
with the exception of signage erected by any governmental body having jurisdiction
over the right-of-way or as provided for in this ordinance.
(j) Signs Painted on Walls. Signs painted directly on an exterior building wall. Murals or
artwork of a non-commercial nature are permitted.
SEC. 13-1-64 SIGN PERMITS REQUIRED.
(a) Permit Required. No person shall erect any sign in the City of Menasha without first
having obtained the appropriate permit from the Zoning Administrator, except as
provided for in this ordinance.
(b) Exceptions. A permit is not required for the following changes to existing signs with
valid permits, however, a drawing or photo of the changes shall be submitted in order to
update the sign permit:
(1) repainting of a sign message;
(2) a copy change or replacement of panels within an existing sign frame or cabinet;
(3) repair of a conforming sign with a valid permit.
(c) Application. Before construction of any sign(s) requiring a permit, applicants shall
consult with the Zoning Administrator and submit an application that shall include:
(1) A completed permit application with the signature of the property owner.
(2) An accurate plot plan drawn to scale of the entire lot on which the sign(s) will be
located.
(3) Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas on the lot.
(4) A table (or tables) containing:
a. Computation of the maximum total sign area;
b. Maximum area for individual signs;
c. Height and number of monument signs; and
d. Statement of the maximum total sign area and maximum number of signs
permitted on the site by this Code.
(5) An accurate indication on the plot plan of the location and orientation of all
existing signs, each sign for which a permit is requested, and the anticipated
location of future signs requiring a permit.
(6) A description and illustration of the following:
a. Colors and materials to be used in sign construction (e.g., limestone base
with bronze letters, etc);
b. Style of lettering for all signs;
c. Appearance/location of logos or icons;
d. Location of each sign on the building(s), with building elevations if
necessary (e.g., over doors, over windows, awnings, etc);
e. All sign proportions; and,
f. Types of illumination (e.g., internally illuminated, or external illumination
with description of type of outdoor light fixture).
(7) In addition, optional submittals may be required by the Zoning Administrator if
deemed necessary due to the character of the proposed signs and/or site.
(d) Permit Fees.
(1) A permit fee established by the Common Council shall be paid to the City of
Menasha for each sign permit issued under this Code.
(2) A fee shall not be charged for putting an existing sign into conformance with this
ordinance or for a copy change as listed in 13-1-64(a).
(3) The fee does not include electrical permit fees, which shall be in addition to the
sign permit fees listed in this section.
(4) Any person failing to obtain a sign permit prior to erecting a sign shall pay double
permit fees.
(e) Approval by Landmarks Commission. Signs to be located in a designated historic
district are subject to review and approval by the Landmarks Commission prior to the
issuance of a sign permit.
(f) Signs in Right-of-Way. Permit applications for a sign which projects into a public rightof
way as allowed in this ordinance must include the following:
(1) Liability Agreement. An agreement by the business and/or property owner to
indemnify and hold harmless the City of Menasha for any damages or liabilities
whatsoever resulting from the placement of such sign.
(2) Revocation Agreement. An agreement by the business and/or property owner
that in the event it is deemed necessary to revoke the sign permit on the basis of a
need to expand capacity, improve safety, or other reason related to the orderly use
of the right-of-way, the City of Menasha may terminate the permit and order the
sign to be removed according to the process outlined in Sec. 13-1-70(a).
(g) Revocation of Permit; Appeal. The Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, and/or
designee may at any time for a violation of this ordinance revoke a permit or require
changes to bring the sign into conformance with this ordinance. Notice shall be given
according to the process outlined in Sec. 13-1-70(a). The holder of a revoked permit
shall be entitled to an appeal before the Board of Appeals.
SEC. 13-1-65 GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS
(a) Design. Signs shall be designed to be compatible with the character of building materials
and landscaping to promote an overall unified and aesthetic effect.
(b) Maintenance. Every sign shall be constructed and maintained in good structural
condition at all times. All signs shall be kept neatly painted, stained, sealed, or preserved
including all parts and supports.
(c) Illumination. Illumination of signs as permitted in Sec. 13-1-66 shall be subject to the
following standards:
(1) Illumination of signs shall be directed or shaded so that the no direct rays shall:
a. interfere with the vision of persons on adjacent streets or properties
b. be directed onto adjacent residential uses or districts; or,
c. create a nuisance condition as determined by the Zoning Administrator
and/or designee.
(2) Where internal illumination of signs is permitted, signs shall be designed to
minimize the amount of light that is transmitted through the sign panel. The
display of white light should be limited to the sign copy. If lighting the sign copy
only is not an option, the display of internal illumination through the background
shall be controlled by one or more of the following:
a. limiting the illuminated background to 30% of the sign area;
b. changing the shape of the sign to reduce the lighted surface area,
c. using a dark color;
d. using an opaque screen.
(3) Underground wiring shall be required for illuminated signs not attached to a
building.
(d) Blanketing. Blanketing of signs is prohibited.
(e) Clearance Areas.
(1) Vehicle Area Clearance. When a sign extends over a private area where
vehicles travel or are parked, the bottom of the overhanging sign must be at least
twelve (12) feet above the ground. Vehicle areas include but are not limited to
driveways, alleys, parking areas, and loading and maneuvering areas.
(2) Pedestrian Area Clearance. When a sign extends over a sidewalk, walkway, or
other space accessible to pedestrians, the bottom of the sign structure must be at
least seven (7) feet above the ground.
(f) Corner Lots. Corner lot properties may choose one of the following options for
monument signs:
(1) One sign may be placed along each street frontage in accordance with the
standards for the zoning district; the permissible sign area for each sign shall be
equal to the average linear feet of the both building exposures, not to exceed
125% of the shorter building exposure.
(2) In lieu of two signs, one sign may be erected not to exceed 125% of the
permissible sign area based on the average of both building exposures and in
accordance with the standards for the zoning district.
(g) Transitional Areas. Signs are prohibited within any transitional area required by Sec.
13-1-17.
(h) Calculation of Sign Area. Sign area shall be calculated as follows:
(1) Calculation of Area of Individual Signs. The allowable area of a sign face shall
be measured by enclosing the most protruding points or edges of a sign within the
smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other
display, together with any material, color, or decoration forming an integral part
of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the
backdrop or structure against which it is placed. Such area shall not include any
base, supports, bracing, supporting fence, or supporting wall when they are
clearly incidental to the display itself.
(2) Calculation of Area of Multi-faced Signs. The allowable sign area for a sign
with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign
faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back
to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and
when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than two
(2) feet apart, the sign area shall be computed by measurement of one of the faces.
(i) Computation of Height. The allowable height of a sign shall be measured by
calculating the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be the lower of:
(1) the existing grade prior to construction; or,
(2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming,
mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign.
(j) Assignment of Allowable Sign Area - Multi-Tenant Buildings. When the allowable
area for signs is based on the linear feet of a building exposure, the allowable sign area
may be assigned to each tenant as follows:
(1) allowable sign area multiplied by the percent of building exposure or building
space occupied by each tenant;
(2) the allowable sign area divided by the number of tenants; or,
(3) the allowable sign area may be assigned at the discretion of the property owner.
SEC. 13-1-66 SIGN STANDARDS BY ZONING DISTRICT.
(a) All signs in the C-2 Central Business District shall be subject to the Downtown Menasha
Sign Design Guidelines as adopted by the Common Council.
(b) The following charts list standards by zoning district for signs that require a sign permit:
Zoning
District
Sign Type
Permitted
Restrictions
see Sec.
13-1-67
Allowable Sign
Area per
Building
Exposure
Min & Max
Sign Area/
Business*
Max # Max
Height
Setback
see Sec.
13-1-65(e)
A-1, R-1,
R-2,
R2-A (2
unit only)
wall (for
general home
occupations
only)
no
illumination
2 sq. ft./sign NA 1/unit below 2nd
floor
windows or
20’,
whichever
is less
NA
R-2A (3+
units),
R-3, R-4
monument external
illumination
only
32 sq. ft./sign
face, not to
exceed 64 sq.
ft./sign
NA 1/street
frontage; see
Sec. 13-1-
65(f) for
corner lots
10’ 2’
Special
Use: A-1,
R-1, R-2,
R-2A,
R-3, R-4
wall external
illumination
only
1 sq. ft. for each
linear ft. of the
building
exposure
at least 20 sq.
ft., not to
exceed 50 sq.
ft.
allowable
sign area
may be
applied per
building
exposure
below 2nd
floor
windows or
20’,
whichever
is less
NA
monument external
illumination
only
32 sq. ft./sign
face, not to
exceed 64 sq.
ft./sign
1/street
frontage; see
Sec. 13-1-
65(f) for
corner lots
10’ 10’
* The aggregate maximum sign area per business may not exceed the allowable sign area per building exposure.
In order to accommodate businesses with very narrow building exposures, a minimum sign area per business is
granted for certain types of signs. A sign smaller than the minimum may be erected subject to the requirements
of this ordinance.
Zoning
District
Type
Permitted
Restrictions
(See Sec.
13-1-67)
Allowable Sign
Area per
Building
Exposure
Min & Max
Sign Area
per
Business*
Max# Max
Height
Setback
see Sec.
13-1-65(e)
C-1, I-1,
I-2
wall - ground
floor
businesses,
including
awning,
canopy, and
marquee
1 sq. ft. for each
linear ft. of the
building
exposure
at least 20 sq.
ft, not to
exceed 300
sq. ft.
allowable
sign area
may be
applied per
building
exposure
top of wall NA
wall - upper
floor
businesses
and/or tenant
directory
8 sq. ft. NA 1/entrance at entrance,
below 2nd
floor
windows or
20’,
whichever
is less
NA
monument
(see Sec. 13-
1-67 for
electronic
message
centers)
1 sq. ft./sign
face for each
linear ft. of the
building
exposure, not to
exceed 200 sq.
ft.
not to exceed
75 sq. ft/sign
face for 1st
business, 50
sq. ft./sign
face for each
business
thereafter
1/street
frontage; see
Sec. 13-1-
65(f) for
corner lots
16’ 2’
business
center
requires
Special Use
Permit
not to exceed
200 sq. ft.
not to exceed
75 sq. ft/sign
face for 1st
business, 50
sq. ft./sign
face for each
business
thereafter
1/business
center
entrance
16’ per
Special
Use
Permit
projecting -
ground floor
businesses
external or
back lit/halo
illumination
only
25 sq. ft./sign
face, not to
exceed 50 sq.
ft./sign
NA 1/business below 2nd
floor
windows or
20’,
whichever
is less
NA
projecting -
upper floor
businesses or
tenant
directory
external or
back lit/halo
illumination
only
8 sq. ft. NA 1/entrance at entrance
below 2nd
floor
windows or
20’,
whichever
is less
NA
* The aggregate maximum sign area per business may not exceed the allowable sign area per building exposure.
In order to accommodate businesses with very narrow building exposures, a minimum sign area per business is
granted for certain types of signs. A sign smaller than the minimum may be erected subject to the requirements
of this ordinance.
Zoning
District
Type
Permitted
Restrictions
(See Sec.
13-1-67)
Allowable Sign
Area per
Building
Exposure
Min & Max
Sign Area
per
Business*
Max# Max
Height
Setback
see Sec.
13-1-65(e)
C-1, I-1,
I-2
adjacent
STH 441
frontage
wall 1 sq. ft. for each
linear ft. of the
building
exposure
at least 20 sq.
ft, not to
exceed 500
sq. ft.
1/business
on building
exposure
facing STH
441 only
top of wall NA
monument 1 sq. ft./sign
face for each
linear ft. of the
building
exposure, not to
exceed 200 sq.
ft.
not to exceed
100 sq.
ft/sign face
for first
business, 50
sq. ft./sign
face for each
business
thereafter
1/lot 16’ 2’
pole See Sec. 13-
1-67
1 sq. ft./sign
face for each
linear ft. of the
building
exposure, not to
exceed 300 sq.
ft./sign face
not to exceed
150 sq.
ft/sign face
for first
business, plus
50 sq. ft./sign
face for each
business
thereafter
1/lot facing
STH 441
16’ above
STH 441
centerline
grade
2’
* The aggregate maximum sign area per business may not exceed the allowable sign area per building exposure.
In order to accommodate businesses with very narrow building exposures, a minimum sign area per business is
granted for certain types of signs. A sign smaller than the minimum may be erected subject to the requirements
of this ordinance.
Zoning
District
Type
Permitted
Restrictions
(See Sec.
13-1-67)
Allowable Sign
Area per
Building
Exposure
Min & Max
Sign Area
per
Business*
Max# Max
Height
Setback
see Sec.
13-1-65(e)
C-2 wall - ground
floor
businesses,
including
awning,
canopy, and
marquee
external or
back lit/halo
illumination
only
1 sq. ft. for each
linear ft. of the
store front
at least 10
sq. ft., not to
exceed 50
sq. ft.
allowable
sign area may
be applied per
store front
below 2nd
floor
windows or
20’,
whichever
is less
NA
wall - upper
floor
businesses
and/or tenant
directory
external or
back lit/halo
illumination
only
8 sq. ft. NA 1/entrance at entrance
below 2nd
floor
windows or
20’,
whichever
is less
NA
projecting -
ground floor
businesses
external or
back lit/halo
illumination
only
1 sq. ft for each
linear ft. of
store front, not
to exceed 25 sq.
ft./sign face
NA 1/business below 2nd
floor
windows or
20’,
whichever
is less
NA
projecting -
upper floor
businesses or
tenant
directory
external or
back lit/halo
illumination
only
8 sq. ft. NA 1/entrance at entrance
below 2nd
floor
windows or
20’,
whichever
is less
NA
monument external or
back lit/halo
illumination
only
1 sq. ft/sign
face for each
linear ft. of the
building
exposure; not to
exceed 50 sq. ft.
NA 1/street
frontage, see
Sec. 13-1-
65(f) for
corner lots
8’ 2’
business
center
requires
Special Use
Permit
not to exceed
100 sq. ft.
not to
exceed 50
sq. ft/sign
face for 1st
business,
plus 25 sq.
ft./sign face
for each
business
thereafter
1/business
center
entrance
8’ per
Special
Use
Permit
sidewalk see Sec. 13-
1-67
8 sq. ft./sign
face, 16 sq.
ft./sign
NA 1/business 6’ see Sec.
13-1-67
* The aggregate maximum sign area per business may not exceed the allowable sign area per building exposure.
In order to accommodate businesses with very narrow building exposures, a minimum sign area per business is
granted for certain types of signs. A sign smaller than the minimum may be erected subject to the requirements
of this ordinance.
Zoning
District
Type
Permitted
Restrictions
(See Sec.
13-1-67)
Allowable Sign
Area per
Building
Exposure
Min & Max
Sign Area
per
Business*
Max# Max
Height
Setback
see Sec.
13-1-65(e)
C-3, C-4 wall - ground
floor
businesses,
including
awning,
canopy, and
marquee
for retail
uses, the C-1
standards for
wall signs
shall apply
1 sq. ft. for each
linear ft. of the
building
exposure
at least 20
sq. ft., not to
exceed 75
sq. ft.
allowable
sign area may
be applied per
building
exposure
facing a street
or customer
parking lot
below 2nd
floor
windows or
20’,
whichever
is less
NA
wall - upper
floor
businesses or
tenant
directory
external or
back lit/halo
illumination
only
8 sq. ft. NA 1/entrance at entrance
below 2nd
floor
windows or
20’,
whichever
is less
NA
monument for retail
uses, the C-1
standards for
monument
signs shall
apply
1 sq. ft./sign
face for each
linear ft. of the
building
exposure; not to
exceed 100 sq.
ft.
not to
exceed 50
sq. ft./sign
face for 1st
business, 25
sq. ft./sign
face for each
business
thereafter
1/street
frontage, see
Sec. 13-1-
65(f) for
corner lots
16’ 2 ft
business
center
requires
Special Use
Permit
not to exceed
100 sq. ft.
not to
exceed 50
sq. ft/sign
face for 1st
business, 25
sq. ft./sign
face for each
business
thereafter
1/business
center
entrance
16’ per
Special
Use
Permit
projecting -
ground floor
businesses
external or
back lit/halo
illumination
only
1 sq. ft for each
linear ft. of
store front, not
to exceed 25 sq.
ft./sign face
NA 1/business below 2nd
floor
windows or
20’,
whichever
is less
NA
projecting -
upper floor
businesses or
tenant
directory
signs
external or
back lit/halo
illumination
only
8 sq. ft. NA 1/entrance at entrance
below 2nd
floor
windows or
20’,
whichever
is less
NA
* The aggregate maximum sign area per business may not exceed the allowable sign area per building exposure.
In order to accommodate businesses with very narrow building exposures, a minimum sign area per business is
granted for certain types of signs. A sign smaller than the minimum may be erected subject to the requirements
of this ordinance.
SEC. 13-1-67 REQUIREMENTS BY SIGN TYPE
(a) Accessory Structure Signs. Signs may be placed on the walls of accessory structures
facing a street or customer parking lot, but the sign area used shall be deducted from the
allowable wall sign area for the building exposure of the primary building.
(b) Awnings/Canopies/Marquees. Awning, canopy, and marquee signs shall be permitted
subject to the following standards:
(1) In the C-2 Central Business District, they may project into the public right-ofway,
but may not be erected closer than three (3) feet to any street curb line.
(2) A minimum clearance of seven (7) feet shall be maintained from ground level.
(3) They shall not extend above the roof or parapet of the structure to which it is
attached.
(4) Any text, logos, or other graphic representation qualifying as a sign which is
placed on an awning, canopy, or marquee shall be included within the calculation
of total allowable wall sign area and are subject to the requirements of this
ordinance.
(5) Marquee signs shall be limited to buildings occupied by theaters, cinemas,
performing arts facilities, or parking structures.
(c) Business Center Signs. Business center signs shall be permitted subject to the following
standards:
(1) Signs shall require a Special Use Permit and are intended to identify the entrance,
the name of the business center, and/or the names of businesses within the
business center.
(2) The boundaries of the business center shall be determined through review and
approval of the Special Use Permit.
(3) Business center signs shall keep the first two (2) feet of the sign closest to the
ground free of sign copy for the purposes of snow storage and landscaping. This
portion of the sign shall not be counted toward the calculation of allowable sign
area.
(4) The maximum height of the sign base shall be no more than 1/3 the total sign
height.
(5) In granting a Special Use Permit, additional conditions may be required
depending on the unique conditions of the business center and surrounding area.
These conditions may include, but are not limited to:
a. location
b. design details
c. colors
d. materials
e. illumination
f. size
g. height
h. landscaping
i. number of businesses identified
(6) Electronic message centers are prohibited.
(d) Electronic Message Centers. Signs whose informational content can be changed or
altered by electronic means shall be subject to the following standards:
(1) Electronic message centers are permitted in the C-1, C-3, C-4, I-1, and I-2
districts and, within all residential districts, institutional uses. Electronic message
centers shall require a Special Use Permit and be turned off between the hours of
9:00pm and 6:00am if they are located within three hundred (300) feet of either of
the following:
a. a residential use or district;
b. any property use that requires a Special Use Permit.
(2) Electronic message centers shall be allowed on monument signs only and are
subject to all monument sign requirements of the applicable zoning district.
(3) The sign shall be equipped with photosensitive equipment which automatically
adjusts the brightness and contrast of the sign in direct relation to the ambient
outdoor illumination. The sign must not exceed a maximum illumination of 5,000
nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours and a maximum
illumination of 500 nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to dawn as
measured from the sign’s face at maximum brightness.
(4) Electronic message centers shall be integral to and a part of the original approved
monument sign and may not comprise more than 30% of the sign face and shall
be located in the lower one half of the sign. Static displays consisting only of
letters or numerals that are not changed more than once in a 24-hour period shall
not be included in the area computation of the electronic message center. The
combined square footage of the electronic message center plus any static display
area may not comprise more than 75% of the total allowable square footage.
(5) Each message displayed on an electronic message center must be static or
depicted for a minimum of three (3) seconds. Each transition shall take place in
less than one (1) second
(6) Electronic message centers shall not utilize animation, chasing, flashing,
scintillation, scrolling or running messages, fade, or any other effect which
depicts movement or is intended to draw attention to the sign.
(7) Including an electronic message center as part of a permanent sign will prohibit
the use of any portable signs (as defined in Sec. 13-1-61).
(8) Electronic message centers shall not display off-premise commercial advertising.
(9) The Zoning Administrator shall inspect annually or at such other times as deemed
necessary each electronic message center for the purpose of ascertaining whether
the software settings are in compliance with the requirements of this Code. The
owner of the electronic message center shall pay to the City of Menasha an annual
inspection fee in an amount established by the Common Council.
(e) Monument Signs. Monument signs shall be permitted subject to the following
standards:
(1) Monument signs shall keep the first two (2) feet of the sign closest to the ground
free of sign copy for the purposes of snow storage and landscaping. This portion
of the sign shall not be counted toward the calculation of allowable sign area.
(2) Monument signs must incorporate design details, materials, and colors of the
associated building(s). EIFS shall not be allowed on the bottom 3 feet.
(3) The maximum height of the sign base shall be no more than 1/3 the total sign
height.
(f) Pole Signs. Pole signs are allowed on properties zoned C-1, I-1, or I-2 that directly abut
WIS 441. Pole signs shall be subject to the following standards:
(1) The structure shall be constructed on no less than two columns which must be
designed to incorporate design details, materials, and colors of the associated
building(s). EIFS shall not be allowed on the bottom 3 feet. Poles shall be
shrouded and integrated into the overall sign design.
(2) Maximum height of a pole sign is sixteen (16) feet above the WIS 441 centerline
grade directly adjacent to the subject property.
(3) Individual tenant sign panels should be uniform in size, recognizing that the major
tenant, or the name of the center may have a slightly larger sign panel.
(4) Sign panels shall not extend more than two (2) feet beyond the width of the
architectural support elements on the sign.
(5) Electronic Message Centers are prohibited.
(g) Projecting Signs. Projecting signs shall be subject to the following standards:
(1) They shall project from the wall at an angle of ninety (90) degrees.
(2) A minimum clearance of seven (7) feet shall be maintained from ground level.
(3) No projecting sign may be erected within twenty (20) feet of any other projecting
sign; however, this provision shall not deny any place of business at least one (1)
projecting sign.
(4) In the C-2 Central Business District, such signs may project into the public rightof-
way, but may not be erected closer than three (3) feet to any street curb line.
(h) Sidewalk Signs in the C-1 General Commercial District. Sidewalk signs may be
placed in the C-1 General Commercial District subject to the following limitations:
(1) Number of Signs Allowed.
a. The number of signs shall be limited to one (1) per building exposure per
business with direct street and/or public area entry. Multi-tenant buildings
are allowed a total of three sidewalk signs per street and/or public area
entry. No business shall be displayed on more than one sign per street or
public area entry.
b. When a sidewalk sign is in use for a business, no other temporary signage
on the property may be in use for said business.
c. Sidewalk signs are not permitted on parcels with electronic message
centers.
(2) Design.
a. Sidewalk signs shall be a sandwich board type (“A-frame”) with multiple
(minimum of 2) or one continuous hinge across the top.
b. Signs must be portable.
c. Signs shall not exceed a width of two and one-half feet.
d. Removable signage panels on thin sign board material such as; aluminum,
Centrex, or other quality sign grade material, shall be attached to the sign
frame with screws or through the use of slide rails – no Velcro, staples, or
double-sided tape. Cardboard or paper as sign materials shall not be
permitted.
e. Interchangeable letters or letter copy on rails are discouraged.
f. Sidewalk signs shall not be illuminated, animated, have moving parts, or
electrically powered in any way.
g. Windblown devices such as balloons, banners, or other similar items shall
not be attached or otherwise made part of the sidewalk sign.
h. Signs shall contain a device such as a chain, rope, or cable to prevent the
sign panels from spreading.
i. Signs shall not have more than two (2) sign faces.
j. Sidewalk signs shall be free standing, internally weighted and shall not be
anchored or affixed to any sidewalk, light pole, sign, traffic signal, bench,
newspaper vending box, planting structure or similar structure or
appurtenances. The signs shall be placed at sidewalk grade level and shall
not be placed on planters, walls, curbs or any similar structure.
(3) Materials.
a. Signs shall be constructed using quality exterior sign board materials,
wood or other durable material.
b. All wood and metal shall be painted or stained.
c. All signs shall be professionally printed or painted, changeable copy that
is hand lettered shall comprise no more than 75% of the sign face.
(4) Location and Removal.
a. Placement is allowed on landscaped areas in front of the business, between
building frontage and sidewalk or in terrace space of the right-of-way
when the terrace is larger than forty-eight (48) inches.
b. All signs must be removed after the conclusion of business hours each day
and are allowed only from 5:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
c. Signage shall not obstruct the ingress/egress of parked vehicles.
d. Signs placed near points of ingress/egress will be subject to vision control
review.
e. When multiple signs are placed on one parcel, signs shall have a minimum
clear spacing of twenty-five (25) feet between signs.
f. Sidewalk signs shall not be anchored or affixed to any sidewalk, light
pole, sign, traffic signal, bench, newspaper vending box, planting structure
or other similar structure or appurtenances. The signs shall be placed at
sidewalk grade level and shall not be placed on planters, wall, curbs or any
similar structure.
(5) General Condition of Signs.
a. To keep signs legible and functional, all sidewalk signs shall be
maintained and kept free of peeling or fading paint or vinyl.
b. Any signs which have become deteriorated due to lapse of time, weather,
or other reason may be ordered to be removed by the Zoning
Administrator and/or designee according to the process outlined in Sec.
13-1-70(a).
(i) Sidewalk Signs in the C-2 Central Business District. Sidewalk signs may be placed in
the C-2 Central Business District subject to the following limitations:
(1) Number of Signs Allowed.
a. The number of signs shall be limited to one (1) per building exposure per
business with direct street and/or public area entry. Multi-tenant buildings
are allowed a total of three sidewalk signs per street and/or public area
entry. No business shall be displayed on more than one sidewalk sign per
street or public area entry.
b. When a sidewalk sign is in use for a business, no other temporary signage
on the property may be in use for said business.
(2) Design.
a. Design of such signs in a designated historic district shall be subject to
approval of the Landmarks Commission.
b. Sidewalk signs shall be a sandwich board type (“A-frame”) with multiple
(minimum of 2) or one continuous hinge across the top.
c. Signs must be portable.
d. Signs shall not exceed a width of two and one-half feet.
e. Removable signage panels on thin sign board material such as; aluminum,
Centrex, or other quality sign grade material, shall be attached to the sign
frame with screws or through the use of slide rails – no Velcro, staples, or
double-sided tape. Cardboard or paper as sign materials shall not be
permitted.
f. Interchangeable letters or letter copy on rails are discouraged.
g. Sidewalk signs shall not be illuminated, animated, have moving parts, or
electrically powered in any way.
h. Windblown devices such as balloons, banners, or other similar items shall
not be attached or otherwise made part of the sidewalk sign.
i. Signs shall contain a device such as a chain, rope, or cable to prevent the
sign panels from spreading.
j. Signs shall not have more than two (2) sign faces.
k. Signs shall be free standing, internally weighted and shall not be anchored
or affixed to any sidewalk, light pole, sign, traffic signal, bench,
newspaper vending box, planting structure or similar structure or
appurtenances. The signs shall be placed at sidewalk grade level and shall
not be placed on planters, walls, curbs or any similar structure.
(3) Materials.
a. Sign materials in a designated historic district shall be subject to approval
of the Landmarks Commission.
b. Signs shall be constructed using quality exterior sign board materials,
wood or other durable material.
c. All wood and metal shall be painted or stained.
d. All signs shall be professionally printed or painted, changeable copy that
is hand lettered shall comprise no more than 75% of the sign face.
(4) Location and Removal.
a. Signs shall be located within twenty (20) feet of the building exposure
whose business name, goods, or services are being offered.
b. Such signs may be placed in the first four (4) feet adjacent to the building
or the first 4 (4) feet adjacent to the curb. Signage shall not obstruct the
ingress/egress of parked vehicles. A minimum of four (4) feet of sidewalk
shall remain open between the sign and any other impediment to
pedestrian movement.
c. All signs must be removed from the public right-of-way after the
conclusion of business hours each day and are allowed only from 5:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
d. When multiple signs are placed on one parcel, signs shall have a minimum
clear spacing of twenty-five (25) feet between signs.
e. Signs shall not be anchored or affixed to any sidewalk, light pole, sign,
traffic signal, bench, newspaper vending box, planting structure or other
similar structure or appurtenances. The signs shall be placed at sidewalk
grade level and shall not be placed on planters, wall, curbs or any similar
structure.
(5) General Condition of Signs.
a. To keep signs legible and functional, all sidewalk signs shall be
maintained and kept free of peeling or fading paint or vinyl.
b. Any signs which have become deteriorated due to lapse of time, weather,
or other reason may be ordered to be removed by the Zoning
Administrator and/or designee according to the process outlined in Sec.
13-1-70(a).
(j) Wall Signs. Wall signs shall be subject to the following standards:
(1) They shall not project more than twelve (12) inches from the building surface.
(2) They shall not extend above the lowest point of the roof, nor beyond the ends of
the wall to which it is attached.
(3) They shall not obscure architectural features of the building, including but not
limited to windows, arches, sills, moldings, cornices, and transoms.
(4) For multiple story building in the C-2 Central Business District and C-3 Business
and Office District, wall signs shall only be permitted as follows (except as
provided for in this ordinance):
a. on the building sign frieze;
b. on a window;
c. on an awning, canopy, or marquee;
d. on a first story panel; and,
e. in the area between the first floor and the window sill of the second story
window; if no windows are present, then no higher than twenty (20) feet.
SEC. 13-1-68 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
(a) Legal Nonconforming Status. Any sign located within the City of Menasha limits as of
the date of adoption of this ordinance or located in an area annexed to the City of
Menasha hereafter which does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance shall be
considered a legal nonconforming sign and may be permitted to remain in accordance
with this ordinance as long as the sign is properly maintained and not detrimental to the
health, safety, and welfare of the community.
(b) Loss of Legal Nonconforming Status.
(1) A sign shall lose its legal nonconforming status when one or more of the
following occurs:
a. the business, event, or use ceases and the building, unit of the building, or
property remains vacant for a period of ninety (90) days;
b. the sign is expanded or changed to another nonconforming sign;
c. the sign is removed or relocated to another site;
d. the sign is altered so as to change the shape, size, type, placement, or
design of its structural or basic parts;
e. the sign is enhanced with any new feature, including the addition of
illumination;
f. the sign is repaired, except if such repair brings the sign into conformance
with this ordinance, when such repair involves the following:
1. the replacement of both the sign frame and sign panels;
2. the replacement of the primary support poles or other support
structure;
3. for signs without framework for sign panels, requires replacement
of the sign panels.
(2) A sign that loses its legal nonconforming status shall be immediately brought into
compliance with this ordinance with a new permit secured or shall be removed.
The Zoning Administrator and/or designee shall order the removal or repair of
such sign according to the process outlined in Sec. 13-1-70(a).
(c) Permitted Modifications. Routine repairs are permitted in order to maintain the sign in
a safe and aesthetic condition exactly as it existed at the time of the enactment of the
ordinance. A change of sign copy or replacement of sign panels within an existing sign
frame is permitted except as provided herein.
(d) Elimination of Nonconforming Signs. The City of Menasha may acquire by purchase,
condemnation, or by other means any nonconforming sign which is deemed necessary to
preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the city’s residents.
(e) Annual Billboard/Off-Premise Sign Inspection. The Zoning Administrator and/or
designee shall inspect annually or at such other times as deemed necessary each existing
billboard or off-premise sign for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is secure
or insecure and whether it is in need of removal or repair. The owner of the billboard or
off-premise sign shall pay to the City of Menasha an annual inspection fee in an amount
established by the Common Council.
SEC. 13-1-69 ABANDONED, DANGEROUS, UNSAFE, AND ILLEGALLY ERECTED
SIGNS.
(a) Abandoned Signs.
(1) When a business, event, or use ceases and the building, unit of the building, or
property remains vacant for a period of thirty (30) days or more, the property
owner shall be required to:
a. remove all signs advertising the former business, event, or use (including
any frame, support poles, wiring, etc.); or,
b. if applicable, install blank panels in the sign frames.
(2) The provisions of Sec. 13-1-68(b) shall apply to abandoned nonconforming signs.
(b) Dangerous Signs. Any sign constituting an immediate hazard to health or safety shall be
deemed a public nuisance by the Zoning Administrator and/or designee and may be
removed by the city according to the process outlined in Sec. 11-7-5 and the cost thereof
charged against the owner of the property on which it was installed. If the property
owner fails to pay for such costs, the costs shall be placed as a special tax on the property
and entered on the tax rolls.
(c) Unsafe Signs. Any sign that is determined by the Zoning Administrator and/or designee
to be unsafe, but not representing an immediate health or safety hazard, shall be removed
or repaired according to the process outlined in Sec. 13-1-70(a).
(d) Illegally Erected Signs. The Zoning Administrator and/or designee shall order the
removal of any sign erected illegally in violation of this ordinance, according to the
process outlined in Sec. 13-1-70(a). Persons erecting a sign prior to securing a sign
permit shall be given notice to submit a sign permit application according to the process
outlined in Sec. 13-1-70(a).
SEC. 13-1-70 ENFORCEMENT PROCESS.
(a) Enforcement Process. The Zoning Administrator and/or designee shall have the
authority to enforce the provisions of this ordinance and issue orders related to and
promoting the purposes of this ordinance. The provisions of the sign ordinance shall be
enforced according to the following procedures:
(1) Notice of the violation or required action shall be sent by certified mail addressed
to the property owner and/or permit holder at the last known address.
(2) The notice shall describe the violation or required action and allow the following
time period for removal, repair, or completion of the required action:
a. fifteen (15) days for violations of portable or temporary sign requirements,
failure to secure a sign permit, and repair or removal of unsafe signs;
b. thirty (30) days for all other violations, required actions, or permit
revocations.
(3) Should the sign not be removed or repaired or the required action completed
within the time specified, the Zoning Administrator and/or designee shall have the
authority to remove the sign, and the property owner shall be liable for the cost
thereof. If the property owner fails to pay for such costs, the costs shall be placed
as a special tax on the property and entered on the tax rolls.
(b) Exceptions. Signs illegally located in the right-of-way may be removed by the City of
Menasha and held for a period of thirty (30) days. The owner of said sign(s) may recover
the sign after paying a fee in an amount established by the Common Council. If the
owner does not recover the sign(s) held by the city within the specified time period, the
sign will be destroyed.
(c) Penalties. Failure to comply with the standards specified in this ordinance may subject
the property owner and/or permit holder to the penalties listed in Sec. 1-1-7.
(d) Appeal. Decisions by the Zoning Administrator and/or designee based on this ordinance
shall be subject to appeal to the Board of Appeals.
113094
1:1
ARTICLE G
Satellite Earth Stations; Television or Radio Antenna
Towers; Wind Energy Systems; Accessory Uses;
Home Occupations
SEC. 13-1-80 SATELLITE EARTH STATIONS.
(a) PERMIT REQUIRED. No owner shall, within the City of Menasha, build, construct, use
or place any type of satellite earth station until a permit shall have first been obtained from
the Zoning Administrator.
(b) DEFINITIONS.
(1) For purposes of this Sections, a "satellite television dish" or "earth station" is
defined as an apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or a
transmitter relay located in a planetary orbit. They are also commonly referred to as
disks, satellite communications systems or home earth stations.
(2) "Owner" means the holder of record of an estate in possession in fee simple, or for
life, in land or real property, or a vendee of record under a land contract for the sale
of an estate in possession in fee simple or for life but does not include the vendor
under a land contract. A tenant in common or joint tenant shall be considered such
owner to the extent of his interest. The personal representative of at least one (1)
owner shall be considered an owner.
(c) APPLICATION. Application for a satellite earth station permit shall be made in writing to
the Zoning Administrator. With such application, there shall be submitted a fee of Ten
Dollars ($10.00) and a complete set of plans and specifications, including a plot plan
showing the location of the proposed satellite earth station with respect to adjoining alleys,
lot lines and buildings. If such application meets all requirements of this Section, the
application shall be approved.
(d) INSTALLATION RESTRICTIONS. Satellite earth stations installed in any zoning
district within the City shall comply with the following provisions:
(1) Number of Units. Not more than one (1) satellite earth station may be allowed per
individual recorded lot except additional stations may be permitted upon application
for a variance in non-residential zones.
(2) Location and Setbacks.
a. Any satellite dish mounting post shall only be located in the rear yard of a
residential lot and at least fifteen (15) feet from any property line.
Placement of a satellite dish in a business or industrial district shall not be
allowed unless a special exception permit is granted by the Plan
Commission.
b. If the dish cannot receive a usable satellite signal in the rear yard of any
residential lot but can receive such a signal while located in a side yard, it
may be located only in a side yard after receiving approval from the Zoning
Board of Appeals. For corner lots, a side yard is only a yard that does not
face a street.
c. No dish shall be placed in the front yard of any residential, business or
industrial lot in the City.
d. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether a signal constitutes a
usable satellite signal, based on evidence provided by the person seeking a
113094
1:2
permit to erect or construct the dish.
(3) Mounting. Satellite earth stations located in agricultural or residential districts shall
be ground-mounted only. Satellite earth stations may be wall- or roof-mounted in
business or industrial districts only. Satellite earth stations attached to the wall or
roof of any principal or accessory structure shall be subject to the structure being
constructed to carry all imposed loading. The Zoning Administrator or Building
Inspector may require engineering calculations.
(4) Diameter. The diameter of the satellite television dish shall not exceed ten (10) feet
for the ground-mounted dish and six (6) feet for the roof-mounted dish, except for
stations used to provide community antenna television services.
(5) Height.
a. A ground-mounted satellite dish may not exceed ten (10) feet in height, as
measured from the ground to the highest point of the dish.
b. A roof-mounted satellite dish may not exceed eight (8) feet in height above
the surrounding roof line as measured from the lowest point of the existing
roof line.
(6) Wind Pressure. All satellite earth stations shall be permanently mounted in
accordance with the manufacture's specifications for installation. All such
installations shall meet a minimum wind load design velocity of eighty (80) mph.
(7) Electrical Installations. Electrical installations in connection with earth satellite
receiving stations, including grounding of the system, shall be in accordance with
the National Electrical Safety Code, Wisconsin State Electrical Code and the
instructions of the manufacturer. In cases of conflict, the stricter requirements shall
govern. All cable used to conduct current or signals from the satellite earth station
to the receivers shall be installed underground unless installation site conditions
preclude underground. If a satellite earth station is to be used by two (2) or more
residential property owners, all interconnecting electrical connections, cables and
conduits must also be buried. The location of all such underground lines, cables and
conduits shall be shown on the application for a permit. All satellite earth stations
shall be grounded against direct lightning strikes.
(8) Temporary Placement. No portable or trailer-mounted satellite earth station shall be
allowed, except for temporary installation for on-site testing and demonstration
purposes for periods not exceeding five (5) days. However, such trial placement
shall be in accordance with all provisions of this Section. Failure to comply shall
result in a citation being issued for violation of this Section. Any person making
such temporary placement shall give written notice to the Zoning Administrator of
the date when such placement shall begin and end.
(9) Advertising. No form of advertising or identification, sign or mural is allowed on
the dish or framework other than the customary manufacturer's identification plates.
(10) Interference with Broadcasting. Satellite earth stations shall be filtered and/or
shielded so as to prevent the emission or reflection of an electromagnetic radiation
that would cause any harmful interference with the radio and/or television
broadcasting or reception on adjacent properties. In the event that harmful
interference is caused subsequent to its installation, the owner of the satellite earth
station shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance
with Federal Communications Commission regulations.
(11) Compliance with Federal Regulations. The installation and use of every satellite
earth station shall be in conformity with the Federal Cable Communications Policy
Act of 1984 and regulations adopted thereunder.
113094
1:3
(12) Color. The color of any satellite dish shall be such that it blends into its
surroundings and shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator as part of the
application.
(e) VARIANCES. Requests for variances from the standards established by this Section may
be made to the Board of Appeals pursuant to this Chapter.
(f) ENFORCEMENT.
(1) It shall be unlawful to construct, use, build or locate any satellite television dish in
violation of any provisions of this Section. In the event of any violation, the Zoning
Administrator or any property owner who would be specifically damaged by such
violation may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin a violation of this
Section.
(2) Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this
Section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the general penalty found in Section 1-
1-7.
SEC. 13-1-81 COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
(a) INTENT. It is the purpose of this section to provide standards for the construction and
maintenance of commercial wireless telecommunications facilities while accommodating
the communication needs of residents and businesses and protecting the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the community. These regulations are necessary in order
to:
(1) Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunications services to the residents
and businesses of the city;
(2) Minimize adverse visual effects of telecommunications facilities through careful
design and siting standards;
(3) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through
structural standards and setback requirements; and,
(4) Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate
new telecommunications antennas in order to reduce the number of towers needed
to serve the community.
(b) DEFINITIONS. The following words and terms shall have the following meanings in
this section unless the context clearly states otherwise:
(1) Antenna. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic signals, including but not limited to directional
antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional
antennas, such as whip antennas. For the purposes of this section, the
term shall refer to antennas used to provide wireless telecommunications services.
(2) Commercial or Commercial Use. A use that involves the exchange of cash, goods
or services, barter, forgiveness of indebtedness, or any other remuneration in
exchange for goods, services, lodging, meals, entertainment in any form, or the
right to occupy space over any period of time. For the purpose of this section,
telecommunications facilities incidental to a primary residential use shall not be
considered a commercial use.
(3) Public Utility. Persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas, electric,
transportation, water, sewer, or land line telephone service to the general public.
For the purpose of this section, commercial telecommunications facilities shall not
be considered public utility uses and are defined separately.
113094
1:4
(4) Telecommunications Facility. A facility that transmits and/or receives
electromagnetic signals for the purpose of providing commercial wireless
telecommunications services. It includes in whole or part: antennas and other
types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, towers or
similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment buildings, accessory
parking areas, or other accessory development.
(5) Telecommunications Facility, Minor. Minor telecommunications facilities shall
include the following:
a. Wall mounted antennas fifteen (15) feet or less in height or ten (10)
square feet or less in area that are solely for the use of the project
site tenants and are not the primary use of the property;
b. Ground or roof mounted antennas fifteen (15) feet or less in height
and fifty-five (55) square feet or less in area that are solely for the
use of the project site tenants and are not the primary use of the
property;
c. Antennas to be added to an existing tower, water tower, or similar
structure;
d. Ground mounted antennas fifty (50) feet or less in height and roof
mounted antennas fifteen (15) feet or less in height and fifty-five
(55) square fee or less in area that are solely for emergency
response uses or for the protection of the public.
e. Ground and roof mounted antennas fifteen (15) feet or less in
height and fifty-five (55) square feet or less in area for use by other
than a project site tenants if located on government and public
utility sites.
(6) Telecommunications Facility, Major. Major telecommunications facilities shall
include the following:
a. Wall mounted antennas exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height or ten (10)
square feet in area;
b. Ground or roof mounted antennas exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height and
fifty-five (55) square feet in area;
c. Ground mounted towers exceeding thirty (30) feet in height;
d. Roof mounted towers exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height.
(7) Tower. Any ground, wall, or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination
thereof greater than fifteen (15) feet in height measured from the base of the tower
to its highest point, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts,
intended primarily for the purpose of mounting antenna or similar apparatus above
grade. For the purpose of this section, the term shall refer to towers supporting
antennas used to provide wireless telecommunications services.
(8) Wireless Telecommunications Services. Licensed commercial wireless
telecommunications services including cellular, personal communication services
(PCS), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
(c) EXEMPT TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. The following
telecommunications facilities shall be considered exempt from the requirements of this
section:
(1) Government owned and operated telecommunications facilities;
(2) Non-commercial telecommunication facilities;
(3) Facilities incidental to residential uses;
(4) Hand held devices such as cell phones, business-band mobile radios, walkie113094
1:5
talkies, cordless telephones, and similar devices as determined by the Community
Development Director.
(d) PERMITTED TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. Commercial
telecommunications facilities may be permitted as follows:
(1) Minor Telecommunications Facilities. Minor telecommunications facilities in
accordance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance are permitted by right
in the following zoning districts:
a. In the I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts;
b. In the C-1 General Commercial, C-2 Central Business, C-3 Business and
Office District, and C-4 Business Park District. Proposed minor
telecommunications facilities to be located in a historic district are subject
to review and approval by the Landmarks Commission.
c. In the following residentially zoned locations:
1. Churches and similar sites when camouflaged in existing steeples
or bell towers;
2. Government and public utility sites.
(2) Major Telecommunications Facilities. Upon recommendation of the Plan
Commission, the Common Council may grant a special use permit for major
telecommunications facilities as follows:
a. In the I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts in accordance with all applicable
provisions of this ordinance.
b. In the C-1 District if located on a government or public utility site in
accordance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance.
(e) GENERAL STANDARDS.
(1) Location. Telecommunications facilities shall conform with each of the following
requirements:
a. Telecommunications facilities shall be located so as to minimize their
visibility and the number of distinct facilities present. Such facilities shall
be co-located whenever technically possible.
b. No more than one (1) tower shall be permitted on a parcel.
c. Telecommunications facilities shall not be located between a principal
structure and a public street. STH 441 shall be excluded from this
requirement.
d. Telecommunications facilities shall meet the minimum requirements of
the underlying zoning district.
e. No telecommunications facility shall be designed and/or sited such that it
poses a potential hazard to nearby residences or surrounding properties or
improvements and shall comply with the following:
1. Towers shall be set back from the public right-of-way, property
line, other tower, or any residential use or zoning district by a
minimum of one hundred and ten percent (110%) of its height,
including all antennas and attachments; or,
2. A tower located at a distance of less than one hundred and ten
percent (110%) of its height from a public right-of-way, property
line, or other tower shall be designed to collapse within itself or
designed to withstand without failure the maximum forces
expected from wind when the tower is fully loaded with antennas,
transmitters, and other equipment. The applicant shall provide
documentation from a qualified and licensed professional engineer
113094
1:6
demonstrating this capability.
f. A telecommunications facility’s setback may be reduced or its location in
general or in relation to a public street varied, at the sole discretion of the
Plan Commission for the following reasons:
1. The facility is proposed to be co-located onto an existing tower or
structure; or,
2. Overall, the reduced setback or alternate location enables further
mitigation of adverse visual and other environmental impacts than
would otherwise be possible.
(2) Design Requirements. Proposed or modified telecommunications facilities shall
meet the following design requirements:
a. Any proposed tower shall be designed to fully accommodate both the
applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas. Towers must be designed
to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept
antennas mounted at varying heights.
b. Towers shall be of a monopole design unless it is determined that an
alternative design would better blend into the surrounding environment.
c. Telecommunications facilities shall be designed to reduce visual impact
and blend into the surrounding environment or structure through the use of
color, camouflaging, architectural treatment, or landscaping, except in
instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as
the Federal Aviation Administration. The Plan Commission shall have
discretion in requiring such screening or camouflaging as appropriate.
d. Telecommunications facilities shall incorporate sufficient anti-climbing
and other safety measures as needed.
(3) Construction Requirements. All telecommunications facilities within the city
shall conform to the latest structural standards and wind loading requirements of
the Uniform Building Code and the Electronics Industry Association. All
telecommunications facilities shall be designed to conform to accepted electrical
engineering methods and practices and to comply with the provisions of the
National Electrical Code.
(4) Lighting. Towers or antennas shall not be illuminated by artificial means and
shall not display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the
Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority for a particular
tower. When incorporated into the approved design of a tower, light fixtures used
to illuminate parking lots or similar areas may be attached to the tower upon
approval by the Plan Commission.
(5) Signs. The placement of signs on any portion of a telecommunication facility
other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited.
(6) Accessory Utility Buildings. All utility buildings and structures that are part of a
telecommunications facility shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the
surrounding environment and shall meet the minimum requirements of the
underlying zoning district. Ground mounted equipment shall be screened from
view by suitable landscaping, except where a design of non-vegetative screening
better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(f) INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC SAFETY TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND
OTHER WIRELESS SERVICES. No new telecommunications service shall interfere
with established public safety telecommunications or other wireless services. Before the
113094
1:7
introduction of new service or changes in existing service, telecommunications providers
shall notify the Community Development Department at least thirty calendar days in
advance of such changes and shall submit an intermodulation study which provides a
technical evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential
interference problems.
(g) SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS. Upon
recommendation of the Plan Commission, the Common Council may grant a special use
permit for major telecommunications facilities conforming to all applicable provisions of
this ordinance. Applicants shall submit the following information:
a. A site plan prepared and submitted according to the policies, procedures,
and requirements outlined in the City of Menasha Site Plan Review Guide
as approved by the Plan Commission and Common Council.
b. A report demonstrating that the telecommunications facility must be
located where it is proposed in order to service the applicant’s service area
and that it is technically necessary.
c. An analysis shall be prepared by or on behalf of the applicant which
identifies all reasonable, technically feasible, alternative locations and/or
facilities which would provide the proposed telecommunications service.
The analysis shall address the potential for co-location at an existing or a
new site and the potential to locate facilities as close as possible to the
intended service area. It shall also explain the rationale for selection of the
proposed site in view of the relative merits of any of the feasible
alternatives. The city may require independent verification of this analysis
at the applicant’s expense. Facilities that are not proposed to be co-located
with another telecommunications facility shall provide a written
explanation as to why the subject facility is not a candidate for co-location.
Based on this analysis, a proposal for a new tower shall not be approved
unless the Plan Commission and Common Council finds that the
telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be
accommodated at an alternative location due to one or more of the
following reasons:
1. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower or structure, as documented by a
qualified and licensed professional engineer, and cannot be
reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or
equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
2. The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at
the tower or structure as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a
reasonable cost.
3. Existing or approved towers or structures within the search radius
cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary
to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer.
4. Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the
planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or
approved tower or structure.
d. A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer that includes
113094
1:8
the following:
1. A description of the tower height and design including a cross
section and elevation;
2. A description of the location, dimensions, and type of all proposed
antennas;
3. Documentation of the height above grade for all potential
mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum
separation distances between antennas;
4. A description of the tower’s capacity, including the number and
type of antennas that it can accommodate;
5. Documentation of what steps the applicant will take to avoid
interference with established public safety telecommunications and
other wireless services;
6. An engineer’s stamp and registration number; and,
7. Any other information necessary to evaluate the application.
e. A letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to
allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to
meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
f. A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease which requires the
applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities upon cessation of
operations at the site.
g. An affidavit signed by the responsible party documenting that the
proposed tower complies with regulations administered by the Federal
Aviation Administration.
(h) DENIAL OF REQUEST. Any decision to deny a request to place, construct, or modify
a commercial telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by evidence
contained in a written record of the proceedings of the Plan Commission and Common
Council.
(i) ANNUAL INSPECTION. All major telecommunications facilities shall be inspected
annually by the Zoning Administrator for compliance with all applicable requirements.
The major telecommunications service provider shall pay an annual inspection fee to the
City of Menasha as established by the Common Council.
(j) REVOCATION.
(1) A special use permit may be revoked based on the finding by the Zoning
Administrator and/or designee that any of the following conditions exist:
a. The use involved is no longer allowed in the applicable zoning district;
b. The facility fails to comply with the relevant requirements of this chapter
as they exist at the time of inspection and the permittee has failed to
supply assurances acceptable to the Zoning Administrator that the facility
will be brought into compliance;
c. The permittee has failed to comply with the conditions of the special use
permit;
d. The facility has not been properly maintained;
e. The facility has been abandoned for a period of twelve months.
(2) The Zoning Administrator and/or designee shall notify the holder of the special
use permit by certified mail of any finding listed above. The permitee shall be
given thirty days to bring the property into compliance with applicable
requirements. Failure to bring the property into compliance shall result in the
revocation of the special use permit.
113094
1:9
(k) ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR PORTIONS OF TOWERS.
(1) Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers shall be removed as follows:
a. All abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be removed
within twelve (12) months of the cessation of operations at the site unless
at time extension is granted by the Zoning Administrator and/or designee.
b. Unused portions of towers above a manufactured connection shall be
removed within six (6) months of the time of antenna relocation. The
replacement of portions of a tower previously removed requires the
issuance of a new special use permit.
(2) The Zoning Administrator and/or designee shall notify the telecommunications
service provider by certified mail when removal of an abandoned or unused tower
or portion of a tower is required. The telecommunications service provider shall
be given thirty (30) days to remove such facilities.
(3) In the event that a tower or portion of a tower is not removed within this time
period, the tower and all associated facilities may be removed by the city and the
costs of removal assessed against the property.
(l) APPEAL. Decisions by the Zoning Administrator and/or designee based on the
requirements of this ordinance shall be subject to appeal to the Board of Appeals.
SEC. 13-1-82 SPECIAL USE PERMITS REQUIRED--WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
(a) APPROVAL REQUIRED. No owner shall, within the City, build, construct, use or place
any type or kind of wind energy system without holding the appropriate conditional use
permit for said system.
(b) SEPARATE PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EACH SYSTEM. A separate conditional use
permit shall be required for each system. Said permit shall be applicable solely to the
systems, structures, use and property described in the permit.
(c) BASIS OF APPROVAL. The Plan Commission shall base its determination on general
considerations as to the effect of such grant on the health, general welfare, safety and
economic prosperity of the City and, specifically, of the immediate neighborhood in which
such use would be located, including such considerations as the effect on the established
character and quality of the area, its physical attractiveness, the movement of traffic, the
demand for related services, the possible hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or nuisance
effect as a result of noise, dust, smoke or odor and such other factors as would be
appropriate to carry out the intent of the Zoning Code.
(d) FEES. The Common Council shall, by resolution, establish fees for the processing and
issuance of wind energy special use permits under this Article.
(e) DEFINITIONS. "Wind energy systems" shall mean "windmills" which are used to
produce electrical or mechanical power.
SEC. 13-1-83 PERMIT PROCEDURE--WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
(a) APPLICATION. The permit application for a wind energy system shall be made to the
Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the City. The application shall include the
following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The address of the property on which the system will be located.
113094
1:10
(3) Applications for the erection of a wind energy conversion system shall be
accompanied by a plat or survey for the property to be served showing the location
of the generating facility and the means by which the facility will provide power to
structures. If the system is intended to provide power to more than one (1)
premises, the plat or survey shall show all properties to be served and the means of
connection to the wind energy conversion system. A copy of all agreements with
system users off the premises shall accompany the application. The application
shall further indicate the level of noise to be generated by the system and provide
assurances as to the safety features of the system. Energy easements shall
accompany the application.
(4) An accurate and complete written description of the use for which special grant is
being requested, including pertinent statistics and operational characteristics.
(5) Plans and other drawings showing proposed development of the site and buildings,
including landscape plans, location of parking and service areas, driveways, exterior
lighting, type of building material, etc., if applicable.
(6) Any other information which the Zoning Administrator may deem to be necessary to
the proper review of the application.
(7) The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and, if the application is
complete and contains all required information, shall refer it to the Plan
Commission.
(b) HEARING. Upon referral of the application, the Plan Commission shall schedule a public
hearing thereof as soon as practical and the Plan Commission shall notice said hearing as
deemed appropriate.
(c) DETERMINATION. Following public hearing and necessary study and investigation, the
Plan Commission shall, as soon as practical, render its decision in writing and a copy made
a permanent part of the Commission's minutes. Such decision shall include an accurate
description of the special use permitted, of the property on which permitted, and any and all
conditions made applicable thereto, or, if disapproved, shall indicate the reasons for
disapproval. The Plan Commission may impose any conditions or exemptions necessary to
minimize any burden on the persons affected by granting the special use permit.
(d) TERMINATION. When a special use does not continue in conformity with the conditions
of the original approval, or where a change in the character of the surrounding area or of the
use itself cause it to be no longer compatible with surrounding areas, or for similar cause
based upon consideration for the public welfare, the special grant may be terminated by
action of the Plan Commission following a public hearing thereon.
(e) CHANGES. Subsequent change or addition to the approved plans or use shall first be
submitted for approval to the Plan Commission and if, in the opinion of the Board, such
change or addition constitutes a substantial alteration, a public hearing before the Plan
Commission shall be required and notice thereof be given.
(f) APPROVAL DOES NOT WAIVE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS. The approval of a
permit under this Article shall not be construed to waive the requirement to obtain
electrical, building or plumbing permits prior to installation of any system.
SEC. 13-1-84 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS REGARDING WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
(a) ADDITIONAL STANDARDS. Wind energy conversion systems, commonly referred to
as "windmills," which are used to produce electrical power, shall also satisfy the
requirements of this Section in addition to those found elsewhere in this Article.
113094
1:11
(b) APPLICATION. Applications for the erection of a wind energy conversion system shall
be accompanied by a plat of survey for the property to be served showing the location of the
generating facility and the means by which the facility will provide power to structures. If
the system is intended to provide power to more than one (1) premises, the plat of survey
shall show all properties to be served and the means of connection to the wind energy
conversion system. A copy of all agreements with system users off the premises shall
accompany the application. The application shall further indicate the level of noise to be
generated by the system and provide assurances as to the safety features of the system.
Energy easements shall accompany the application.
(c) CONSTRUCTION. Wind energy conversion systems shall be constructed and anchored
in such a manner to withstand wind pressure of not less than forty (40) pounds per square
foot in area.
(d) NOISE. The maximum level of noise permitted to be generated by a wind energy
conversion system shall be fifty (50) decibels, as measured on a dB(A) scale, measured at
the lot line.
(e) ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE. Wind energy conversion system generators
and alternators shall be filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission of
radio-frequency energy that would cause any harmful interference with radio and/or
television broadcasting or reception. In the event that harmful interference is cause
subsequent to the granting of a conditional use permit, the operator of the wind energy
conversion system shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in
accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations.
(f) LOCATION AND HEIGHT. Wind energy conversion systems shall be located in the
rear yard only and shall meet all setback and yard requirements for the district in which they
are located and, in addition, shall be located not closer to a property boundary than a
distance equal to their height. Wind energy conversion systems are exempt from the height
requirements of this Chapter; however, all such systems over seventy-five (75) feet in height
shall submit plans to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to determine whether the
system is to be considered an object affecting navigable air space and subject to FAA
restrictions. A copy of any FAA restrictions imposed shall be included as a part of the wind
energy conversion system conditional use permit application.
(g) FENCE REQUIRED. All wind energy conversion systems shall be surrounded by a
security fence not less than six (6) feet in height. A sign shall be posted on the fence
warning of high voltages.
(h) UTILITY COMPANY NOTIFICATION. The appropriate electric power company shall
be notified, in writing, of any proposed interface with that company's grid prior to installing
said interface. Copies of comments by the appropriate utility company shall accompany and
be part of the application for a conditional use permit.
SEC. 13-1-85 GARAGES, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
(a) INTENT. It is recognized that residents may need private garages to store vehicles as
well as small accessory buildings for storage or other incidental uses. It is the purpose of
this Section to allow these buildings and uses as long as aesthetics open space, and
residential character are not compromised.
(b) PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. No garage or accessory building shall be located on a lot
without a principal structure unless said lot adjoins a lot of same ownership with a
principal structure.
113094
1:12
(c) LOCATION. A detached garage or accessory structure shall not be located in between a
principal structure and a street right-of-way except in the case of a through lot where the
garage or accessory structure shall not be placed in front of the primary building exposure
as determined by the Community Development Director. Garages and accessory
structures shall comply with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
(d) HEIGHT.
(1) The sidewalls of any garage or accessory structure shall not exceed twelve (12)
feet in height.
(2) The overall height of any garage or accessory structure may not exceed eighteen
(18) feet in height except that the height may be increased one (1) foot for each
foot the required side and rear yard setbacks are increased. In no case shall the
height of the garage exceed the height of the principal structure.
(e) SIZE. Garages and accessory buildings shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Attached Garages.
a. R-1 and R-1A Single Family Residence Districts. Maximum size of one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet or eighty percent (80%) of the
principal dwelling’s floor area, whichever is less.
b. R-2 Two Family Residence District. Maximum size of one thousand three
hundred (1,300) square feet or eighty percent (80%) of the principal
dwelling’s floor area, whichever is less.
(2) Detached Garages.
a. R-1 Single Family Residence District. Maximum size of eight hundred
sixteen (816) square feet.
b. R-2 Two Family Residence District. Maximum size of six hundred
twenty-four (624) square feet per dwelling unit.
(3) Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall not exceed two hundred (200)
square feet of gross area.
(f) DENSITY. Detached garages and accessory buildings shall not occupy more than thirty
percent (30%) of any rear yard.
SEC. 13-1-86 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
(a) INTENT. It is recognized that there is a need for some persons to use their place of
residence for limited non-residential purposes. The conduct of business within a residential
zoning district, including "general home occupations", "seasonal home occupations", and
"rummage sales" may be permitted under the provisions of this section. It is the intent of
this section to ensure the compatibility of home occupations and rummage sales with other
uses permitted in residential districts while maintaining and preserving the character of
residential neighborhoods.
(b) GENERAL HOME OCCUPATIONS.
(1) Definition. A "general home occupation" is defined as an occupation or business
activity for financial gain that is conducted in whole or part within a dwelling unit,
and is clearly subordinate to the residential use of the premises.
(2) Standards. General home occupations that comply with the standards listed in this section
are permitted by right as an accessory use in the following zoning districts: A-1
Agricultural/Holding, R-1 Single Family Residence, R-2 Two Family Residence, R-
2A Multi-Family Residence, R-3 Multi-Family Residence, R-4 Multi-Family
Residence, and R-MH Residential Mobile Home Residence. Occupant(s) wishing
113094
1:13
to conduct a general home occupation in a rented or leased dwelling must obtain
written permission from the property owner.
a. A general home occupation shall be conducted within the residential
dwelling unit and shall be clearly incidental to the use of the structure as a
dwelling. Not more than three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area
may be used for such purposes. General home occupations conducted within
an accessory building are prohibited.
b. The operation may be conducted by the occupant(s) residing at the location
of the home occupation, plus one (1) additional non-occupant employee.
c. There shall be no outside operations or exterior storage of merchandise,
inventory, business equipment, materials, or heavy equipment.
d. Merchandise shall not be displayed or offered for sale either within or
outside of the residence, provided that orders previously made by telephone
or at a sales party may be filled on the premises. Direct sales of products off
displays, shelves, or racks are not allowed, but a person may pick up an
order placed earlier as described above.
e. There shall be no visible evidence of the conduct of a general home
occupation other than one (1) non-illuminated professional or announcement
sign or nameplate not to exceed two (2) square feet in area mounted flat
against the dwelling.
f. Except as provided herein, the general home occupation shall not generate
additional vehicular traffic, parking, pedestrian traffic, or cause an increase
in the use of any public utilities beyond normal residential levels. One (1)
off-street parking stall shall be provided for the home occupation. The use
may increase vehicular traffic flow and parking by no more than one (1)
vehicle at a time.
g. One (1) vehicle, not to exceed three-quarter (3/4) ton capacity, owned and
operated by the occupant(s) of the dwelling, is permitted for the delivery of
materials to or from the premises. Delivery by mail and package delivery
services is also permitted.
h. The use shall not produce noise, vibration, glare, odors, fumes, smoke, dust,
heat, or electrical interference detectable beyond the confines of the subject
dwelling, including transmittal through vertical or horizontal party walls.
i. No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, etiologic,
radioactive, bio-hazardous, or other restricted materials may be used or
stored on the site.
(c) SEASONAL HOME OCCUPATIONS.
(1) Definition. A "seasonal home occupation" is defined as a seasonal business activity
for financial gain that is conducted in whole or part within a residential property and
involves the outdoor display and sale of merchandise on the premises. Merchandise
in this category is limited to agricultural crops/produce, Halloween pumpkins,
Christmas trees, and other similar seasonal commodities as determined by the
Community Development Department.
(2) Standards. Approved seasonal home occupations that comply with the standards
listed in this section are permitted as an accessory use in the following zoning
districts: A-1 Agricultural/Holding, R-1 Single Family Residence, and R-2 Two
Family Residence.
a. The occupant(s) must obtain a seasonal home occupation permit before
entering into business.
113094
1:14
b. The operation may be conducted by the occupant(s) residing at the location
of the seasonal home occupation, plus one (1) additional non-resident
employee.
c. The primary use of the dwelling unit shall be residential. Not more than
three hundred (300) square feet of the dwelling's gross floor area may be
used for office, sales, or storage activities associated with the seasonal home
occupation.
d. Outdoor displays of merchandise shall not be located in the street right-ofway
and shall not encroach upon neighboring properties. All lighting must
be directed away from adjoining properties.
e. The use shall not produce noise, vibration, glare, odors, fumes, smoke, dust,
heat, or electrical interference detectable beyond the confines of the subject
dwelling, including transmittal through vertical or horizontal party walls.
f. No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, etiologic,
radioactive, bio-hazardous, or other restricted materials may be used or
stored on the site.
g. Signage - refer to Article F.
h. Operating hours open to the public are permitted between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m.
i. All merchandise, display racks or stands, and signs shall be removed by the
permit expiration date.
(3) Seasonal Home Occupation Permit Application Procedures.
a. The occupant(s) shall complete and submit a seasonal home occupation
permit application form and required materials to the Community
Development Department.
b. The applicant(s) shall pay the permit application fee established by the
Community Development Department and approved by the Common
Council.
c. Occupant(s) wishing to conduct a seasonal home occupation in a rented or
leased unit must obtain written permission from the property owner. This
form shall be filed with the application.
d. The Community Development Department shall review the application to
determine if the proposal conforms to the standards listed in this section.
e. The Community Development Department shall contact all properties within
one hundred (100) feet of the proposed home occupation as determined by
the Department. Notified occupants shall have 10 days to file an objection
with the Department. For a seasonal home occupation permit to be granted,
not more than twenty percent (20%) of the surrounding occupants may
object to the proposed use.
f. If not more then twenty percent (20%) of the property owners object to the
use and the proposal complies with the standards listed in this section, the
Community Development Department may grant a seasonal home
occupation permit.
g. The Community Development Department shall determine the appropriate
expiration date of the permit based on its use. A seasonal home occupation
permit may be valid for a maximum of six (6) months from the date of
approval and may not be renewed. One (1) permit may be granted to a
household in a twelve (12) month period. If the occupant(s) wishes to
conduct a seasonal home occupation in subsequent years, the occupant(s)
113094
1:15
shall apply for a new permit.
(d) RUMMAGE SALES.
(1) Definition. A "rummage sale" (also referred to as a "garage sale") is defined as a
temporary business activity that is conducted in whole or part within a residential
property and involves the outdoor display and sale of the occupant's used household
goods.
(2) Standards. Rummage sales that comply with the standards listed in this section are
permitted by right as a temporary accessory use in the following zoning districts: A-
1 Agricultural/Holding, R-1 Single Family Residence, R-2 Two Family Residence,
R-2A Multi-Family Residence, R-3 Multi-Family Residence, R-4 Multi-Family
Residence, and R-MH Residential Mobile Home Residence. Occupant(s) wishing
to conduct a rummage sale in a rented or leased dwelling must obtain written
permission from the property owner.
a. Sales shall be held no more than two (2) times per year.
b. Sales may last no longer than five (5) consecutive days.
c. Sales shall be conducted on the occupant's property. Multiple family sales
are permitted if they are held on the property of one of the participants.
d. Goods may not be displayed in the public right-of-way.
e. No consignment goods or goods purchased for resale may be offered for
sale.
f. Signage - refer to Article F.
g. All items offered for sale, display racks or stands, and signs shall be
removed within twenty-four (24) hours of completion of the sale.
(e) SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
(1) Inspections. All general home occupation, seasonal home occupation, and rummage
sale sites may be subject to inspection by the Community Development Department.
The Department shall have the right at any time, upon reasonable notice, to enter
and inspect the premises for safety and compliance purposes.
(2) Penalties. Failure to comply with the standards specified in this section may subject
the occupant(s) and/or property owner(s) to the penalties listed in Section 1-1-7 of
the Menasha Code of Ordinances.
SEC. 13-1-87 OUTSIDE STORAGE OF FIREWOOD.
(a) No person shall store firewood in the front yard on residentially zoned property, except that
firewood may be temporarily stored in the front yard for a period of thirty (30) days from
the date of its delivery.
(b) Firewood should be neatly stacked and may not be stacked closer than two (2) feet to any lot
line and not higher than six (6) feet from grade, except adjacent to a fence where firewood
can be stacked against the fence as high as the fence. Fences as used in this Section shall
not include hedges and other vegetation.
(c) All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be promptly and properly
disposed of and shall not be allowed to remain on the premises.
(d) Woodpiles that contain diseased wood that is capable of transmitting disease to healthy
trees and woodpiles that harbor or are infested or inhabited by rats or other vermin are
public nuisances and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of this Code of Ordinances.
(e) Not more than fifteen percent (15%) of the side or rear yard may be used for storage of
firewood at any one time.
113094
1:16
SEC. 13-1-88 FENCES.
(a) INTENT. It is the intent of this ordinance to regulate the use of fence material, height,
location, and maintenance in order to prevent the creation of public nuisance; preserve
property values; and promote the comfort, health, safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics
and general welfare of the people of the City of Menasha. No fence shall be built,
enlarged or altered within the City unless it is in compliance with this ordinance.
(b) FENCES DEFINED. For the purpose of this Section, a fence is herein defined as a
structure used as screening or a barrier intended to prevent passage.
(c) PERMITTING. Permits are required for any fence in the front yard including corner lots
and through lots.
(1) Application shall be made on a form available from the Community Development
Department and shall include a sketch or design of the proposed fence, specify the
height and location of the fence to be installed with respect to the street rightofway
and sidewalk (if present), driveway openings, property lines, and existing
structures on the subject and adjacent properties. The application shall also
specify the type of fencing to be used in constructing or installing the fence.
(2) Consideration shall be given to vision control area standards and any other safety
concerns that may be related to the installation of the proposed fence pursuant to
Sec. 13-1-53.
(3) A permit may be issued by the Community Development Director or designee that
may include limitations on the location, height, or materials used in constructing
or installing any fence as may be necessary to protect public safety and general
welfare.
(4) A permit may be revoked at any time by the Community Development
Department if the fence poses a risk to health, safety, or general welfare of the
community and is found to be a public nuisance.
(d) HEIGHT OF FENCES REGULATED.
(1) Fences, within the front yard setback, shall not exceed three feet six inches (3’6”)
in height.
(2) Fences in residential-zoned districts or residentially used properties shall not
exceed six feet (6’) in height except those fences in a residential district abutting a
commercial or industrial district may have a fence of up to eight feet (8’) in height
along the abutting side.
(3) All other fences shall not exceed eight feet (8’) in height.
(4) Height Exceptions:
(a) Decorative posts at a minimum spacing of twenty four (24) inches may extend
eight (8) inches above the maximum height.
(b) To accommodate slope and or lawn maintenance, up to six (6) inches of
ground clearance shall be allowed which will not contribute to the
measurement of maximum fence height.
(c) Berms with slopes less than or equal to a minimum of three (3) feet of
horizontal to maximum of every one (1) foot of vertical (i.e. 3:1) shall not
contribute to the measurement of maximum fence height.
(e) FENCE MATERIALS. In the residential-zoned districts or residentially used properties
fences shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner and constructed using residential
style fencing. Residential-style fencing includes: Treated wood or naturally rot resistant
wood, wood composite, wrought iron, brick, stone or other masonry, vinyl, wire mesh,
and galvanized or coated chain link.
113094
1:17
(1) The following materials are prohibited from being used in residential-zoned districts:
barbed wire, electrical fences, strand fences, corrugated metal, razor wire, t-posts,
u-posts, or any improvised material not traditional used as a fence.
(2) Galvanized or coated chain link, fencing used for livestock, chain mesh, and the like
are prohibited in the front yard.
(3) All fencing shall be constructed with a top rail support.
(4) Any fence within the front yard shall be a maximum of 50% opaque.
(f) MAINTENANCE. All fences shall be maintained in a structurally sound, attractive and
vertical manner. Any fence found to be in disrepair or a detriment to the comfort, health,
safety, morals, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the people of the City of
Menasha shall be repaired, replaced, or demolished.
(g) EXCEPTIONS.
(1) Protective fences on industrial or publicly owned lands such as schools, and
educational institutions, are excluded from the provisions of this Section, except that
no fence shall incorporate the use of barbed wire, razor wire, or other security fencing
measures used to harm the health or wellbeing of the public.
(2) Garden fences that encompass a garden are exempt from the provisions of this
Section provided they are not located in the front yard and are a minimum of five feet
from any property line.
(3) Snow fencing with the purpose of preventing snow drifts is permitted between
November 15 and April 15 of the following year.
(4) Kennels or other fencing whereas required by other portions of the Municipal
Ordinance including swimming pools (sec. 13-1-89(d)) and licensing of dogs and cats
(sec. 7-1).
SEC. 13-1-89 SWIMMING POOLS.
(a) SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS. This Section shall apply to all new, remodeled,
altered and relocated private outside swimming pools in the City of Menasha except that the
protective enclosure requirements shall be retroactive to all existing swimming pools. A
swimming pool is any structure, basin, chamber or tank containing or capable of containing
an artificial body of water for swimming, diving or recreational bathing, having a depth of
two (2) feet or more at any point. The purpose of this Section is to provide protection and
safety of individuals, provide land use controls and provide for the general health and
welfare of the neighborhood.
(b) PERMIT REQUIRED.
(1) A building permit is required for the installation, alteration or addition of a
swimming pool. A building permit shall be applied for and obtained prior to the
installation, alteration or addition of any private outside residential swimming pool.
The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan drawing of the
premises upon which the proposed swimming pool is to be installed. The plot plan
shall show the size and shape of the lot, location and size of all buildings, structures
and fences existing in the parcel and any other information affecting the premises.
The plot plan shall be accurate and dimensioned.
(2) Plumbing and electrical permits are required for applicable installations for the
operation of a swimming pool. Plumbing installations for the operation of a
swimming pool are required to be done in compliance with the State Plumbing
Code under a plumbing permit. Electrical installations made for the operation of a
swimming pool are required to be done in compliance with the Wisconsin Electrical
113094
1:18
Code, Article 680, under the electrical permit.
(c) POOL LOCATION REQUIREMENTS. A swimming pool and any pool accessory
building structure and any pool equipment or structure shall not exceed fifteen percent
(15%) of the total lot area of the lot on which it is located. No part of the swimming pool,
pool accessory structure or pool equipment or structure shall be closer than three (3) feet to
any side lot line or rear lot line or closer to the street than the front setback line of the main
building.
(d) PROTECTIVE ENCLOSURES REQUIRED.
(1) All private residential swimming pools, whether in-ground or above-ground types,
shall be enclosed with an adequate and secure fence at least forty-eight (48) inches
high above adjoining grade to prevent straying into the pool area. Required fences
shall be constructed to prohibit the passage of a nine (9) inch sphere between fence
members. Any gates installed shall be provided with self-closing and self-latching
devices which shall be on the inside of the gate at least thirty (30) inches above
ground level. A pool dome or pool top fencing attached to the pool to extend at
least forty-eight (48) inches above the ground or a pool cover capable of supporting
one hundred (100) pounds per square foot of area are acceptable substitutes for
fencing. Pool covers shall be fixed securely in place at all times when the pool is
not supervised by a responsible person.
(2) Above-grade pools with walls that are at least forty-eight (48) inches high at all
points around said pool or have platforms and railings that are forty-eight (48)
increase or more in height above grade are not required to be enclosed as provided
in Subsection (d)(1), but the ladders and stairways providing access to said pools
shall be adequately secured to prevent entry whenever the pool is not in use.
(e) INTERFERENCE WITH THE ENJOYMENT OF PROPERTY RIGHTS
PROHIBITED. No swimming pool or family pool shall be so located, designed, operated
or maintained as to interfere unduly with the enjoyment of the property rights of owners of
property adjoining the swimming pool or family pool. Such rights are not limited to those
of drainage. Persons draining a swimming pool shall not permit such water to flow onto
adjacent property owned by other persons.
(f) PROPERLY MAINTAINED. All swimming pools shall be maintained in such a way as
to not create a nuisance, hazard, eyesore or otherwise result in a substantial adverse effect
on neighboring properties or to be in any way detrimental to public health, safety or welfare.
SEC. 13-1-90 MOBILE STORAGE REGULATIONS
SECTION 1: APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE OF MOBILE STORAGE
REGULATIONS
(a) Applicability. This ordinance shall apply to all forms of mobile storage. The
standards of this ordinance shall apply to all person, firms, partnerships,
associations, and corporations owning, occupying, or having control or
management of any premises located within the limits of the City of Menasha.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance it to regulate the use of mobile storage
within the City of Menasha in order to protect the public safety, health, and
welfare; minimize abundance and size of mobile storage units; preserve property
values; support and complement land use objectives as set forth in the city’s
113094
1:19
zoning ordinance; and enhance the aesthetic appearance and quality of life within
the city. The standards contained herein are intended to achieve the following
objective:
(1) Establish a mobile storage permit system to allow some types of mobile
storage and prohibit mobile storage not expressly permitted by this
ordinance.
(2) Enable the effective use of mobile storage.
(3) Maintain and improve the image of the city by regulating the proliferation
of mobile storage.
(4) Prevent mobile storage that is potentially dangerous to the public due to
structural deficiencies or disrepair.
(5) Prevent the placement of mobile storage that will conceal or obstruct
vision in street right or ways.
(6) It is the expressed intent of this ordinance to prohibit the use of semitractor
trailers or similar mobile equipment as a substitute for permanent
structures whose purpose is to store goods, equipment, parts, fixtures,
stock in trade or similar products or materials.
SEC 2: DEFINITIONS
(a) Mobile Storage. For the purposes of this ordinance, mobile storage will be
defined as a motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer, mobile home, mobile office, or
other container on wheels or placed on the ground used in the transportation or
storage of non-hazardous goods, whether finished or unfinished, from which any
goods are sold, stored, services performed, or other business conducted.
SEC 3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
(a) The use of mobile storage in residentially zoned districts is strictly prohibited
(b) The use of mobile storage in the C1, C2, C3, C4, I1 and I2 zoning districts shall
comply with the following requirements:
(1) A permit is required for each mobile storage unit placed on a lot.
(2) No more than two mobile storage units may be placed on a single lot at
any one time.
(3) Mobile storage may only be used for the storage of finished goods (i.e. overstock
items, seasonal merchandise, or equipment), or unfinished goods (i.e. raw
materials). The storage of refuse material, or opened containers of paint, oil, gas,
or any other hazardous material is prohibited.
(4) Mobile storage shall be located behind the principal structure or otherwise
located so as to minimize visibility from public streets.
(5) Mobile storage units shall not encroach upon any yard, setback or
transitional area required by ordinance.
(6) Mobile storage units shall not obstruct any drive or other space necessary
for access by fire apparatus.
(7) The placement of the mobile storage unit shall not reduce the number of
parking spaces below the minimum number required for the zoning district
in which the use is located.
113094
1:20
(8) The provisions of the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts are
applicable to the use or placement of any mobile storage units.
SEC 4: PERMIT PROCEDURES
(a) Prior to the use or placement of any mobile storage units, a permit must be
obtained from the Community Development Department.
(b) A permit(s) for the placement of mobile storage may be issued for a total
of ninety (90) days per year.
(c) The permit application shall include the following information:
(1) Name of establishment requesting the permit.
(2) Name and telephone number of contact person.
(3) Type of storage unit(s), dimensions of the unit(s), and a
copy of leasing or rental agreement of the storage unit(s) if applicable.
(4) A site plan showing the proposed placement of the mobile
storage unit in relation to the any buildings on the lot, street right-of-ways,
and the surrounding lots and the zoning of those lots.
(5) If the mobile storage unit is to have electricity or other
utility hook-up, that information shall be indicated on the site plan.
(6) The reason for required mobile storage, including what is to
be stored.
SEC 5: EXCEPTIONS
(a) Construction Sites. Mobile storage units may be placed on construction
sites for the time period from when a building permit has been issued until the building
permit expires or until an occupancy permit is granted, whichever comes first.
(b) Licensed Tractor-Trailers. Licensed tractor-trailers used in the transport of
finished goods or raw materials are exempt from the requirement of this
ordinance.
SEC 6: UNSAFE AND ILLEGALLY PLACED MOBILE STORAGE UNITS
(a) Unsafe Mobile Storage. Any mobile storage units deemed unsafe by the
Zoning Administrator may be removed by the City according to the process outlined in
Section 6 and any costs incurred therefor shall be charges against the owner of the
property on which the mobile storage unit was placed.
(b) Illegally Placed Mobile Storage. The Zoning Administrator shall order
the removal of any mobile storage units found in violation of this ordinance according to
the process outlined in Section 7.
SEC 7: ENFORCEMENT PROCESS
(a) Enforcement Process. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority
to enforce the provisions of this ordinance and issue orders related to and promoting the
purposes of this ordinance. The provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced according
to the following procedures:
(1) Notice of the violation or required action shall be sent by certified
mail addressed to the property owner and/ or permit holder at the last known address.
113094
1:21
(2) The notice shall describe the violation or required action and
identify a time frame for the violators to removal, repair, or complete the required action.
(3) Should the storage unit not be removed or repaired or the required
action completed within the identified time frame, the Zoning Administrator shall have
the authority to remove the mobile storage unit, and the property owner shall be liable for
any and all costs incurred therefor. If the property owner fails to pay for such costs, the
costs shall be placed as a special tax on the property and entered on the tax rolls.
(b) Penalties. Failure to comply with the specifications found in this
ordinance might subject the property owner and/ or permit holder to the penalties listed in
Sec. 1-1-7.
(c) Appeal. Decisions by the Zoning Administrator based in the provisions of
this ordinance shall be subject to appeal to the Board of Appeals.
SEC. 13-1-99 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
071414
1:1
ARTICLE H
Mobile Homes
SEC. 13-1-100INTENT--WHERE MOBILE HOME DISTRICTS PERMITTED.
(a) Residential-Mobile Home (R-MH) zoning districts may hereafter be established by
amendments to the official zoning map in any district previously classified as residential in
accordance with the procedures, requirements and limitations set forth in this Article.
Within such districts, mobile homes, with such additional supporting uses and occupancies
as are permitted herein, may be established subject to the requirements and limitations set
forth in these and other regulations.
(b) It is the intent of this Article to recognize mobile homes constructed prior to October 1,
1974, as distinct and different from units designated as Mobile Homes within the definitions
of this Article and to prohibit units not meeting the requirements for Mobile Homes as
defined herein. Units constructed prior to 1974 are prohibited. Mobile Homes meeting the
requirements of the One- and Two-Family Building Dwelling Code shall not be permitted
in a residential Mobile Home (R-MH) District except as a conditional use. Permits may be
obtained only after approval by the Plan Commission.
SEC. 13-1-101DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions are used in this Article:
(a) MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES (PARKS). Mobile home communities/parks are
distinguished from subdivisions lacking common facilities and continuing management
services. The latter would be controlled by general subdivision regulations, which would
apply also to mobile home subdivisions without common open space or continuing
management.
(b) MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel of land platted for subdivision according to
all requirements of the comprehensive plan, designed or intended for lots to be conveyed by
deed to individual owners for residential occupancy primarily by mobile homes.
(c) RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME. A single-family dwelling built on or after October 1,
1974, in accordance with the ANSI Code (American National Standards Institute) or in
accordance with the HUD Code (Housing & Urban Development), both of which govern
the heating and cooling systems, electrical systems, fire safety, body and frame construction,
thermal protections and plumbing systems. All said homes shall bear the proper approved
Wisconsin insignia as required by the Wisconsin Administrative Code, ILHR 20.12-20.17.
(d) FOUNDATION SIDING. A fire and weather resistant, pre-finished material surrounding
the entire perimeter of a home and completely enclosing a space between the exterior wall
of such home and the ground. Foundation siding shall be properly vented, harmonious, and
compatible with the house and installed within sixty (60) days from the date of placement
on site.
(e) PRIMARY EXPOSURE. Open areas adjacent to the front wall (or main entrance) of a
dwelling unit.
(f) SECONDARY EXPOSURE. Open areas adjacent to side and rear walls of a dwelling
unit.
(g) STATUTORY DEFINITIONS. In addition to the above definitions, definitions contained
071414
1:2
in Section 66.058 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall also be applicable.
SEC. 13-1-102PERMITS REQUIRED.
(a) Permits for the installation of the mobile homes shall be obtained by the owner or by the
person making the installation for the owner of the mobile home prior to the placement of
the home on a lot. In addition, Class C permits may be required according to Section 13-1-
104(c)(3) below.
(b) It is intended that such mobile home developments shall be so located, designed and
improved as to provide a desirable residential environment, protection from potentially
adverse neighboring influences, protection for adjacent residential properties, access for
vehicular traffic without traversing minor streets in adjoining residential neighborhoods.
SEC. 13-1-103MINIMUM DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR R-MH DISTRICTS
AND FOR INDIVIDUAL MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES;
MINIMUM NUMBER OF LOTS OR SPACES.
(a) Where a R-MH District is to be established for the development of a single mobile home
community only, minimum area shall be ten (10) acres. The minimum width of tract for
portions used for general vehicular entrances and exits only (other than alleys or service
entrances) shall be sixty (60) feet; for portions containing lots for dwellings and buildings
open generally to occupants, minimum dimension shall be two hundred (200) feet.
Minimum number of lots or spaces completed and ready for occupancy before first
occupancy is permitted shall be established as twenty-five percent (25%) of total units
permitted on zoned site.
(b) These limitations shall not apply where expansion of an existing mobile home community
is concerned and where such expansion will not increase variation from requirements
applying to mobile home communities, as set forth herein.
SEC. 13-1-104PERMITTED AND PERMISSIBLE USES AND STRUCTURES.
The following principal uses and structures are permitted within R-MH Districts:
(a) ONE-FAMILY DETACHED MOBILE HOMES (RESIDENTIAL MOBILE
HOME). In mobile home communities, recreational vehicles shall not be occupied as
living quarters and sales lots shall not be permitted, but dwellings may be sold on lots they
occupy in residential use.
(b) PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. Uses and structures that are
customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted principal uses and structures shall
be permitted, except for those requiring specific approval as provided below.
(c) PRINCIPAL OR ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES REQUIRING CLASS C
PERMIT.
(1) Commercial and Service Facilities in Mobile Home Communities. In mobile home
communities so located that such facilities are not conveniently available in the
neighboring area and containing at least one hundred (100) dwelling units,
commercial and service establishments intended to serve only persons within the
community, designed, improved and located to protect the character of the
071414
1:3
community and the surrounding neighborhood, and occupying in total, including
related parking area, not more than five percent (5%) of the area of the community,
may be permitted only by Class C permit as provided below.
(2) Outdoor Storage Areas in Mobile Home Communities
(3)
. In mobile home
communities, outdoor storage areas, including those for recreational vehicles, may
be permitted only by Class C permit as provided below. Such areas shall be so
designed, improved and located as to protect adjoining uses from adverse visual or
other effects and shall occupy, in total, not more than five percent (5%) of the area
of the mobile home community if within the boundaries of the main portion of the
community. If the property includes a separate parcel or parcels for utility,
maintenance or storage facilities, the limitation as to area shall not apply. Use of
such area shall be limited to occupants of the community.
Class C Permits. Class C permits in such cases may be granted by the Zoning
Administrator, either in connection with general site plan approval for the
development as a whole or in subsequent site plan approval for the specific feature
involved, upon written findings that the purposes of these regulations and
limitations, as set forth above, would be adequately met by the development as
proposed or subject to such additional conditions and safeguards as he finds
necessary to promote such purposes.
SEC. 13-1-105MAXIMUM DENSITY LIMITATIONS IN MOBILE HOME
COMMUNITIES.
Maximum density in any mobile home community shall not exceed seven (7) units per gross acre
for detached single-family dwellings. For purposes of these regulations, gross acreage is to be
computed as all area within the exterior boundaries of the property, including streets, common open
space, lands occupied by management offices and community buildings, land occupied by mobile
home stands or lots, and lands occupied by utilities installations. In computations, single-family
detached residences shall thus be considered to require six thousand two hundred twenty-three
(6,223) square feet of gross land area.
SEC. 13-1-106MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.
The following limitations on maximum lot coverage shall apply to residential uses in mobile home
communities. Where a roofed area, such as a carport or outdoor recreation shelter, is open for forty
percent (40%) or more of its perimeter, its lot coverage shall be computed as one-half (1/2) the area
covered by the roof. Where the lot is adjacent and accessible to approved common open space
(other than vehicular areas), an additional five percent (5%) of the lot area may be occupied.
071414
1:4
SEC. 13-1-107REQUIRED OUTDOOR LIVING AREA ON LOT.
(a) In mobile home communities, an outdoor living area shall be provided on each lot equal to
at least ten percent (10%) of its area, provided that in no case shall such area be less than
three hundred (300) square feet or required to be more than five hundred (500) square feet.
The minimum horizontal dimension of such area shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet.
(b) Such outdoor living area shall be properly drained, located for convenience and optimum
use and walled, fenced or planted to provide reasonable privacy. Within such area, a
section suitably surfaced for garden furniture shall be provided, not less than one hundred
(100) square feet in area or ten (10) feet in minimum horizontal dimension. This section
may be covered, in whole or in part, by a roof, subject to the limitations on maximum lot
coverage set forth above.
SEC. 13-1-108YARDS; OPEN SPACE ADJACENT TO DWELLING UNITS; SPACING OF
DWELLING UNITS.
(a) INTENT.
(1) Yards and other open spaces required herein in relation to dwellings in mobile home
communities are intended to perform a variety of functions. Among these are
assuring (as appropriate to and required by the dwellings as designed, located and
constructed) adequate privacy, usable outdoor living space, desirable outlook,
natural light ventilation, access to and around dwellings, off-street parking space
and spacing between dwellings and portions of dwellings and other buildings for
reducing potential adverse effects of noise, odor, glare or hazards from fire.
(2) It is intended in these regulations to relate provisions to performance of these
functions, allowing maximum flexibility in detailed site planning and use so long as
performance requirements and related standards are met.
(b) OPEN SPACE DEPTH DEFINED; REQUIREMENTS BY DWELLING UNIT'S
EXPOSURE. Open space depth is the minimum open space distance on the lot (except as
otherwise specifically provided) perpendicular to the wall of the dwelling at any point, or to
any addition of the dwelling which is enclosed for more than sixty percent (60%) of its
perimeter.
(c) DISTANCE TO COMMON AREAS. Except as provided below, distance from any
Secondary Exposure of a dwelling to a street pavement or to the edge of a common
driveway, a common parking area, a common walk or other common area shall be at least
eight (8) feet. In the case of Primary Exposures, this distance shall be fifteen (15) feet.
Carports open in a manner that assures visibility as required below may extend to within
four (4) feet of a common sidewalk adjacent to a street or to a common parking area or to
within eight (8) feet of the street pavement or common parking area if no such sidewalk is
involved.
(d) OTHER MINIMUM OPEN SPACE DEPTH REQUIREMENTS. Other open space
depth requirements shall be, by exposure: Primary, fifteen (15) feet; Secondary, six (6) feet.
Dwellings on lots adjoining nonresidential buildings shall be separated from such buildings
by at least ten (10) feet more than the above requirements.
071414
1:5
(e) SHORELAND SETBACKS.
a) For parcels within the corporate boundaries of the City of Menasha prior to May 8,
1982 the following standards shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured from the
ordinary high-water mark.
b) For parcels annexed to the City of Menasha after May 7, 1982 the following standards
shall apply:
1) Shoreland setback area for a principal building - 50 feet as measured from the
ordinary high water mark, except that a principal structure may be constructed or
placed within the shoreland setback area if all of the following apply:
a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel of land
that is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel of land
containing a principal building.
b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance equal
to the average setback of the principal building on the adjacent lots or 35
feet from the ordinary high-water mark, whichever distance is greater.
(f) OCCUPANCY OF OPEN SPACE BY CARPORTS, RECREATIONAL SHELTERS,
STORAGE STRUCTURES.
(1) A carport, enclosed for fifty percent (50%) or less of its total perimeter by
attachment to the dwelling and by a wall at the inner end perpendicular to the
attachment to the dwelling, may extend into any open space on the lot, required or
other, that does not adjoin the outdoor living area on an adjacent lot or any common
non-vehicular open space.
(2) Enclosed storage facilities combined with and included within such carports or
recreational shelters shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the floor area of such
carport or shelter. Separate storage structures not exceeding thirty (30) square feet
in floor area or seven (7) feet in height may occupy any open space on the lot,
required or other, that is farther from a street or common non-vehicular open space
than the nearest portion of the dwelling. Only one (1) such separate storage
structure shall be permitted per dwelling unit.
(3) Carports, recreational shelters and storage facilities for adjacent lots may be so
located as to attach across lot lines, provided that as located and constructed they do
not constitute undesirable impediments to view (including visibility at intersections
of streets or the intersections of driveways with streets) or increase fire hazards.
(g) As an alternative to providing required open space for each dwelling exposure on its own
lot, where equivalent spacing can be assured in form appropriate to the exposures involved
by decreasing clearance from the lot line on one (1) lot and increasing clearance on the
adjacent lot, this arrangement may be permitted, provided that access for servicing and
maintenance of dwellings involved can be assured and further provided that minimum open
space depth for primary exposures shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling.
SEC. 13-1-109LIMITATIONS ON SIGNS.
In connection with Mobile Home Communities, no sign intended to be read from any public way
adjoining the district shall be permitted except:
(a) No more than one (1) identification sign, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area, for
each principal entrance.
(b) No more than one (1) sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, advertising property
071414
1:6
for sale, lease or rent, or indicating "Vacancy" or "No Vacancy," may be erected at each
principal entrance.
(c) In the case of new mobile home communities consisting in whole or in part of mobile home
subdivisions or condominiums, one (1) sign, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area,
may be erected for a period of not more than two (2) years at each principal entrance to
advertise the sale of lots or dwellings.
(d) No source of illumination for any such signs shall be directly visible from adjoining streets
or residential property, and no such signs shall be erected within five (5) feet of any exterior
property line.
SEC. 13-1-110OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Residential parking requirements shall be one (1) stall/unit.
(b) In R-MH District communities, residential parking spaces need not be located on lots
occupied by the dwelling units served, but at least one (1) such space shall be reserved for,
and located within one hundred (100) feet walking distance of, the dwelling unit it is
intended to serve. The "off-street" requirement shall be construed to be met if parking is so
arranged that there is no maneuvering incidental to parking or exiting parking stalls on
travel lanes of streets.
SEC. 13-1-111COMMON RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.
(a) No less than ten percent (10%) of the total area of any mobile home community established
under these regulations shall be devoted to common recreational areas and facilities, such as
playgrounds, swimming pools, community buildings, ways for pedestrians and cyclists
away from streets and play areas for small children for other recreational areas in block
interiors. At least one (1) principal recreation and community center shall contain not less
than five percent (5%) of the total area of the community.
(b) To be countable as common recreational area, interior-block ways for pedestrians or cyclists
shall form part of a system leading to principal destinations. Such ways may also be used
for installations of utilities.
(c) Common recreational area shall not include streets or parking areas, shall be closed to
automotive traffic except for maintenance and service vehicles, and shall be improved and
maintained for the uses intended.
SEC. 13-1-112PROCEDURES--SITE PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR MOBILE
HOME COMMUNITIES.
Before building permits may be issued for construction of mobile home communities, in addition to
other required permits, reports or reviews, a special permit shall be required. Determinations by the
Community Development Director in relation to such permits shall include review of site plans and
such other information or material as is necessary to establish conformity with the requirements and
intent of these regulations. In connection with such permit, the Community Development Director
may establish such conditions and safeguards as are required to assure such conformity.
071414
1:7
SEC. 13-1-113STANDARDS FOR GENERAL SITE PLANNING FOR MOBILE HOME
COMMUNITIES.
The following guides, standards and requirements shall apply in site planning for mobile home
communities:
(a) PRINCIPAL VEHICULAR ACCESS POINTS. Principal vehicular access points shall
be designed to encourage smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and
minimum hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Merging and turnout lanes and/or
traffic dividers shall be required where existing or anticipated heavy flows indicate need. In
general, minor streets shall not be connected with streets outside the district in such a way
as to encourage the use of such minor streets by substantial amounts of through traffic. No
lot within the community shall have direct vehicular access to a street bordering the
development.
(b) ACCESS FOR PEDESTRIANS AND CYCLISTS. Access for pedestrians and cyclists
entering or leaving the community shall be by safe and convenient routes. Such ways need
not be adjacent to or limited to the vicinity of vehicular access points. Where there are
crossings of such ways and vehicular routes at edges of planned developments, such
crossings shall be safety located, marked and controlled and where such ways are exposed
to substantial vehicular traffic at edges of communities, safeguards may be required to
prevent crossings except at designated points. Bicycle paths, if provided, shall be so related
to the pedestrian way system that street crossings are combined.
(c) PROTECTION OF VISIBILITY - AUTOMOTIVE TRAFFIC, CYCLISTS AND
PEDESTRIANS. At intersections of any streets, public or private, the provisions of Sec.
13-1-50 shall apply and is hereby adopted by reference. Where there is pedestrian or
bicycle access from within the community to a street at its edges by paths or across yards or
other open space without a barrier to prevent access to the street, no material impediment to
visibility more than two and five-tenths (2.5) feet above ground level shall be created or
maintained within twenty-five (25) feet of said street unless at least twenty-five (25) feet
from said access measured at right angles to the path.
(d) EXTERIOR YARDS FOR MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES; MINIMUM
REQUIREMENTS; OCCUPANCY. The following requirements and limitations shall
apply to yards at the outer edges of mobile home communities:
(1) Along Public Streets
(2)
. Where R-MH communities adjoin public streets along
exterior boundaries, a yard at least twenty-five (25) feet in minimum dimensions
shall be provided adjacent to such streets. Such yard may be used to satisfy open
space depth requirements for individual dwellings but shall not contain carports,
recreational shelters, storage structures or any other structures generally prohibited
in yards adjacent to streets in residential districts. No direct vehicular access to
individual lots shall be permitted through such yards, and no group parking facilities
or active recreation areas shall be allowed therein.
At Edges of R-MH Districts (Other Than at Streets or Alleys). Where R-MH
communities are so located that one (1) or more boundaries are at the edges of RMH
districts and adjoining neighboring districts without an intervening street, alley
or other permanent open space at least twenty (20) feet in width, an exterior yard at
least twenty (20) feet in minimum dimension shall be provided. Where the
adjoining district is residential, the same limitations on occupancy and use of such
yards shall apply as stated above concerning yards along public streets. Where the
adjoining district is nonresidential, such yards may be used for group or individual
parking, active recreation facilities or carports, recreational shelters or storage
071414
1:8
structures.
(e) WAYS FOR PEDESTRIANS AND/OR CYCLISTS IN EXTERIOR YARDS. In any
exterior yard, required or other, ways for pedestrian and/or cyclists may be permitted, if
appropriately located, fenced or landscaped to prevent potential hazards arising from
vehicular traffic on adjacent streets or other hazards and annoyances to users or to occupants
of adjoining property. When otherwise in accord with the requirements concerning such
ways set forth above, approved ways in such locations shall be counted as common
recreation facilities and may also be used for utilities easements.
(f) YARDS, FENCES, WALLS OR VEGETATIVE SCREENING AT EDGES OF
MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES. Along the edges of mobile home communities,
walls or vegetative screening shall be provided where needed to protect residents from
undesirable views, lighting, noise, or other off-site influences or to protect occupants of
adjoining residential districts from potentially adverse influences within the mobile home
community. In particular, extensive off-street parking areas and service areas for loading
and unloading other than passenger vehicles, and for storage and collection of trash and
garbage, shall be screened.
(g) INTERNAL RELATIONSHIPS. The site plan shall provide for safe, efficient,
convenient and harmonious groupings of structures, uses and facilities, and for appropriate
relation of space inside and outside buildings to intended uses and structural features. In
particular:
(1) Streets, Drives and Parking and Service Areas
(2)
. Streets, drives and parking and
service areas shall provide safe and convenient access to dwellings and community
facilities and for service and emergency vehicles, but streets shall not be so laid out
as to encourage outside traffic to traverse the community, nor occupy more land
than is required to provide access as indicated, nor create unnecessary fragmentation
of the community into small blocks. In general, block size shall be the maximum
consistent with use, the shape of the site and the convenience and safety of the
occupants.
Vehicular Access to Streets
(3)
. Vehicular access to streets from off-street parking
areas may be direct from dwellings if the street or portion of the street serves fifty
(50) units or less. Determination of units served shall be based on normal routes
anticipated for traffic. Along streets or portions of streets serving more than fifty
(50) dwelling units, or constituting major routes to or around central facilities,
access from parking and service areas shall be so combined, limited, located,
designed and controlled as to channel traffic conveniently, safely and in a manner
that minimizes marginal traffic friction, and direct vehicular access from individual
dwellings shall generally be prohibited.
Ways for Pedestrians and Cyclists; Use by Emergency, Maintenance or Service
Vehicles
a. Walkways shall form a logical, safe and convenient system for pedestrian
access to all dwellings, project facilities and principal off-street pedestrian
destinations. Maximum walking distance in the open between dwelling
units and related parking spaces, delivery areas and trash and garbage
storage areas intended for use of occupants shall not exceed one hundred
(100) feet.
.
b. Walkways to be used by substantial numbers of children as play areas or
routes to school, bus stops or other destinations shall be so located and
safeguarded as to minimize contracts with normal automotive traffic. If an
internal walkway system is provided, away from streets, bicycle paths shall
071414
1:9
be incorporated in the walkway system. Street crossings shall be held to a
minimum on such walkways and shall be located and designated to provide
safety and shall be appropriately marked and otherwise safeguarded. Ways
for pedestrians and cyclists, appropriately located, designed and constructed
may be combined with other easements and used by emergency,
maintenance or service vehicle but shall not be used by other automotive
traffic.
071414
1:10
SEC. 13-1-114REQUIRED STREET PARKING--PRIVATE STREETS.
(a) Parking Requirements.
Parking Paving Width
Street Class Permitted (feet)
Minor, one way No 14
(Serving less than 20 lots) One side 16
Both sides 23
Minor, two-way No 18
(Serving 50 lots or less) One side 25
Both sides 32
Collector No 20
(Serving more than 50 lots) One side 27
Both sides 34
(b) STREETS.
(1) Streets that are to be dedicated to the jurisdiction, if any, shall be dimensioned and
improved in accordance with general subdivision regulations.
(2) For other streets, required paving widths shall be as follows, based generally on a
moving lane width of ten (10) feet for collector streets and nine (9) feet for minor
streets, with parallel parking lanes at seven (7) feet in locations where on-street
parking is to be permitted. As an exception to these general rules, one-way minor
streets serving less than twenty (20) lots, and driveways to parking bays containing
less than ten (10) parking spaces shall have a minimum pavement width of fourteen
(14) feet. Driveways to parking bays containing ten (10) or more parking spaces
shall be eighteen (18) feet in pavement width. (See table.)
SEC. 13-1-115LOTS AND LOCATIONS FOR DWELLINGS ON LOTS;
IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED BEFORE OCCUPANCY.
(a) Location on the lot shall be suitable for the type of dwelling proposed, considering size,
required open spaces and manner of support, and any improvements necessary on the lot for
the support or anchoring of the type of dwelling proposed shall be provided to the dwelling
so supported and/or anchored before occupancy.
(b) The limits of each mobile home lot shall be clearly marked on the ground by permanent
flush stakes, markers or other suitable means.
SEC. 13-1-116 THROUGH SEC. 13-1-119 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
113094
1:1
ARTICLE I
Annexation
SEC. 13-1-120 ANNEXATION--GENERAL POLICIES.
Annexation of territory to the City shall be accomplished as prescribed in this Article.
SEC. 13-1-121 RECEIPT AND DISTRIBUTION OF PETITION.
Immediately upon receipt of a petition for annexation, the City Clerk shall distribute a copy of the
petition, including a written description and a map of the area proposed to be annexed and a request
for a report returnable to the Administration Committee on the impact of the proposed annexation, to
the following department heads, commissions, boards and officers:
(a) Comptroller.
(b) Director of Public Works.
(c) City Assessor.
(d) Director of Community Development and City Plan Commission.
(e) Board of Education.
(f) Park and Recreation Board.
(g) Chief of Police.
(h) Fire Chief.
(i) Water Department.
SEC. 13-1-122 REPORT TO COUNCIL AND COMMITTEE REFERRAL.
At the first regular Common Council meeting following the receipt of the annexation petition, the
City Clerk shall report to the Common Council that the petition has been received; and the Council
shall then refer the petition to the Administration Committee.
SEC. 13-1-123 IMPACT REPORTS.
(a) WHEN REQUIRED. Each of the department heads, commissions, boards and officers
enumerated above shall prepare a report on the impact of the proposed annexation to be
submitted to the Administration Committee on or before the date designated by the
Committee. The impact report shall contain at least the following information, where
applicable:
(1) Additional personnel required and an estimate of the cost.
(2) Additional equipment required and an estimate of the cost.
(3) Additional buildings and an estimate of the cost.
(4) Additional improvements and an estimate of the cost.
(5) Additional miscellaneous cost estimates.
(6) A total cost estimate.
(7) An estimate of additional revenues to be generated and a forecast of the years in
which such revenues will be realized.
113094
1:2
(8) A recommendation for or against the proposed annexation and a statement of the
reasons therefor.
(b) IMPACT REPORTS NOT REQUIRED. Where the area proposed to be annexed is so
small that the impact will be insignificant, the department heads, commissions, boards and
officers may submit a "no impact" report.
SEC. 13-1-124 COMMITTEE PROCEDURES, RECOMMENDATION AND COUNCIL
ACTION.
Upon receipt of the impact reports, the Administration Committee shall review the reports, together
with the opinion of the Wisconsin Department of Development, and any other material pertinent to
the proposed annexation and make a recommendation to the Common Council in a timely manner so
that an ordinance annexing the territory may be adopted by the Council not later than sixty (60) days
after the date of the filing of the petition for annexation with the City Clerk or not later than sixty
(60) days after the referendum election if favorable to the annexation. If the Administration
Committee opposes the annexation and the Council votes to reject the petition, no further action
shall be taken thereon.
SEC. 13-1-125 ZONING DESIGNATION.
All territory annexed to the City shall automatically become a part of the R-1 Single Family
Residence District until definite boundaries and regulations are recommended by the Plan
Commission and adopted by the Council, provided the Council may, in the annexation ordinance,
temporarily designate the classification of the annexed area for zoning purposes. The Common
Council shall adopt definite boundaries and zoning district regulations within six (6) months from
the date of annexation.
SEC. 13-1-126 THROUGH SEC. 13-1-129 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
113094
1:1
ARTICLE J
Administration
SEC. 13-1-130 GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM.
This Chapter contemplates an administrative and enforcement officer entitled the "Zoning
Administrator" to administer and enforce the same. Certain considerations, particularly with regard
to granting of permitted conditional uses, planned unit development conditional uses, changes in
zoning districts and zoning map, and amending the text of this Code require review and
recommendation by the Plan Commission and ultimate action by the Common Council. A Zoning
Board of Appeals is provided to assure proper administration of the Chapter and to avoid
arbitrariness.
SEC. 13-1-131 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
The Director of Community Development is hereby designated as the administrative enforcement
officer for the provisions of this Chapter and is also herein referred to as the Zoning Administrator.
The duty of the Zoning Administrator shall be to interpret and administer this Chapter and to issue,
after on-site inspection, all permits required by this Chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall
further:
(a) Maintain records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official
actions.
(b) Record the lowest floor elevations of all structures erected, moved, altered or improved in
the floodland districts.
(c) Establish that all necessary permits that are required for floodland uses by state and federal
law have been secured.
(d) Inspect all structures, lands and waters as often as necessary to assure compliance with this
Chapter.
(e) Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures and the use of
structures, lands and waters, give notice of all violations of this Chapter to the owner,
resident, agent or occupant of the premises and report uncorrected violations to the City
Attorney in a manner specified by him.
(f) Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until he has inspected and
approved such use or erection.
(g) Request assistance and cooperation from the Police Department, Building Inspector and City
Attorney as deemed necessary.
SEC. 13-1-132 ROLE OF SPECIFIC CITY OFFICIALS IN ZONING ADMINISTRATION.
(a) PLAN COMMISSION.
(1) The Plan Commission, together with its other statutory duties, shall make reports and
recommendations relating to the plan and development of the City to the Common
Council, other public officials and other interested organizations and citizens. In
general, the Plan Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable
it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning. Under this Chapter, its
113094
1:2
functions are primarily recommendatory to the Common Council pursuant to
guidelines set forth in this Chapter as to various matters and, always, being mindful
of the intent and purposes of this Chapter. Recommendations shall be in writing. A
recording thereof in the Commission's minutes shall constitute the required written
recommendation. The Commission may, in arriving at its recommendation, on
occasion of its own volition, conduct its own public hearing.
(2) For the purposes of this Chapter, the Plan Commission shall review and make
recommendations to the Common Council on the following: Special use permits,
development site plans, transitional areas, annexations, rezonings, planned unit
developments (PUDs), changes to the official map, redevelopment plans and tax
increment finance (TIF) plans. The Plan Commission shall also adopt and revise as
necessary a comprehensive plan, recommend necessary changes or amendments to
this Code and perform any further duties imposed upon it by the Council.
(b) COMMON COUNCIL. The Common Council, the governing body of the City, subject to
recommendations by the Plan Commission and the holding of public hearings by said
Council, has ultimate authority to grant permitted conditional uses, planned unit
development conditional uses, make changes and amendments in zoning districts, the zoning
map and supplementary floodland zoning map and to amend the text of this Chapter. The
Council may delegate to the Plan Commission and the responsibility to hold some or all
public hearings as required under this Chapter.
(c) ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. A Zoning Board of Appeals is established to provide
an appeal procedure for persons who deem themselves aggrieved by decisions of
administrative officers in enforcement of this Chapter. See Article L of this Chapter for
detail provisions.
SEC. 13-1-133 ZONING PERMIT.
(a) ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED. No new structure, new use of land, water or air or
change in the use of land, water or air shall hereafter be permitted and no structure or part
thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged,
converted or structurally altered without a zoning permit.
(b) Applications for a zoning permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator and shall include
the following where pertinent and necessary for proper review:
(1) Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect, professional
engineer and contractor.
(2) Description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded subdivision or by metes and
bounds; address of the subject site; type of structure; existing and proposed operation
or use of the structure or site; number of employees; and zoning district within which
the subject site lies.
(3) Plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in the State of Wisconsin or
other map drawn to scale and showing such of the following as may be required by
the Zoning Administrator: the location, boundaries dimensions, uses, and size of the
following: subject site; existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed
easements, streets and other public ways; public utilities; off-street parking, loading
areas and driveways; existing highway access restrictions; high water; channel,
floodway and floodplain boundaries; and existing and proposed street, side and rear
yards.
(4) Additional information as may be required by the City Zoning Administrator or the
113094
1:3
Plan Commission (if involved).
(c) ACTION.
(1) A zoning permit shall be granted or denied in writing by the Zoning Administrator
within thirty (30) days of application and the applicant shall post such permit in a
conspicuous place at the site.
(2) The permit shall expire within six (6) months unless substantial work has
commenced or within eighteen (18) months after the issuance of the permit if the
structure for which a permit is issued is not substantially completed, in which case of
expiration, the application shall reapply for a zoning permit before commencing
work on the structure.
(3) Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter shall be null and
void.
SEC. 13-1-134 CHANGES IN OCCUPANCY.
(a) INTENT. To ensure that as many properties as possible are in compliance with this Code,
all commercial, multi-family and industrial property changing occupancy shall first be
reviewed by the Department of Community Development.
(b) PROCEDURE. The procedure for obtaining approval on a change in occupancy is as
follows:
(1) The property owner or agent shall meet with the Department of Community
Development to explain the proposed occupancy. An application for change in
occupancy shall be filed with the Department of Community Development; and
(2) The Department of Community Development will review the application and will
verify whether the new occupancy complies with this code. If the occupancy
complies, an occupancy permit will then be issued to the applicant. If the new
occupancy does not comply, then corrective actions will be so noted and explained to
the applicant. An occupancy permit will not be issued until all corrective actions are
completed.
(c) APPEAL. An applicant who disagrees with corrective actions imposed upon him by the
Department of Community Development may appeal to the City Plan Commission. The
procedure to appeal this action is:
(1) Applicant files a letter with the Department of Community Development explaining
his disagreement with the interpretation of the Department of Community
Development;
(2) The Department shall place the appeal on the agenda at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Plan Commission; and
(3) The Plan Commission shall review the appeal and consider the matter. If the
Commission upholds the Department's interpretation, then the applicant shall take
the necessary corrective action. If the Commission agrees with the applicant, it may
so order that an occupancy permit be granted or may order that an occupancy permit
be issued with conditions it deems appropriate.
113094
1:4
SEC. 13-1-135 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
(a) VIOLATIONS. It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land, or to use water
or air in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. In case of any violation, the
Common Council, the Zoning Administrator, the Plan Commission or any property owner
who would be specifically damaged by such violation may cause appropriate action or
proceeding to be instituted to enjoin a violation of this Chapter or cause a structure to be
vacated or removed.
(b) REMEDIAL ACTION. Whenever an order of the Zoning Administrator has not been
complied with within thirty (30) days after written notice has been mailed to the owner,
resident agent or occupant of the premises, the Common Council, the Zoning Administrator
or the City Attorney may institute appropriate legal action or proceedings.
(c) PENALTIES. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of
this Chapter or any order of the Zoning Administrator issued in accordance with this Chapter
or resists enforcement shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a forfeiture and such
additional penalties as provided for in Section 1-1-7 of this Code of Ordinances.
SEC. 13-1-136 FEES FOR ZONING, LAND USE, BUILDING, PLUMBING, ELECTRICAL,
HEATING, VENTILATING, AND AIR CONDITIONING
INSPECTIONS.
No person may receive a permit under Section 13 without having first paid the appropriate fee. Such
fees will be set and reviewed by the Common Council annually. A list of the fees shall be
maintained in the office of the City Clerk and the Director of Community development.
SEC. 13-1-137 THROUGH SEC. 13-1-139 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
113094
1:1
ARTICLE K
Changes and Amendments to the Zoning Code
SEC. 13-1-140 AUTHORITY.
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice requires, the
Common Council may, by ordinance, change the district boundaries established by this Chapter and
the Zoning Map incorporated herein and/or the Supplementary Floodland Zoning Map incorporated
herein, or amend, change or supplement the text of the regulations established by this Chapter or
amendments thereto. Such change or amendment shall be subject to the review and
recommendation of the Plan Commission.
SEC. 13-1-141 INITIATION OF CHANGES OR AMENDMENTS.
The Common Council, the City Plan Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals and other
government bodies and any private petitioners may apply for an amendment to the text of this
Chapter to the District boundaries hereby established or by amendments hereto in the accompanying
zoning map made a part of this Chapter and/or the Supplementary Floodland Zoning Map to be
made a part of this Chapter.
Cross Reference: Section 13-1-16.
SEC. 13-1-142 PROCEDURE FOR CHANGES OR AMENDMENTS.
(a) PROCEDURE ESTABLISHED.
(1) Whenever all owners of a parcel of property petition the Common Council for
rezoning, they must first present to the City Clerk a photocopy of their deed and a
permit fee. This fee shall be recommended to the Common Council by the Director
of Community Development. If the same is not amended by the Common Council,
said fee shall stand. Recertification to the Common Council is not necessary in the
following years and the fees remain unchanged. The original recommendation shall
be to the Administration Committee. Requests by agents for owners will not be
accepted. In the case where a parcel of land is owned by a corporation, said petition
must be signed by the president and the secretary of such corporation along with a
certified copy of the minutes authorizing said rezoning.
(2) All applicants for rezoning must present the City Clerk with a photocopy of the deed
in which they received the property. Abbreviations from the Assessor's office will
not be accepted. Every rezoning ordinance shall contain the exact description from
the deed and must contain the following language after the description: "as recorded
in the Winnebago County Registry as Document No. ."
(3) Petitions for any change to the district boundaries and map(s) or amendments to the
text regulations shall be addressed to the Common Council and shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator, describe the premises to be rezoned or the portions of text of
regulations to be amended, list the reasons justifying the petition, specify the
proposed use, if applicable, and have attached the following, if petition be for change
113094
1:2
of district boundaries:
a. Plot plan, drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet
showing the area proposed to be rezoned, its location, its dimensions, the
location and classification of adjacent zoning districts and the location and
existing use of all properties within three hundred (300) feet of the area
proposed to be rezoned.
b. Owners' names and addresses of all properties lying within one hundred
(100) feet of the area proposed to be rezoned.
c. Together with additional information as may be required by the City Plan
Commission or Common Council.
(b) RECOMMENDATIONS.
(1) The Common Council or the City Clerk shall cause the petition to be forwarded to
the Plan Commission for its consideration and recommendation.
(2) Within 30 days of receipt of the application, the Community Development
Department shall schedule an informal public hearing before the Plan Commission
and shall schedule a formal public hearing before the Common Council.
(3) The Plan Commission cannot act on any matter unless the agenda is received by
them at least five (5) days prior to the scheduled meeting so that individual members
can read the material and view the premises.
(4) The Plan Commission shall review all proposed amendments to the text and zoning
map(s) within the corporate limits and shall recommend in writing that the petition
be granted as requested, modified or denied. A recording of the recommendation in
the Plan Commission's official minutes shall constitute the required written
recommendation.
(c) HEARINGS.
(1) The City Clerk or Community Development Department shall notify all property
owners immediately adjacent and extending one hundred (100) feet from or directly
opposite the property and extending one hundred (100) feet from the street frontage
of the opposite land. Such notice shall be by first class mail and shall include the
proposed rezoning, the date of the informal hearing before the Plan Commission, and
the date of the formal hearing before the Common Council. Such notice shall be sent
not less than seven (7) days prior to the informal hearing. The Clerk shall, with all
due diligence, ascertain who all the owners of the property are. Failure to notify all
owners where, with due diligence, such information cannot be obtained will not
invalidate a rezoning ordinance per se. Copies of all notices shall be filed with The
Clerk. The Clerk shall call upon the City Planner and Assessor for aid in their
endeavor.
(2) The Common Council, following receipt of recommendation of the Plan
Commission, shall hold a public hearing upon each proposed change or amendment,
giving notice of the time, place and the change or amendment proposed by
publication of a Class 2 notice, under Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes. At
least ten (10) days' prior, written notice shall also be given to the clerk of any
municipality within one thousand (1,000) feet of any land to be affected by the
proposed change or amendment.
(3) The Common Council may delegate to the City Plan Commission the responsibility
to hold public hearings as required under this Section.
(d) COMMON COUNCIL'S ACTION. Following such hearing and after consideration of the
Plan Commission's recommendations, the Common Council shall vote on the proposed
ordinance effecting the proposed change or amendment.
113094
1:3
(e) RECORDING. When a rezoning ordinance is passed, the Clerk shall mail a copy to the
successful applicant instructing such person that, if he desires to have the instrument
recorded at his own expense, he shall contact the City Attorney's office who may advise the
petitioner thereafter.
SEC. 13-1-143 PROTEST.
(a) In the event of a protest against amendment to the zoning map, duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more either of the areas of the land
included in such proposed change, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the
land immediately adjacent extending one hundred (100) feet therefrom, or by the owners of
twenty percent (20%) or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending one hundred
(100) feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such changes or amendments shall
not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the full Common
Council membership.
(b) In the event of protest against amendment to the text of the regulations of this Chapter, duly
signed and acknowledged by twenty percent (20%) of the number of persons casting ballots
in the last general election, it shall cause a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the full Common
Council membership to adopt such amendment.
SEC. 13-1-144 THROUGH SEC. 13-1-149 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
113094
1:1
ARTICLE L
Appeals
SEC. 13-1-150 APPEALS TO THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
(a) SCOPE OF APPEALS. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any decision
of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days of the
alleged grievance or judgment in question by filing with the officer(s) from whom the appeal
is taken and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof,
together with payment of a filing fee as may be established by the Common Council. The
officer(s) from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals all
papers constituting the record from which action the appeal was taken.
(b) STAY OF PROCEEDINGS. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certified to the
Board that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
immediate peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of
record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due
cause shown.
(c) POWERS OF ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. In addition to these powers enumerated
elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances, the Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
(1) Errors. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or
Building Inspector.
(2) Variances. To hear and grant appeals for variances as will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that
the spirit and purposes of this Chapter shall be observed and the public safety,
welfare and justice secured. Use variances shall not be granted.
(3) Interpretations. To hear and decide application for interpretations of the zoning
regulations and the boundaries of the zoning districts after the City Plan Commission
has made a review and recommendation.
(4) Substitutions. To hear and grant applications for substitution of more restrictive
nonconforming uses for existing nonconforming uses provided no structural
alterations are to be made and the City Plan Commission has made a review and
recommendation. Whenever the Board permits such a substitution, the use may not
thereafter be changed without application.
(5) Unclassified Uses. To hear and grant applications for unclassified and unspecified
uses provided that such uses are similar in character to the principal uses permitted in
the district and the City Plan Commission has made a review and recommendation.
(6) Temporary Uses. To hear and grant applications for temporary uses, in any district
provided that such uses are of a temporary nature, do not involve the erection of a
substantial structure and are compatible with the neighboring uses and the City Plan
Commission has made a review and recommendation. The permit shall be
temporary, revocable, subject to any condition required by the Board of Zoning
Appeals and shall be issued for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months.
Compliance with all other provisions of this Chapter shall be required.
113094
1:2
(7) Permits. The Board may reverse, affirm wholly or partly, modify the requirements
appealed from and may issue or direct the issue of a permit.
SEC. 13-1-151 HEARING ON APPEALS.
The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing, cause notice thereof to be
published in the official newspaper not less than seven (7) days prior thereto, cause notice to be
given to the appellant or applicant and the administrative officer(s) appealed from by regular mail or
by personal service not less than five (5) days prior to the date of hearing. In every case involving a
variance, notice shall also be mailed not less than five (5) days prior to the hearing of the fee owners
of records of all land within one hundred (100) feet of any part of the subject building or premises
involved in the appeal.
SEC. 13-1-152 DECISIONS OF BOARD OF APPEALS.
(a) TIME FRAME. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals and applications within
thirty (30) days after the public hearing and shall transmit a signed copy of the Board's
decision to the appellant or applicant and the Zoning Administrator.
(b) CONDITIONS. Conditions may be placed upon any zoning permit ordered or authorized
by this Board.
(c) VALIDITY. Variances, substitutions or use permits granted by the Board shall expire
within six (6) months unless substantial work has commenced pursuant to such grant.
SEC. 13-1-153 VARIATIONS.
(a) PURPOSE.
(1) A request for a variance may be made when an aggrieved party can submit proof that
strict adherence to the provisions of this Zoning Code would cause him undue
hardship or create conditions causing greater harmful effects than the initial
condition. A variance granted to a nonconforming use brings that use into
conformance with the district and zoning requirements.
(2) The Board of Appeals may authorize upon appeal, in specific cases, such variance
from the terms of the Zoning Code as will not be contrary to the public interest,
where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the
Zoning Code will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of the Zoning
Code shall be observed and substantial justice done. No variance shall have the
effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree
of flood protection that the flood protection elevation for the particular area or permit
standards lower than those required by state law.
(3) For the purposes of this Section, "unnecessary hardship" shall be defined as an
unusual or extreme decrease in the adaptability of the property to the uses permitted
by the zoning district which is caused by facts, such as rough terrain or poor soil
conditions, uniquely applicable to the particular piece of property as distinguished
from those applicable to most or all property in the same zoning district.
(b) APPLICATION FOR VARIATION. The application for variation shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator. Applications may be made by the owner or lessee of the structure,
113094
1:3
land or water to be affected. The application shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and address of applicant and all abutting and opposite property owners of
record.
(2) Statement that the applicant is the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of the
property.
(3) Address and description of the property.
(4) A site plan showing an accurate depiction of the property.
(5) Additional information required by the City Plan Commission, City Engineer, Board
of Zoning Appeals or Zoning Administrator.
(6) Fee receipt in the amount of Two Hundred Twenty-five Dollars ($225.00).
(c) PUBLIC HEARING OF APPLICATION. The Board of Appeals shall conduct at least
one (1) public hearing on the proposed variation. Notice of such hearing shall be given not
more than thirty (30) days and not less than ten (10) days before the hearing in one (1) or
more of the newspapers in general circulation in the City of Menasha, and shall give due
notice to the parties in interest, the Zoning Administrator and the City Plan Commission. At
the hearing the appellant or applicant may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. The
Board shall thereafter reach its decision within thirty (30) days after the final hearing and
shall transmit a written copy of its decision to the appellant or applicant, Zoning
Administrator and Plan Commission.
(d) ACTION OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS. For the Board to grant a variance, it must
find that:
(1) Denial of variation may result in hardship to the property owner due to
physiographical consideration. There must be exceptional, extraordinary or unusual
circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or parcel, structure, use or intended
use that do not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same district and the
granting of the variance would not be of so general or recurrent nature as to suggest
that the Zoning Code should be changed.
(2) The conditions upon which a petition for a variation is based are unique to the
property for which variation is being sought and that such variance is necessary for
the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other
properties in the same district and same vicinity.
(3) The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to increase the
value or income potential of the property.
(4) The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious
to the other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is
located.
(5) The proposed variation will not undermine the spirit and general and specific
purposes of the Zoning Code.
(e) CONDITIONS. The Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon
the premises benefitted by a variance as may be necessary to comply with the standards
established in this Section.
SEC. 13-1-154 REVIEW BY COURT OF RECORD.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals may present to a court of
record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal and specifying the grounds
of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing
of the decision in the offices of the Board.
113094
1:4
SEC. 13-1-155 THROUGH SEC. 13-1-159 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
072114
1:1
ARTICLE M
Definitions
SEC. 13-1-160 DEFINITIONS.
(a) The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Chapter, shall be construed
as herein defined. Words not defined shall be interpreted in accordance with definitions
found in any standard dictionary:
(1) ABUTTING. Making contact with or separated only by public thoroughfare, railroad or
public utility right-of-way.
(2) ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or a portion of the main building
which is located on the same lot or parcel as the main building and the use of which is
clearly incidental to that of the main building or to the use of the premises. This
definition excludes a private garage.
(3) ACCESSORY USE. A use on the same lot with and of a nature customarily incidental
and subordinate to the principal building or use.
(4) AIRPORT OR HELIPORT. Any land or structure which is used or intended for use,
for the landing and takeoff of aircraft and any appurtenant land or structure used or
intended for use by port buildings or other port structures or rights-of-way.
(5) ALLEY. A public right-of-way not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width which has
been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and designed to provide secondary
access to abutting property.
(6) ANIMALS - DOMESTIC. Dogs, cats, birds and other commonly known house pets.
(7) ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS. Establishments which include bookstores, motion
picture theaters, mini-motion picture theaters, bath houses, massage parlors, modeling
and body painting studios and cabarets whose principal use is to depict, describe,
engage in or relate to "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities."
Escort services and escorts as regulated in Sec. 7-13 shall be considered adult
establishments.
(8) APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms rented, leased or granted similar tenancy,
with cooking facilities available which is occupied as a residence by a single family
or a group of individuals living together as a single-family unit. This includes any
unit in buildings with more than two (2) dwelling units.
(9) APARTMENT BUILDING. Three (3) or more dwelling units or apartments grouped
in one (1) building.
(10) AUTOMOBILE/TRUCK WASH. A building, or portion thereof, containing facilities
for washing automobiles or trucks, using production line methods, including, but not
limited to, steam cleaning devices or other mechanical devices.
(11) AUTOMOBILE WRECKING. The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or
trailers or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, or
wrecked vehicles or their parts. (See also junk yard.)
(12) BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partly underground, but having half or
more of its floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining
ground.072114 1:2
(13) BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of lodging that satisfies
all of the following (as per Chapter 254.61, Wis. Stats.):
i. Provides 8 or fewer rooms for rent to no more than a total of 20 tourists or
transients.
072114
1:2
ii. Provides no meals other than breakfast and provides the breakfast only to
renters of the place.
iii. Is the owner’s personal residence.
iv. Is occupied by the owner at the time of rental.
v. Was originally built and occupied as a single-family residence, or prior to use
as a place of lodging, was converted to use and occupied as a single-family
residence.
(14) BOARDER. A person who regularly receives lodging with or without meals at
another's home for pay or services.
(15) BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE. Building or dwelling unit other than a
motel, hotel, Bed and Breakfast Establishment, or Tourist Rooming House, where,
for compensation and by prearrangement, lodging is provided with or without meals
for three (3) or more persons, not to exceed eight (8) persons, nor more than two (2)
persons to a room.
(16) BOARDING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a habitable unit used or
intended to be used for living and/or sleeping but not used for cooking or eating
purposes.
(17) BROADCASTING ANTENNA, RADIO AND TELEVISION. Commercial,
public or private broadcasting towers exceeding the district height limitations or
more than one (1) tower of any height located on the same lot or parcel.
(18) BUFFER. The use of land, topography, difference in elevation, space, fences or
landscape planting to screen or partially screen a use or property from another use or
property and thus reduce undesirable influences, such as site, glare, noise, dust and
other external effects.
(19) BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a lot after the minimum yard
requirements, drainage provisions, open space and other site constraint requirements
of this Code have been met.
(20) BUILDING. Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter, support,
protection or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind; and when said
structures are divided by party walls without openings, each portion of such building
so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
(21) BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance to be measured from the grade of a
building line to the top, to the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard
roof, to a point of the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, to the uppermost
point on a round or other arch-type roof, to the mean distance of the highest
gable on a pitched or hip roof.
(22) BUILDING LINE. An imaginary line separating buildable area and the required
yards as defined herein.
(23) BUILDING LINE, SHORELAND. A line measured across the width of the lot
where the main structure is placed in accordance with the setback provisions from
the ordinary high water mark, as designated by the Department of Natural Resources.
(24) BUSINESS. Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is
exhibited or sold, or where services are offered for compensation.
(25) CAMPUS. One or more parcels on adjacent or opposing lots upon which two or
more structures exhibit a common design theme and architectural character.
(26) CEMETERY. Site set apart for the burial or interment of the human dead.
(27) CHURCH. A building, together with its necessary buildings and uses, where persons
regularly assemble for religious worship and which buildings, together with its
accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body
organized to sustain public worship.
072114
1:3
(28) CLUB OR LODGE. A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members
paying annual dues, with the use of premises being restricted to members and their
guests. The serving of food and meals on such premises is permissible providing
adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. Serving of alcoholic
beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed, provided such serving is
secondary and incidental to the operation of the dining room for the purpose of
serving food and meals and providing further that such serving of alcoholic beverages
is in compliance with the applicable federal, state, county and municipal laws.
(29) COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENT. Facilities licensed or operated or
permitted under the authority of the Wisconsin Department of Health and Social
Services, including child welfare agencies, group foster homes for children and
community-based residential facilities (as per Chapter 46.03, Wis. Stats.).
(30) CONDOMINIUM. A form of individual ownership within a building which may
entail joint ownership and responsibility for maintenance and repairs of the land and
other common property of the building.
(31) DAY CARE CENTER. A licensed facility in which care and supervision is
providing for four (4) or more children under the age of seven (7) years for less than
twenty-four (24) hours per day.
(32) DENSITY. A number expressing the relationship of the number of dwellings to an
acre of land.
(33) DRIVE-IN. Any use where products and/or services are provided to the customer
under conditions where the customer does not have to leave the car or where fast
service to the automobile occupants is offered regardless of whether the service is
provided within the building.
(34) DRIVEWAY. A graveled or paved access from a street to a private structure o r
parking area and a continuous access to a street.
(35) DWELLING, ATTACHED. A dwelling which is partially surrounded by open
space on the same lot.
(36) DWELLING DETACHED. A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space
on the same lot.
(37) DWELLING UNIT. A residential building or portion thereof intended for
occupancy by a single family, but not including hotels, motels and boarding houses.
(38) DWELLINGS FOR WATCHMEN. A dwelling unit whose occupancy is limited to
an employee of the entity owning or conducting operations on the site whose job
responsibilities include site security.
(39) EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for use of a strip of land by the public or
any person for any specific purpose or purposes of construction and maintaining
utilities, including, but not exclusive of the following: sanitary sewers, water mains,
electric lines, telephone lines, other transmission lines, storm sewer, storm drainage
ways, gas lines, other service utilities, etc.
(40) EXTERIOR STORAGE. The storage of goods, materials, equipment, manufactured
products and similar items not fully enclosed by a building.
(41) FAMILY. Any number of persons each related by blood, marriage, adoption or
foster care arrangement living together as a single housekeeping unit, or a group of
not more than four (4) persons not so related, maintaining a common household, and
using common cooking and kitchen facilities.
(42) FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. A licensed facility located in a residential dwelling
and operated by a resident family, providing care and supervision for four (4) to eight
(8) children.
072114
1:4
(43) FARM. Any tract of land, one (1) acre or larger, used for the growing/production of
field crops or the raising of non-domesticated animals.
(44) FENCE. Any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a divider marker, barrier or
enclosure and located along the boundary or within the required yard.
(45) FLOOR AREA. The net area of any floor space enclosed by exterior walls, fire
walls or absolute fire separation, exclusive of open spaces.
(46) FLOOR AREA, PUBLICLY USED. All occupied areas within a building except
for: all rooms with ceilings less than six (6) feet eight (8) inches at their lowest point,
toilet rooms, furnace and mechanical rooms, identified exit corridors, exit stairs,
permanent fixtures and janitor's or other small closets.
(47) FRONTAGE. That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public
street.
(48) GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached or attached building or a portion of the principal
building, including a car port, which is used primarily for the storing of motor
vehicles by the tenants of the building or buildings.
(49) GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any premises, except those described as a private garage, used
for the storage or care of power-driven vehicles or where any such vehicles are
equipped for operation, repaired or kept for renumeration, hire or sale.
(50) GARAGE, REPAIR. A building or space for the repair or maintenance of vehicles,
but not including factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking establishments or
junk yards.
(51) GASOLINE STATION. Any building or premises used for the dispensation, sale or
offering for retail sale of any motor fuels, oils or lubricants. The building or space
may also be used for the repair or maintenance of vehicles.
(52) HOME OCCUPATION. Any business or commercial activity that is conducted or
petitioned to be conducted from property that is zoned for residential use.
(53) HOTEL. A place where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to transients,
in 5 or more rooms, and all related rooms, buildings and areas (as per Chapter DHS
195, Wis. Stats.)
(54) JUNK YARD. Land or buildings where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled,
including, but not limited to, scrap metal, rags, paper, rubber products resulting from
wrecking or salvage of automobiles or other vehicles, or outdoor storage of two (2) or
more unregistered vehicles, except as otherwise authorized. Such use shall not
include sanitary landfill and organic waste or material.
(55) KENNEL -- COMMERCIAL. Any structure or premises on which four (4) or more
animals of one (1) type, over four (4) months of age, are kept, owned, boarded,
groomed, sheltered, protected, bred or offered for sale or any other merchandising.
(56) LANDSCAPING. Alteration of the natural terrain, including the planting of trees,
grass, shrubs and ground cover.
(57) LIGHT MANUFACTURING AND ASSEMBLY. The processing, fabrication,
assembly, treatment and packaging of materials and finished products where all
operations, with the exception of loading are entirely conducted within an enclosed
building. Such land uses shall be relatively clean and quiet with minimal nuisances
such as noise, heat, vibration, foul odor, etc. that are detectable at the property line.
(58) LOT. A tract of sand, designated by metes and bounds, registered land survey, or
plat, and separated from other tract of land by legal description approved by the City
of Menasha and recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds.
(59) LOT AREA. Area within a lot, including land over which easements have been
granted, but not including any land within the limits of a public street upon which
072114
1:5
such lot abuts. If a corner lot has its corner bounded by a curved line connecting
other street lines which, if extended, would intersect, the area may be computed as if
such boundary lines were so extended.
(60) LOT AREA PER UNIT. The lot area required by this Chapter to be provided for
each dwelling unit.
(61) LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous
street, the interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135)
degrees.
(62) LOT, COVERAGE. Percentage of lot area used for a defined purpose.
(63) LOT DEPTH. The minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot.
(64) LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. Percentage of lot area used for a defined purpose.
(65) LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
(66) LOT LINE. A lot line that is the property line bounding a lot, except that where any
portion of a lot extends into a public right-of-way or a proposed right-of-way, the line
of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line.
(67) LOT LINE, FRONT. That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated
public street. In the case of a lot abutting two (2) or more public streets, the front lot
line shall be the lot line of least dimension.
(68) LOT LINE, REAR. That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot l ine. If
the rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet in length or if the lot forms a point at the
rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to
and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
(69) LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
(70) LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE. A corner lot whose rear lot line coincides with
any part of the side lot line of an abutting interior lot (see diagram).
(71) LOT, SUBSTANDARD. Any platted lot less than seven thousand two hundred
(7,200) square feet in lot area.
(72) LOT OF RECORD. Any lot which is one (1) unit of a plat duly approved and filed
or one (1) unit of an assessor's subdivision or a registered land survey that has been
recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds prior to the effective date of
this Code.
(73) LOT WIDTH. The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot
is measured on or within the front yard setback requirements.
(74) MOBILE HOME. A manufactured home as defined in the U.S. Department 072114 1:6
, 24 C.F.R. Sec 3280.
(75) MOBILE HOME SITE. A parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home
for the exclusive use of the occupants of said mobile home.
(76) MOBILE HOME PARK. Any site, lot, field or tract of land under single ownership,
designed, maintained or intended for the placement of two (2) or more occupied
mobile homes. Mobile home parks shall include any buildings, structures, vehicles or
enclosure intended for use as part of the equipment of such mobile home park.
(77) MOBILE HOME STAND. That part of an individual mobile home plat which has
been reserved for placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions.
(78) MOTEL. A hotel that furnished on-premise parking for motor vehicles of guests as
part of the room charge, without extra cost, and that is identified as a “motel” rather
than a “hotel” at the request of the operator (as per Chapter DHS 195, Wis. Stats.).
(79) MULTIPLE RESIDENT. Three (3) or more dwelling units in one (1) structure.
072114
1:6
(80) NOISE. One (1) or a group of loud, harsh, non-harmonious sounds or vibrations that
are present and irritating to the ear.
(81) NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. Any structure whose lot area, yard and/or
height regulations permitted or existing at the time of adoption of this Code now do
not comply with the provisions of this Code.
(82) NON-CONFORMING USE. Any use of a lot or structure permitted or existing at
the time of adoption of this Code which now does not comply with all the regulations
of this Code or any amendments hereto governing the zoning district in which such
use is located.
(83) NOXIOUS. Matter which is capable of causing injury or is in any way harmful to
living organisms or is capable of causing detrimental effect upon the health, the
physiological or social or economic well-being of human beings.
(84) NURSERY SCHOOL. A use where care is provided for four (4) or more children
under kindergarten age.
(85) NURSERY, LANDSCAPE. A business engaged in growing and selling trees,
flowering and ornamental plants, grasses, and shrubs and other ground covers which
may be conducted within a building or without for the purpose of landscape
construction.
(86) NURSING HOME, REST HOME OR CONVALESCENT HOME. A building
with facilities for the care of children, the aged, infirm or place of rest for those
suffering bodily disorder, but not containing equipment for surgical care or for
treatment of disease or injury. Said nursing home shall be licensed by the State Board
of Health.
(87) OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used.
The term shall also include the building or rooms housing such use. Change in
occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors of a
substantially similar use to that which previously existed.
(88) OFFICE USES. Those commercial activities that take place in office buildings
where goods are not produced, sold or repaired. These include: banks, general
offices, professional offices, governmental office, insurance office, real estate office,
travel agency or transportation ticket office, telephone , exchange, utility office, radio
broadcasting and similar uses.
(89) OPEN SPACE. Any open area not covered by a structure.
(90) OPEN SPACE, COMMON. A parcel or parcels of land and/or an area of water not
required for storage of the "regional flood" within a site designated for private open
space for the sole benefit, use and enjoyment of the homeowners within a planned
unit development or similar developments associated with common open space area.
(91) OPEN STORAGE. Storage of any material outside of the building and/or structure.
(92) ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK. A mark delineating the highest water level
which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape. The ordinary high water mark is commonly that point where natural
vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. In areas
where the ordinary high water mark is not evident, setbacks shall be measured from
the stream bank of the following waters that have permanent flow or open water: the
main channel, adjoining side channels, back waters and sloughs.
(93) PARCEL. An unplatted tract of land that does not have sufficient street frontage or
area, as defined within the Code, to be considered a buildable lot.
(94) PARKING SPACE. A suitable surfaced and permanently maintained area either
within or outside of a building of sufficient size to store one (1) automobile.
072114
1:7
(95) PEDESTRIAN WAY. A public or private right-of-way across or within a block to
be used by pedestrians.
(96) PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization
of any kind.
(97) PLAN, COMPREHENSIVE. Comprehensive plan shall mean a compilation of
policy statements, goals, standards and maps for guiding the physical, social and
economic development, both private and public, of the municipality and its environs
and may include, but is not limited to, the following: statements of olicies, goals,
standards, a land use plan, a community facilities plan, a transportation plan and
recommendations for plan implementation. A comprehensive plan represents the
planning agency's recommendations for the future development of the community.
(98) PLAN, SITE. A map or graphics prepared to scale depicting the development of a
tract of land, including, but not limited to, the location and relationship of the
structures, streets, driveways, recreation areas, parking areas, utilities, landscaping,
existing and proposed grading, walkways and other site development information as
related to a proposed development.
(99) PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A development having two (2) or more
principal uses or structures on a single tract or tracts of land, developed according to
a plan approved by the City, under single ownership or unified control. A planned
unit development allows for flexibility not available under normal zoning district
requirements. A planned unit development may include a combination of land uses.
(100) PREVAILING. The predominant or most frequent occurrence.
(101) PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR USE. One which determines the predominant use
as contrasted to accessory use or structure.
(102) PRINTING, PUBLISHING, AND ENGRAVING. Commercial printing and
engraving operations including the custom reproduction of materials for custom
orders by individuals and/or businesses. Uses include, but are not limited to: printing,
photocopying, screen processing, plaque engraving.
(103) PROPERTY LINE. The legal boundaries of a parcel of property which may also
coincide with the right-of-way of a road or ordinary high water mark.
(104) PUBLIC LAND. Land owned or operated by a municipality, school district, county,
state, federal or other governmental unit.
(105) PUBLIC BUILDING. A building owned and operated by a governmental unit
including, but not limited to, fire stations, wells, city hall, public works, senior citizen
facility and police facilities.
(106) RECREATION, COMMERCIAL. Includes all uses such as bowling alleys, driving
ranges and movie theaters that are privately owned and operated with the intention of
earning a profit by providing entertainment for the public.
(107) RECREATION, PUBLIC. Includes all uses such as tennis courts, ball fields, picnic
areas and the like that are commonly provided for the public at parks, playgrounds,
community centers and other sites owned and operated by a unit of government for
the purpose of providing recreation.
(108) RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle less than thirty (30) feet in overall
length that is mounted on wheels used for convenience on highways and streets and
propelled or drawn by its own motor power.
(109) RESEARCH, LABORATORY, TESTING, AND TECHNOLOGY USE.
Research, investigation, development, scientific testing uses, that does not include
the mass production of manufacturing.
072114
1:8
(110) RESTAURANTS, TRADITIONAL. Restaurant where food is served by a waitress
or waiter to a customer and consumed while seated at a counter or a table. Food is
served on non-disposable containers.
(111) RESTAURANTS, DRIVE-IN. Restaurants in which the customers are served food
at a carry-out counter or service window.
(112) ROAD. Right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and vehicles to
abutting property whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
road, avenue, boulevard, land, place or however otherwise designated. Egress and
ingress easements shall not be considered roads.
(113) ROOM. A space within a building completely enclosed, except for openings for
light, ventilation, ingress and egress.
(114) SHORE YARD SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between the
structure and the ordinary high water mark (see diagram).
(115) SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, illustration or device which is
affixed to or represented directly or indirectly on a building, structure or land in view
of the general public and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person,
institution or business.
(116) SOLAR STRUCTURE. A structure designed to utilize solar energy as an alternative
for, or supplement to, a conventional energy system.
(117) SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola and human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even
if completely or opaquely covered.
(118) SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Activities where human genitals are in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; and fondling or other erotic touching of the human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast.
(119) STREET. A public right-of-way which affords primarily means of access to abutting
property and shall also include avenue, highway, road or way.
(120) STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, the use of which requires more or less
permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground.
(121) TOURIST OR TRANSIENT. A person who travels to a location away from his or
her permanent address for a short period of time for vacation, pleasure, recreation,
culture, business or employment (as per Chapter DHS 195, Wis. Stats.).
(122) TOURIST ROOMING HOUSE. All lodging places and tourist cabins and cottages,
other than hotels and motels, in which sleeping accommodations are offered for pay
to tourists or transients. It does not include private boarding or rooming houses not
accommodating tourists or transients or bed and breakfast establishments regulated
under Chapter DHS 197 (as per Chapter DHS 195, Wis. Stats.).
(123) UNDUE HARDSHIP. Undue hardship as used in connection with the
recommending of the granting of a variance means the property in question cannot be
put to a reasonable use if used under conditions allowed by the official controls; the
plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to his property not created by
the landowner; and the variance, if recommended, will not alter the essential
character of the locality. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute an undue
hardship if reasonable use for the property exists under the terms of this Code.
(124) USE, ACCESSORY. A use subordinate to and serving the principal use or structure
on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto.
072114
1:9
(125) USE, PERMITTED. A public private use which of itself conforms with the
purposes, objectives, requirements, regulations and performance standards of a
particular district.
(126) USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
subordinate or accessory uses.
(127) USE, SPECIAL. A public or private use which possesses unique characteristics that
may affect the community or the surrounding area and, therefore, deserves special
consideration and permission before being established.
(128) VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of this Code where it is
determined that, by reason of special and unusual circumstances relating to a specific
lot, strict application of the Code would cause an undue hardship.
(129) VISION CLEARANCE AREA. An unoccupied space extending along the full
width of the front lot line between side lot lines and extending ten (10) feet from the
abutting street right-of-way. Such space shall remain clear of obstructions between
three (3) and twelve (12) feet above grade.
(130) VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE. An unoccupied triangle space at the street
corner of a corner lot. The triangle is formed by connecting the point where each
street line intersects and two (2) points located ten (10) feet along each street line.
(131) YARD. A required open space on the lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a
structure from its lowest level to the sky except as permitted in this Chapter. A yard
extends along the lot line at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified
in the setback regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located.
(132) YARD, FRONT. A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between
the side lot lines and extending from the abutting street right-of-way to the depth
required in the setback regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located.
Where irregular lot lines exist, the front yard shall be determined by the Department
of Community Development.
(133) YARD, REAR. That portion of the yard on the same lot with the principal building
located between the rear of the building and the rear lot line extending along the full
width of the lot. Where irregular lot lines exist, the rear yard shall be determined by
the Department of Community Development.
(134) YARD, SIDE. The yard extending along the side lot line between the front and rear
yards to a depth or width required by setback regulations for the zoning district in
which such lot is located. Where irregular lot lines exist, the side yard shall be
determined by the Department of Community Development.
(135) ZONING DISTRICT. An area or areas within the limits of the City for which the
regulations and requirements governing use are uniform.
(136) ZONING MAP. The map incorporated into this Chapter as a part thereof,
designating the zoning districts.
113094
1:1
CHAPTER 2
Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
ARTICLE A
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact,
Statement of Purpose and Title
SEC. 13-2-1 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Sections 62.23, 62.231, 87.30 and 144.26,
Wis. Stats.
SEC. 13-2-2 FINDINGS OF FACT.
(a) FINDINGS OF FACT. Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and the pollution of
the navigable waters of the City of Menasha would adversely affect the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare and impair the tax base. The Legislature of Wisconsin has
delegated responsibility to all municipalities to further the maintenance of safe and healthful
conditions; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic
life; control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; and preserve shore cover
and natural beauty.
(b) PURPOSE. To promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, this
Chapter has been established to:
(1) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Prevent and control water pollution by filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients,
heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters
and to maintain storm and flood water capacity;
(3) Protect fish spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life and wildlife by preserving wetlands
and other fish and aquatic habitat;
(4) Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and
(5) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural
shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other earth
moving activities.
SEC. 13-2-3 TITLE OF CHAPTER.
Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Ordinance/Chapter for the City of Menasha, Wisconsin.
SEC. 13-2-4 THROUGH SEC. 13-2-9 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
113094
1:1
ARTICLE B
General Provisions
SEC. 13-2-10 COMPLIANCE.
The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within the shoreland area of the City of Menasha
shall be in full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable local, state or federal
regulations. (However, see Section 13-2-25 of this Chapter for the standards applicable to
nonconforming uses.) All permitted development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit
unless otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this Chapter.
SEC. 13-2-11 MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED.
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties are required to comply
with this Chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if Section
13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state
highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation are exempt when Section
30.12(4)(a), Wis. Stats., applies.
SEC. 13-2-12 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTION.
(a) This Chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance enacted under
Section 62.23 or 87.30, Wis. Stats., which relate to shoreland-wetlands, except that where
another municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than the provisions contained in this
Chapter, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater
restrictions, but not otherwise.
(b) This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions,
covenants or easements. However, where this Chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this Chapter shall prevail.
SEC. 13-2-13 INTERPRETATION.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the municipality and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of
this Chapter is required by a standard in Chapter NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code, and where the Chapter
provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Chapter NR 117 standards in
effect on the date of the adoption of this Chapter or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this Chapter.
113094
1:2
SEC. 13-2-14 SEVERABILITY.
Should any portion of this Chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional for any reason by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected.
SEC. 13-2-15 THROUGH SEC. 13-2-19 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
113094
1:1
ARTICLE C
Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District
SEC. 13-2-20 PURPOSE OF SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING.
This Chapter is adopted to maintain safe and healthful conditions, to prevent and control water
pollution, to protect fish spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life and wildlife habitation, to preserve
shore cover and natural beauty and to control building and development in wetlands whenever
possible. When development is permitted in a wetland, the development should occur in a manner
which minimizes adverse impacts upon the wetland.
SEC. 13-2-21 OFFICIAL SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING MAPS.
The following maps are hereby adopted and made a part of this Ordinance and are on file in the
office of the City Clerk for the City of Menasha, Wisconsin: Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Map(s),
stamped "FINAL" on , 19 .
SEC. 13-2-22 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
(a) The shoreland-wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the City of Menasha,
Wisconsin, which are five (5) acres or more and are shown on the final Wetland Inventory
Map that has been adopted and made a part of this Chapter in Section 13-2-21 and which
are:
(1) Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable lakes,
ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the City of Menasha shall be
presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the Department of Natural Resources
("Department") publication "Surface Water Resources of Winnebago County" or are
shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base
maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this Chapter in
Section 13-2-21 of this Chapter.
(2) Within three hundred (300) feet of the ordinary high-water mark of navigable rivers
or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either
continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey
quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by
reference and made a part of this Chapter in Section 13-2-21. Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps, Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps,
County Soil Survey Maps or other existing community floodplain zoning maps used
to delineate floodplain area which have been adopted by the City of Menasha shall
be used to determine the extent of floodplain areas in the City.
(b) Determinations of navigability and ordinary high-water mark shall initially be made by the
Zoning Administrator. When questions arise, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the
appropriate district office of the Department for the final determination of navigability or
ordinary high-water mark.
(c) When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland district boundary
113094
1:2
shown on the official shoreland-wetland zoning maps and the actual field conditions at the
time the maps were adopted, the Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district
office of the Department to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as mapped
is in error. If the Department staff concurs with the Zoning Administrator that a particular
area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority
to immediately grant or deny a land use or building permit in accordance with the
regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping
errors shown on the official shoreland-wetland zoning maps, the Zoning Administrator shall
be responsible for initiating a shoreland-wetland map amendment within a reasonable period.
SEC. 13-2-23 PERMITTED USES.
The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Chapter 30 and 31, Wis. Stats., and the
provisions of other local, state and federal laws, if applicable:
(a) Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit, provided that no
wetland alteration occurs:
(1) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and boating;
(2) The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree
fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural reproduction of
such crops;
(3) The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and harvesting of timber;
(4) The pasturing of livestock;
(5) The cultivation of agricultural crops; and
(6) The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
(b) Uses which do not require the issuance of a (zoning/land use/building) permit and which
may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below:
(1) The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level stabilization
measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that
would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not
corrected;
(2) The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary for the
purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries;
(3) The maintenance and repair of existing drainage ditches, where permissible under
Section 30.20, Wis. Stats., or of other existing drainage systems (such as tilling) to
restore pre-existing levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling
necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is permissible under
Chapter 30, Wis. Stats., and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks
where possible;
(4) The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock, including
limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance;
(5) The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and walkways, observation decks
and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and filling necessary
for such construction or maintenance;
(6) The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining lands
outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district provided that such installation or
maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize the adverse impact upon the
natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in Section 13-2-38(c) of this
Chapter; and
113094
1:3
(7) The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing highways and
bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such maintenance,
repair, replacement or reconstruction.
(c) Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit and which may
include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below:
(1) The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the continuity of
the municipal street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency services
or to provide access to uses permitted in this Section, provided that:
a. The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
b. The road is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse impact upon
the natural functions of the wetland listed in Section 13-2-38(c) of this
Chapter;
c. The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional area
practical to serve the intended use;
d. Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the
roadbed only; and
e. Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or
maintenance of the road.
(2) The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings provided that:
a. The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in the
shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows or other
wetland or aquatic animals;
b. The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
c. The building does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in floor area;
and
d. Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support
for the building is allowed.
(3) The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation areas,
outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific areas, game refuges and
closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal
farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that:
a. Any private development allowed under this paragraph shall be used
exclusively for the permitted purpose;
b. Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of public
boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the construction of park shelters
or similar structures is allowed;
c. The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses permitted
under this paragraph are allowed only where such construction and
maintenance meets the criteria in Subsection (c)(1) of this Section; and
d. Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife
habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves
shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance
wetland values.
(4) The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines and
water, gas and sewer distribution lines, and related facilities provided that:
a. The transmission and distribution lines and related facilities cannot, as a
practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
b. Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or
maintenance is allowed; and
113094
1:4
c. Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize
the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in Section
13-2-38(c) of this Chapter.
(5) The construction and maintenance of railroad lines, provided that:
a. The railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland;
b. Only limited wetland alteration necessary for such construction or
maintenance is allowed; and
c. Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize
the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the wetland as listed in
Section 13-2-38 of this Chapter.
SEC. 13-2-24 PROHIBITED USES.
(a) Any use not listed in Section 13-2-23 of this Chapter is prohibited, unless the wetland or a
portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this Ordinance in accordance with
Section 13-2-38 of this Chapter.
(b) The use of a boat house for human habitation and the construction or placement of a boat
house or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters are
prohibited.
SEC. 13-2-25 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES.
The existing lawful use of a structure, building or property, or its accessory use, which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter may be continued subject to the following conditions:
(a) Notwithstanding Section 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., the repair, reconstruction, renovation,
remodeling or expansion of a legal nonconforming structure in existence at the time of
adoption or subsequent amendment of this Chapter adopted under Section 62.231, Wis.
Stats., or of an environmental control facility in existence on May 7, 1982, related to that
structure, is permitted under Section 62.231(5), Wis. Stats. Section 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats.,
applies to any environmental control facility that was not in existence on May 7, 1982, but
was in existence on the effective date of this Chapter or amendment.
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for twelve
(12) consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or property shall conform
to the appropriate provisions of this Chapter.
(c) Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use of a structure and
which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this Chapter adopted
under Sections 62.231 or 61.351, Wis. Stats., may be continued although such use does not
conform with the provisions of this Chapter. However, such nonconforming use may not be
extended.
(d) The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boat houses which are located below the
ordinary high-water mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of
Section 30.121, Wis. Stats.
(e) Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to continue as
nonconforming uses.
113094
1:5
SEC. 13-2-26 THROUGH SEC. 13-2-29 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
113094
1:1
ARTICLE D
Administrative Provisions
SEC. 13-2-30 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
The Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties and powers:
(a) Advise applications as to the provisions of this Chapter and assist them in preparing permit
applications and appeal forms.
(b) Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for compliance with this
Chapter.
(c) Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official
actions.
(d) Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for
the purpose of performing these duties.
(e) Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits, appeals for a map or text
interpretation and map or text amendments within ten (10) days after they are granted or
denied to the appropriate district office of the Department.
(f) Investigate and report violations of this Chapter to the appropriate City planning agency and
the District Attorney, corporation counsel or City Attorney.
SEC. 13-2-31 ZONING PERMITS.
(a) WHEN REQUIRED. Unless another Section of this Chapter specifically exempts certain
types of development from this requirement, a zoning permit shall be obtained from the
Zoning Administrator before any new development, as defined in Section 13-2-41(b)(4) of
this Chapter, or any change in the use of an existing building or structure is initiated.
(b) APPLICATION. An application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator
upon forms furnished by the City and shall include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of
these regulations, the following information:
(1) General Information.
a. Name, address and telephone number of applicant, property owner and
contractor, where applicable.
b. Legal description of the property and a general description of the proposed
use or development.
c. Whether or not a private water or sewage system is to be installed.
(2) Site Development Plan. The site development plan shall be drawn to scale and
submitted as a part of the permit application form and shall contain the following
information:
a. Dimensions and area of the lot;
b. Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines and
centerline of all abutting streets or highways;
c. Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private water
supply systems;
d. Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting navigable
waterways;
e. Location and landward limit of all wetlands;
113094
1:2
f. Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative
cover;
g. Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as determined
from floodplain zoning maps used to delineate floodplain areas;
h. Location of existing or future access roads; and
i. Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration.
(c) EXPIRATION. All permits issued under the authority of this Chapter shall expire one (1)
year from the date of issuance.
SEC. 13-2-32 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE.
(a) Except where no zoning permit or conditional use permit is required, no land shall be
occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified,
rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning
Administrator subject to the following provisions:
(1) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part thereof,
and the proposed use thereof, conform to the provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a zoning
or conditional use permit.
(3) The certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten (10) days after the
completion of the work specified in the zoning or conditional use permit, providing
the building or premises or proposed use thereof conforms with all the provisions of
this Chapter.
(b) The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of compliance for a building,
premises or part thereof, pursuant to rules and regulations established therefor by the
Common Council.
(c) Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of
compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of the adoption, certifying after
inspection the extent and type of use made of the building or premises and whether or not
such use conforms to the provisions of this Chapter.
SEC. 13-2-33 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS FOR WETLAND AREAS.
(a) APPLICATION. Any use listed as a conditional use in this Chapter shall be permitted only
after an application has been submitted to the Zoning Administrator and a conditional use
permit has been granted by the Board of Appeals, following the procedures in Sections 13-2-
37(c), (d) and (e) for hearing and deciding appeals.
(b) CONDITIONS. Upon consideration of the permit application and the standards applicable
to the permitted uses in Section 13-2-23(c) of the Chapter, the Board of Appeals shall attach
such conditions to a conditional use permit in addition to those required elsewhere in this
Chapter, as are necessary to further the purposes of this Chapter as listed in Section 13-2-2 of
this Chapter. Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of
specific enumeration: type of shore cover; erosion potential; increased side yard set-backs;
specific sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens;
period of operation; operational control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks,
parking areas and signs; and type of construction. To secure information upon which to base
its determination, the Board of Appeals may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to
113094
1:3
the information required for a zoning permit, other pertinent information which is necessary
to determine if the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this Chapter.
SEC. 13-2-34 FEES.
The Common Council, by resolution, shall establish fees for permits and administrative procedures
under this Chapter.
SEC. 13-2-35 RECORDING.
Where a zoning permit or conditional use permit is approved, an appropriate record shall be made by
the Zoning Administrator of the land use and structures permitted.
SEC. 13-2-36 REVOCATION.
Where the conditions of a zoning permit or conditional use permit are violated, the permit shall be
revoked by the Board of Appeals.
SEC. 13-2-37 BOARD OF APPEALS.
(a) APPOINTMENT. The Mayor shall appoint a Board of Appeals under Title 2, Chapter 4 of
this Code of Ordinances and Section 62.23(7)(e), Wis. Stats., consisting of five (5) members
subject to confirmation by the Common Council. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules for
the conduct of the business of the Board of Appeals as required by Section 62.23(7)(e)3,
Wis. Stats.
(b) POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board of Appeals shall:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or
administration of this Chapter.
(2) Hear and decide applications for conditional use permits under this Chapter.
(3) May authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of the
Ordinance as shall not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of this Chapter will result in unnecessary hardship.
In the issuance of a variance, the spirit of the Chapter shall be observed and
substantial justice done. No variance from the terms of this Chapter shall be granted
which is contrary to the public interest. A variance may be granted where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter would
result in unnecessary hardship. The granting of a variance shall not have the effect of
granting or extending any use of property which is prohibited in that zoning district
by this Chapter.
(c) APPEALS TO THE BOARD. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any
person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the community affected
by any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other
administrative official. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by
the rules of the Board, by filing with the official from whom the appeal is taken and with the
113094
1:4
Board of Appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons therefor. The Zoning
Administrator or other official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board all
the papers constituting the record on which the appeal action was taken.
(d) PUBLIC HEARINGS.
(1) Before making a decision on an appeal, the Board of Appeals shall, within a
reasonable period of time, hold a public hearing. The Board shall give public notice
of the hearing by publishing a Class 2 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., specifying
the date, time and place of the hearing and the matters to come before the Board. At
the public hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney and
present testimony.
(2) A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate
district office of the Department at least ten (10) days prior to all public hearings on
issues involving shoreland-wetland zoning.
(e) DECISIONS.
(1) The final disposition of an appeal, or application for a conditional use permit, to the
Board of Appeals shall be in the form of a written decision, made within a reasonable
time after the public hearing, signed by the Board chairperson. Such decision shall
state the specific facts which are the basis of the Board's determination and shall
either affirm, reverse or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or
persecution, or grant the application for a conditional use.
(2) A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the appropriate
district office of the Department within ten (10) days after the decision is issued.
SEC. 13-2-38 AMENDING SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING REGULATIONS.
The Common Council may, from time to time, alter, supplement or change the district boundaries
and the regulations contained in this Chapter in accordance with the requirements of Section
62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Stats., and the following:
(a) A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the appropriate
district office of the Department within five (5) days of the submission of the proposed
amendment to the City planning agency.
(b) All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland zoning regulations shall be
referred to the City Plan Commission, and a public hearing shall be held as required by
Section 62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Stats. The appropriate district office of the Department shall be
provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing.
(c) In order to insure that the shoreland protection objectives in Section 144.26, Wis. Stats., will
be accomplished by the amendment, the Common Council may not rezone a wetland in a
shoreland-wetland zoning district, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning may
result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the following:
(1) Storm and flood water storage capacity;
(2) Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland,
the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area or the flow of
groundwater through a wetland;
(3) Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that
would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
(4) Shoreline protection against soil erosion;
(5) Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
113094
1:5
(6) Wildlife habitat; or
(7) Areas of special recreational scenic or scientific interest, including scarce wetland
types and habitat of endangered species.
(d) Where the district office of the Department determines that a proposed rezoning may have a
significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in Subsection (c) of this Section, the
Department shall so notify the City of its determination either prior to or during the public
hearing held on the proposed amendment.
(e) The appropriate district office of the Department shall be provided with:
(1) A copy of the recommendations and report, if any, of the City Plan Commission on
the proposed text or map amendment within ten (10) days after the submission of
those recommendations to the Common Council; and
(2) Written notice of the Common Council's action on the proposed text or map
amendment within ten (10) days after the action is taken.
(f) If the Department notifies the City Plan Commission in writing that a proposed amendment
may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in Subsection (c) of this
Section, that proposed amendment, if approved by the Common Council, may not become
effective until more than thirty (30) days have elapsed since written notice of the Common
Council approval was mailed to the Department, as required by Subsection (e) of this
Section. If, within the thirty (30) day period, the Department notifies the Common Council
that the Department intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for
the City under Section 62.231(6), Wis. Stats., the proposed amendment may not become
effective until the ordinance adoption procedure under Section 62.231(6), Wis. Stats., is
completed or otherwise terminated.
SEC. 13-2-39 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
113094
1:1
ARTICLE E
Penalties; Definitions
SEC. 13-2-40 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
Any development, building or structure or accessory building or structure constructed, altered, added
to, modified, rebuilt or replaced, or any use or accessory use established after the effective date of
this Chapter in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, by any person, firm, association,
corporation (including building contractors or their agents) shall be deemed a violation. The Zoning
Administrator shall refer violations to the Common Council and the City Attorney who shall
prosecute such violations. Any person, firm, association or corporation who violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture as specified in Sec.
1-1-7, "General Penalties," of this Code of Ordinances, together with the taxable costs of such
action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this
Chapter is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and the maintenance thereof
may be abated by action at suit of the City, the State or any citizen thereof pursuant to Section
87.30(2), Wis. Stats.
SEC. 13-2-41 DEFINITIONS.
(a) For the purpose of administering and enforcing this Chapter, the terms or words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future; words in
the singular number include the plural number; words in the plural number include the
singular number. The word "shall" is mandatory, not permissive. All distances unless
otherwise specified shall be measured horizontally.
(b) The following terms used in this Chapter mean:
(1) Accessory Structure or Use. A detached subordinate structure or a use which is
clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with the principal structure
or use to which it is related and which is located on the same lot as that of the
principal structure or use.
(2) Boat house. As defined in Section 30.121(1), Wis. Stats., a permanent structure used
for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and includes all structures
which are totally enclosed, have roofs or walls or any combination of structural parts.
(3) Department. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(4) Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory
structures; the construction of additions or substantial alterations to buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the placement of buildings or structures; ditching,
lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and
the deposition or extraction of earthen materials.
(5) Drainage System. One (1) or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar devices
which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge.
(6) Environmental Control Facility. Any facility, temporary or permanent, which is
reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention, measurement, control
or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution,
radiation or other pollutants, including facilities installed principally to supplement
113094
1:2
or to replace existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting
acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced
by other pollution control facilities.
(7) Fixed Houseboat. As defined in Section 30.121(1), Wis. Stats., a structure not
actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary high-water mark of a
navigable waterway and is retained in place either by cables to the shoreline or by
anchors or spudpoles attached to the bed of the waterway.
(8) Navigable Waters. Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within
Wisconsin, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within the
territorial limits of this State, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters,
which are navigable under the laws of this State. Under Section 144.26(2)(d), Wis.
Stats., notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative rule promulgated
thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under Section 62.231, Wis. Stats., and
Chapter NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm drainage
ditches if:
a. Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river;
b. Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not
navigable streams before ditching; and
c. Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
(9) Ordinary High-Water Mark. The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a distinctive
mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristic.
(10) Planning Agency. The City Plan Commission created under Section 62.23(1), Wis.
Stats.
(11) Regional Flood. A flood determined to be representative or large floods known to
have generally occurred in Wisconsin and which may be expected to occur or be
exceeded on a particular stream because of like physical characteristics, once in
every one hundred (100) years.
(12) Shorelands. Lands within the following distances from the ordinary high-water mark
of navigable waters; one thousand (1,000) feet from a lake, pond or flowage; and
three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream or to the landward side of the
floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
(13) Shoreland-Wetland District. The zoning district, created in this shoreland-wetland
zoning ordinance, comprised of shorelands that are designated as wetlands on the
wetlands inventory maps which have been adopted and made a part of this Chapter
as described in Section 13-2-11 of this Chapter.
(14) Special Exception or Conditional Use. A use which is permitted by this Ordinance
provided that certain conditions specified in the Chapter are met and that a permit is
granted by the Board of Appeals or, where appropriate, the planning agency
designated by the Common Council.
(15) Unnecessary Hardship. That circumstance where special conditions, which were not
self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with the
restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily
burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purpose of this Ordinance.
(16) Variance. An authorization granted by the Board of Appeals to construct, alter or
use a building or structure in a manner that deviates from the dimensional standards
of this Chapter.
(17) Wetlands. Those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough
113094
1:3
to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet
conditions.
(18) Wetland Alteration. Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching, tiling,
excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and dam
construction in a wetland area.

































090214
14:1
CHAPTER 1
Subdivision Regulations
SEC. 14-1-1 INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE.
(a) INTRODUCTION. In accordance with the authority granted by Section 236.45 of the
Wisconsin Statutes and for the purposes listed in Sections 236.01 and 236.45 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, the Common Council of the City of Menasha does hereby ordain as
follows:
(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted to
promote the health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity and general welfare of the
City.
(2) This Chapter shall not repeal, impair of modify private covenants or public
ordinances, except that it shall apply whenever it imposes stricter restrictions on
land use.
(3) The effective date of this Chapter shall be January 3, 1989, having been adopted,
following public hearing, pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 66.035 and Chapter 236,
Wis. Stats.
(b) PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare. The regulations are designed to lessen congestion in the
streets; to foster the orderly layout and use of land; to insure safety from fire, flooding, panic
and other dangers; to provide optimum light and air; to discourage overcrowding of the
land; to lessen concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provision of
transportation, public water and sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public
necessities; and to facilitate the further division of large tracts of land into smaller parcels.
The regulations are made with the reasonable consideration of, but not limited to, the
present character of the City and its environs, with the objectives of conserving the value of
the land and improvements placed thereon, providing the most appropriate environment for
human habitation, encouraging commerce and industry and providing for the most
appropriate use of land in the City.
State Law Reference: Chapter 236, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 14-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
(a) The following definitions shall be applicable in this Chapter.
(1) Alley
(2)
. A public right-of-way which normally affords a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property.
Arterial Street
(3)
. A street which provides for the movement of relatively heavy traffic
to, from or within the City. It has a secondary function of providing access to
abutting land.
Block
(4)
. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by a
combination or combinations of streets, exterior boundary lines of the subdivision
and streams or water bodies.
City. The City of Menasha, Wisconsin.
090214
14:2
(5) Collector Street
(6)
. A street which collects and distributes internal traffic within an
urban area such as a residential neighborhood, between arterial and local streets. It
provides access to abutting property.
Commission
(7)
. The Plan Commission created by the Common Council pursuant to
Section 62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Comprehensive Development Plan
(8)
. A comprehensive plan prepared by the City
indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of
land use, places and structures, and for the general physical development of the City
and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to
such plan or parts thereof.
Cul-de-sac
(9)
. A short street having but one (1) end open to traffic and the other end
being permanently terminated in a vehicular turnaround.
Division of Land
(10)
. Where the title or any part thereof is transferred by the execution
of a land contract, an option to purchase, an offer to purchase and acceptance, a deed
or a certified survey, a division which creates an additional parcel and a division
occurs where any of the above transactions change the title from a joint tenancy to a
tenancy in common or from tenancy in common to joint tenancy.
Easement
(11)
. The area of land set aside or over or through which a liberty, privilege or
advantage in land, distinct from ownership of the land, is granted to the public or
some particular person or part of the public.
Extraterritorial Plat Approval Jurisdiction
(12)
. The unincorporated area within one and
one-half (1-1/2) miles of a fourth-class city or a village and within three (3) miles of
all other cities.
Final Plat
(13)
. The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of
subdivision is presented for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to
the County Register of Deeds. Said plat must conform to all State laws.
Frontage Street
(14)
. A minor street auxiliary to and located on the side of an arterial
street for control of access and for service to the abutting development.
Improvement, Public
(15)
. Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, open channel, water main,
roadway, park, parkway, public access, sidewalk, pedestrian way, planting strip or
other facility for which the City may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation.
Local Street
(16)
. A street of little or no continuity designed to provide access to
abutting property and leading into collector streets.
Lot
(17)
. A parcel of land having frontage on a public street or other officially approved
means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use
and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, yard, parking area
and other open space provisions of this Chapter and any applicable zoning
ordinance.
Lot, Area
(18)
. The area contained within the exterior boundaries of a lot excluding
streets, easements and land under navigable bodies of water.
Lot, Corner
(19)
. A lot abutting intersecting streets at their intersection.
Lot, Reversed Corner
(20)
. A corner lot which is oriented so that it has its rear lot line
coincident with or parallel to the side lot line of the interior lot immediately to its
rear.
Lot, Through
(21)
. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or less
parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot. On a "through lot," both street
lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
Lot Lines. The peripheral boundaries of a lot as defined herein.
090214
14:3
(22) Lot Width
(23)
. The width of a parcel of land measured along the front building line.
Major Thoroughfare
(24)
. A street used or intended to be used primarily for fast or
heavy through traffic. Major thoroughfares shall include freeways, expressways and
other highways and parkways, as well as arterial streets.
Marginal Access Street
(25)
. A street which is parallel to and adjacent to major
thoroughfares and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from
traffic on the major street.
Minor Street
(26)
. A street used, or intended to be used, primarily for access to abutting
properties.
Minor Subdivision
(27)
. The division of land by the owner or subdivider resulting in the
creation of not more than four (4) parcels or building sites.
Owner
(28)
. Includes the plural as well as the singular and may mean either a natural
person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public or quasi-public
corporation, or combination of these.
Pedestrian Pathway
(29)
. A public way, usually running at right angles to streets, which
is intended for the convenience of pedestrians only; it may also provide public rightof-
way for utilities.
Plat
(30)
. The map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plat of subdivision is
presented to the City for approval.
Preliminary Plat
(31)
. The preliminary plat map, drawing or chart indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Plan Commission/Council
for their consideration as to compliance with the Comprehensive Development Plan
and these regulations along with required supporting data.
Protective Covenants
(32)
. Contracts entered into between private parties which
constitute a restriction on the use of all private property within a subdivision for the
benefit of the property owners and to provide mutual protection against undesirable
aspects of development which would tend to impair stability of values.
Replat
(33)
. The process of changing, or a map or plat which changes, the boundaries of
a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of a large block, lot
or outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing exterior boundaries of
said block, lot or outlot is not a replat.
Shorelands
(34)
. Those lands within the following distances: one thousand (1,000) feet
from the high-water elevation of navigable lakes, ponds and flowages or three
hundred (300) feet from the high-water elevation of navigable streams or to the
landward side of the floodplain, whichever is greater.
Subdivider
(35)
. Any person, firm or corporation, or any agent thereof, dividing or
proposing to divide land resulting in a subdivision, minor subdivision or replat.
Subdivision
(36)
. The division of a lot, outlot, parcel, or tract of land by the owner
thereof or his agent for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building
development where the act of division creates five (5) or more parcels or building
sites of one and one-half (1-1/2) acres or less in area, or where the act of division
creates five (5) or more parcels or building sites by successive division within a
period of five (5) years, whether done by the original owner or a successor owner.
Wetlands
(37)
. Those lands which are partially or wholly covered by marshland flora
and generally covered with shallow standing water or lands which are wet and
spongy due to high-water table.
Wisconsin Administrative Code. The rules of administrative agencies having rulemaking
authority in Wisconsin, published in a loose-leaf, continual revision system,
as directed by Section 35.93 and Chapter 227 of the Wisconsin Statutes, including
090214
14:4
subsequent amendments to those rules.
SEC. 14-1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(a) COMPLIANCE. No person shall divide any land located within the jurisdictional limits
of these regulations which results in a subdivision, land division or a replat as defined
herein; no such subdivision, land division or replat shall be entitled to record; and no street
shall be laid out or improvements made to land without compliance with all requirements of
this Chapter and the following:
(1) The provisions of Ch. 236 and Sec. 80.08, Wis. Stats.
(2) The rules of the Division of Health contained in Wis. Adm. Code for Subdivisions
H 65 not served by public sewer.
(3) The rules of the Division of Highways, Wisconsin Department of Transportation
contained in Wis. Adm. Code for Subdivisions Highway 33, which abut a state
trunk highway or connecting street.
(4) The rules of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources contained in Wis.
Adm. Code for Floodplain Management Program.
(5) Comprehensive plans or components of such plans prepared by state, regional,
county or municipal agencies duly adopted by the Common Council.
(6) All applicable local and county regulations, including zoning, sanitary, building and
official mapping ordinances.
(b) JURISDICTION. Jurisdiction of these regulations shall include all lands within the
corporate limits of the City as well as the unincorporated area within one and one-half (1-
1/2) miles of the corporate limits as provided in Sec. 236.10 and 62.32, Wis. Stats. The
provisions of this Chapter, as they apply to divisions of tracts of land into less than five (5)
parcels, shall not apply to:
(1) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order;
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed ten (10) years, mortgages or easements;
(3) The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if
additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below
the minimum sizes required by this Chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances.
(c) CERTIFIED SURVEY. Any division of land other than a subdivision as defined in Sec.
236.02(8), Wis. Stats., shall be surveyed and a certified survey map prepared as provided in
Sec. 236.34, Wis. Stats.
(d) PERMITS. No building permit shall be issued by the City authorizing the building on or
improvement of any parcel of land not on record as of the effective date of this Chapter until
the provisions and requirements of this Chapter have been met.
(e) FEES. On or about November 1 of every year, the Plan Commission shall establish fees for
reviewing certified survey maps and plats and shall refer the same to the Common Council
for approval at its next regular meeting. Should the Common Council not object or modify
the fees in any manner, then said fees shall be the prevailing rate for the calendar year
November 1 to October 31.
090214
14:5
SEC. 14-1-4 PROCEDURE FOR SUBMITTING SUBDIVISIONS.
(a) PRELIMINARY MEETINGS. Before filing a preliminary plat, or certified survey, the
subdivider is encouraged to consult with the Plan Commission and/or its consulting staff for
advice regarding general subdivision requirements. The subdivider shall also submit a
location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to traffic arteries and
existing community facilities. This consultation is neither formal nor mandatory but is
intended to inform the subdivider of the purpose and objectives of these regulations, the
comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan components and duly adopted plan
implementation devices of the City and to otherwise assist the subdivider in planning his
development. In so doing, both the subdivider and planning agency may reach mutual
conclusions regarding the general program and objectives of the proposed development and
its possible effects on the neighborhood and community. The subdivider will gain a better
understanding of the subsequent required procedures.
(b) PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW WITHIN THE CITY.
(1) Submission
(2)
. Before submitting a Final Plat for approval, the subdivider shall
prepare a Preliminary Plat and a letter of application. The Preliminary Plat shall be
prepared in accordance with this Chapter, and the subdivider shall file an adequate
number of copies of the Plat and the application as required by this Section with the
City Clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting of the Plan Commission at
which action is desired. The City Clerk shall submit a copy of the preliminary plat
to the Plan Commission and to the City Engineer for review and written report of
his recommendations and reactions to the proposed plat.
Public Improvements, Plans and Specifications
(3)
. Simultaneously with the filing of
the preliminary plat of map, the owner shall file with the City Clerk five (5)
complete sets of preliminary plans and specifications for the construction of any
public improvements required by this Chapter.
Property Owners Association
(4)
. The Plan Commission may require submission of a
draft of the legal instruments and rules for proposed property owners associations
when the subdivider proposes that common property within a subdivision would be
either owned or maintained by such an organization of property owners.
Affidavit
(5)
. The surveyor preparing the preliminary plat shall certify on the face of
the plat that it is a correct representation of all existing land divisions and features
and that he has fully complied with the provisions of this Chapter.
Supplementary Data to be Filed with Preliminary Plat
a. A statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of residential buildings
with number of proposed dwelling units; types of business or industry so as
to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards and congestion
of population; and,
. The following shall also be
filed with the preliminary plat:
b. If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for the
areas, including dimensions; and,
c. Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is being
proposed for the subdivision, the Plan Commission may require that the
subdivider submit a preliminary plat of the remainder of the property so as to
show the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and future
subdivision. In any event, all subdivisions must be shown to relate well with
existing or potential adjacent subdivisions.
(6) Referral to Other Agencies. The City Clerk shall, within two (2) days after filing,
090214
14:6
transmit four (4) copies to the County Planning Agency, two (2) copies to the
Director of the Planning Function in the Wisconsin Department of Local Affairs and
Development, additional copies to the Director of the Planning Function for
retransmission of two (2) copies each to the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation if the subdivision abuts or adjoins a state trunk highway or a
connecting street, and the Wisconsin Department of Health and Social Services if
the subdivision is not served by the public sewer and provision for such service has
not been made, and an adequate number of copies to the Plan Commission. The
County Planning Agency, the Wisconsin Department of Local Affairs and
Development, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation and the Wisconsin
Department of Health and Social Services shall be hereinafter referred to as
objecting agencies.
(7) Drafting Standards
(c) PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL WITHIN THE CITY.
. The subdivider shall submit to the City Clerk and to those
agencies having the authority to object to plats under provisions in Chapter 236 of
the Wisconsin Statutes copies of a preliminary plat (or certified survey) based upon
an accurate exterior boundary survey by a registered land surveyor which shall show
clearly the proposed subdivision at a scale of not more than one (1) inch per one
hundred (100) feet having two (2) foot contour intervals, shall identify the
improvements (grading, tree planting, paving, installation of facilities and
dedications of land), easements which the subdivider proposes to make and shall
indicate by accompanying letter when the improvements will be provided. Any
proposed restrictive covenants for the land involved shall be submitted.
(1) After review of the preliminary plat or survey map and negotiations with the
subdivider on changes being advisable and the kind and extent of public
improvements which will be required, the Plan Commission shall reject or approve
conditionally the preliminary plat within twenty (20) days, as provided by statute.
(2) If the Plan Commission rejects the plat or map, it shall return it to the owner. If it
approves or conditionally approves the plat or map, it shall so notify the Common
Council.
(3) If the Plan Commission approves the preliminary plat, the Common Council shall,
within forty (40) days of the date the plat was filed with the City Clerk, approve,
approve conditionally or reject such plat and shall state, in writing, any conditions of
approval or reasons for rejection, unless the time is extended by agreement by the
subdivider. Failure of the Common Council to act within forty (40) days or
extension thereof shall constitute an approval of the preliminary plat, unless other
authorized agencies object to the plat. The City Clerk shall communicate to the
subdivider the action of the Common Council. If the plat or map is approved, the
City Clerk shall endorse it for the Common Council.
(4) Approval or conditional approval of a Preliminary Plat shall not constitute
automatic approval of the Final Plat, except that if the Final Plat is submitted within
six (6) months of preliminary plat approval and conforms substantially to the
preliminary plat layout as indicated in Section 236.11(1)(b) of the Wisconsin
Statutes, the Final Plat shall be entitled to approval with respect to such layout. The
Preliminary Plat shall be deemed an expression of approval or conditional approval
of the layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of the Final Plat which will be
subject to further consideration by the Plan Commission at the time of its
submission.
(5) Should the subdivider desire to amend the preliminary plat as approved, he may
090214
14:7
resubmit the amended plat which shall follow the same procedure, except for the
hearing and fee, unless the amendment is, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, of
such scope as to constitute a new plat, in which such case it shall be refiled.
(d) FINAL PLAT REVIEW.
(1) The subdivider shall prepare a Final Plat and a letter of application in accordance
with this Chapter and shall file copies of the Plat and the application with the City
Clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting of the Plan Commission at which
action is desired. The owner or subdivider shall file six (6) copies of the final plat
not later than twelve (12) months after the date of approval of the preliminary plat;
otherwise, the preliminary plat and final plat will be considered void unless an
extension is requested in writing by the subdivider and for good cause granted by
the City. The owner or subdivider shall also submit at this time a current certified
abstract of title or registered property report and such other evidence as the City
Attorney may require showing title or control in the applicant.
(2) The City Clerk shall, within two (2) days after filing, transmit four (4) copies to the
County Planning Agency, two (2) copies to the Director of the Planning Function in
the Wisconsin Department of Local Affairs and Development, additional copies to
the Director of the Planning Function for retransmission of two (2) copies each to
the Wisconsin Department of Transportation if the subdivision abuts or adjoins a
state trunk highway or a connecting street, and the Wisconsin Department of Health
and Social Services if the subdivision is not served by a public sewer and provision
for service has not been made, and the original Final Plat and adequate copies to the
Commission. The County Planning Agency, the Wisconsin Department of Local
Affairs and Development, the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, and the
Wisconsin Department of Health and Social Services shall be hereinafter referred to
as objecting agencies.
(3) The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and to the
requirements of all applicable ordinances and state laws and shall be submitted for
certification of those agencies having the authority to object to the plat as provided
by Section 236.12(2).
(4) Simultaneously with the filing of the final plat or map, the owner shall file with the
City Clerk six (6) copies of the final plans and specifications of public
improvements required by this Chapter.
(5) The City Clerk shall refer two (2) copies of the final plat to the Plan Commission,
one (1) copy to the Engineer, and a copy each to the telephone and power and other
utility companies. The abstract of title or registered property report shall be referred
to the attorney for his examination and report. The City Clerk shall also refer the
final plans and specifications of public improvements to the City Engineer for
review. The recommendations of the Plan Commission and City Engineer shall be
made within thirty (30) days of the filing of the final plat. The City Engineer shall
examine the plat or map and final plans and specifications of public improvements
for technical details and, if he finds them satisfactory, shall so certify in writing to
the Plan Commission. If the plat or map or the plans and specifications are not
satisfactory, the City Engineer shall return them to the owner and so advise the Plan
Commission.
(6) The Commission shall examine the Final Plat as to its conformance with the
approved Preliminary Plat, any conditions of approval of the Preliminary Plat, this
Chapter and all ordinances, rules, regulations, comprehensive plans and
comprehensive plan components which may affect it and shall recommend
090214
14:8
approval, conditional approval or rejection of the Plat to the Common Council.
(e) PARTIAL PLATTING. The Final Plat may, if permitted by the Commission, constitute
only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the subdivider proposes to record
at the time.
(f) FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
(1) The objecting agencies shall, within twenty (20) days of the date of receiving their
copies of the Final Plat, notify the subdivider and all other approving and objecting
agencies of any objections. If there are not objections, they shall so certify on the
face of the copy of the Plat and shall return that copy to the Plan Commission. If an
objecting agency fails to act within twenty (20) days, it shall be deemed to have no
objection to the Plat.
(2) If the Final Plat is not submitted within twelve (12) months of the last-required
approval of the Preliminary Plat, the Common Council may refuse to approve the
Final Plat.
(3) The Commission shall, within thirty (30) days of the date of filing of the Final Plat
with the City Clerk, recommend approval, conditional approval or rejection of the
Plat and shall transmit the Final Plat and application along with its
recommendations to the Common Council.
(4) The Commission shall, when it determines to recommend approval of a Plat, give at
least ten (10) days prior written notice of its intention to the City Clerk of any
municipality within one thousand (1,000) feet of the Plat.
(5) The Common Council shall, within sixty (60) days of the date of filing the original
Final Plat with the City Clerk, approve or reject such Plat unless the time is
extended by agreement with the subdivider. If the Plat is rejected, the reasons shall
be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement of the reasons
forwarded to the subdivider. The Common Council may not inscribe its approval
on the Final Plat unless City Clerk certifies on the fact of the Plat that the copies
were forwarded to objecting agencies as required herein, the date thereof and that no
objections have been filed within twenty (20) days or, if filed, have been met.
(6) Failure of the Common Council to act within sixty (60) days, the time having not
been extended and no unsatisfied objections having been filed, the plat shall be
deemed approved.
(7) After the Final Plat has been approved by the Common Council and required
improvements either installed or a contract and sureties insuring their installation is
filed, the City Clerk shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the Plat attesting to
such approval to be duly executed and the Plat returned to the subdivider for
recording with the County Register of Deeds. The Register of Deeds cannot record
the Plat unless it is offered within thirty (30) days from the date of last approval.
(8) The subdivider shall file ten (10) copies of the Final Plat with the City Clerk for
distribution to the approving agencies and other affected agencies for their files.
(g) ENGINEERING FEE. The City may require the subdivider to pay a fee equal to the
actual cost to the City for all engineering work incurred by the City in connection with the
plat or certified survey map.
(h) ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. The subdivider shall pay an administrative review fee as
established by the Common Council.
SEC. 14-1-5 TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PRELIMINARY PLATS.
090214
14:9
(a) GENERAL. A preliminary plat shall be required for all subdivisions and shall be based
upon a survey by a registered land surveyor and the plat prepared on tracing cloth or paper
of good quality at a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch and shall show
correctly on its face the following information:
(1) Title
(2)
under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded.
Location
(3)
of the proposed subdivision by government lot, quarter section, township,
range, county and state.
Date, Scale and North Point
(4)
.
Names and Addresses
(5)
of the owner, subdivider and land surveyor preparing the plat.
Entire Area
(b) PLAT DATA. All preliminary plats shall show the following:
contiguous to the proposed plat owned or controlled by the subdivider
shall be included on the preliminary plat even though only a portion of said area is
proposed for immediate development. The Plan Commission or Common Council
may waive this requirement where it is unnecessary to fulfill the purposes and intent
of this Chapter and undue hardship would result from strict application thereof.
(1) Exact Length and Bearing
(2)
of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision
referenced to a corner established in the U.S. Public Land Survey and the total
acreage encompassed thereby.
Locations of all Existing Property Boundary Lines
(3)
, structures, drives, streams and
water courses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, railroad tracks and other
significant features within the tract being subdivided or immediately adjacent
thereto.
Location, Right-of-Way Width and Names
(4)
of all existing streets, alleys or other
public ways, easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way and all section and quarter
section lines within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent
thereto.
Location and Names of any Adjacent Subdivisions
(5)
, parks and cemeteries and
owners of record of abutting unplated lands.
Type, Width and Elevation
(6)
of any existing street pavements within the exterior
boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto, together with any legally
established centerline elevations.
Location, Size and Invert Elevation
(7)
of any existing sanitary or storm sewers,
culverts and drain pipes, the location of manholes, catchbasins, hydrants, electric
and communication facilities, whether overhead or underground, and the location
and size of any existing water and gas mains within the exterior boundaries of the
plat or immediately adjacent thereto. If no sewers or water mains are located on or
immediately adjacent to the tract, the nearest such sewers or water mains which
might be extended to serve the tract shall be indicated by the direction and distance
from the tract, size and invert elevations.
Corporate Limit Lines
(8)
within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately
adjacent thereto.
Existing Zoning
(9)
on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
Contours within the exterior boundaries of the plat and extending to the centerline
of adjacent public streets to National Map Accuracy Standards based upon Mean
Seal Level Datum at vertical intervals of not more than two (2) feet. At least two (2)
permanent bench marks shall be located in the immediate vicinity of the plat; the
location of the bench marks shall be indicated on the plat, together with their
elevations referenced to Mean Sea Level Datum and the monumentation of the
bench marks clearly and completely described. Where, in the judgment of the
090214
14:10
Commission, undue hardship would result because of the remoteness of the parcel
from a mean sea level reference elevation, another datum may be used.
(10) High-Water Elevation
(11)
of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages and wetlands within the
exterior boundaries of the plat or located within one hundred (100) feet therefrom.
Water Elevation
(12)
of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages and wetlands within the
exterior boundaries of the plat or located within one hundred (100) feet therefrom at
the date of the survey.
Floodland and Shoreland Boundaries
(13)
and the contour line lying a vertical distance of
two (2) feet above the elevation of the one hundred (100) year recurrence interval
flood or, where such data is not available, two (2) feet above the elevation of the
maximum flood of record within the exterior boundaries of the plat or within one
hundred (100) feet therefrom.
Soil Types
(14)
and their boundaries, as shown on the operational soil survey maps
prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
Location and Results of Soil Boring Tests
(15)
within the exterior boundaries of the plat
conducted in accordance with Section H 65.06 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code and delineation of areas with three (3) foot and six (6) foot groundwater and
bedrock levels where the subdivision will not be served by public sanitary sewer
service.
Location and Results of Percolation Tests
(16)
within the exterior boundaries of the plat
conducted in accordance with Section H 65.06 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code where the subdivision will not be served by public sanitary sewer service.
Location, Width and Names
(17)
of all proposed streets and public rights-of-way such as
alleys and easements.
Approximate Dimensions of All Lots
(18)
together with proposed lot and block numbers.
Location and Approximate Dimensions
(19)
of any sites to be reserved or dedicated for
parks, playgrounds, drainageways or other public use or which are to be used for
group housing, shopping centers, church sites or other non-public uses not requiring
lotting.
Approximate Radii of all Curves
(20)
.
Any Proposed Lake and Stream Access
(21)
with a small drawing clearly indicating the
location of the proposed subdivision in relation to access.
Any Proposed Lake and Stream
(22)
improvement or relocation, and notice of
application for approval by the Division of Environmental Protection, Department
of Natural Resources, when applicable.
Where the Commission
(c) SUBMISSION. The subdivider shall first consult with the Plan Commission regarding the
requirements for minor sub-divisional certified surveys before submission of the final map.
Following consultation, a copy of the final map in the form of a certified survey map shall
be submitted to the City. The certified survey shall be reviewed, approved or disapproved
by the Plan Commission pursuant to the procedures used for preliminary plats.
finds that it requires additional information relative to a
particular problem presented by a proposed development in order to review the
preliminary plat, it shall have the authority to request in writing such information
from the subdivider.
(d) PROPOSED LAYOUT. The Plan Commission may require a proposed subdivision
layout of all or part of the contiguously owned land even though division is not planned at
the time.
(e) ADDITIONAL INFORMATION. The Plan Commission may require a proposed
subdivision layout of all or part of the contiguously owned land even though division is not
090214
14:11
planned at the time.
(f) CERTIFIED SURVEY.
(1) The subdivider shall cause a certified survey map to be prepared in accordance with
Section 14-1-9 of this Chapter and submit ten (10) copies along with the individual
lot percolation tests and soil borings (for lots not served by public sewer) to the City
Clerk. The map shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission for conformance with
this Chapter and all ordinances, rules, regulations, comprehensive plans and
comprehensive plan components which affect it. The Commission shall approve,
approve conditionally or reject such map within sixty (60) days from the date of
filing of the map unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If
the map is rejected, the reason shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a
written statement forwarded to the subdivider.
(2) If the Plan Commission approves the certified survey, the Common Council shall,
within thirty (30) days of the recommendation, approve conditionally or reject the
map and shall notify the subdivider of its decision.
(g) REQUIREMENTS. To the extent reasonable practicable, the certified survey/minor
subdivision plat shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter relating to general
requirements, design standards and required improvements. Conveyance by metes and
bounds shall be prohibited where the lot(s) involved is less than one and one-half (1-1/2)
acres or three hundred (300) feet in width.
SEC. 14-1-6 REPLAT.
(a) When it is proposed to replat a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, so as to change the
boundaries of a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, the subdivider or person wishing to
replat shall vacate or alter the recorded Plat as provided in Sections 236.40 through 236.44
of the Wisconsin Statutes. The subdivider, or person wishing to replat, shall then proceed
as specified in Subsections (a) through (f) of Section 14-1-4.
(b) The City Clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the Plan Commission when a
Preliminary Plat of a replat of lands within the City is filed, and shall cause notices of the
proposed Replat and public hearing to be mailed to the owners of all properties within the
limits of the exterior boundaries of the proposed Replat and to the owners of all properties
within two hundred (200) feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed Replat.
SEC. 14-1-7 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
(a) CERTIFIED SURVEY REQUIRED. When it is proposed to divide land into two (2)
parcels or building sites, any one (1) of which is less than five (5) acres, or when it is
proposed to divide a block, lot or outlot into not more than four (4) parcels or building sites
within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior boundaries of the block, lot
or outlot, the subdivider shall subdivide by use of a certified survey map, prepared in
accordance with Section 236.34, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 14-1-8 DESIGN STANDARDS--STREETS.
(a) COMPLIANCE WITH STATUTES. In laying out a subdivision, the owner shall
090214
14:12
conform to the provisions of Chapter 236, Wis. Stats., and all applicable code sections. In
all cases where the requirements of this Chapter are different from the requirements of
Chapter 236, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
(b) DEDICATION. The subdivider shall dedicate land and improve streets as provided in this
Chapter. Streets shall be located with due regard for topographical conditions, natural
features, existing and proposed streets, utilities and land uses and public convenience and
safety. Streets shall conform to the official map of the City.
(c) SUFFICIENT FRONTAGE. All lots shall have sufficient frontage on a public street to
allow access by emergency and service motor vehicles.
(d) COMPLIANCE WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The arrangement, character,
extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the City's Comprehensive
Development Plan and to this Chapter and shall be considered in their relation to existing
and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographical conditions, to runoff
of storm water, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. The arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions shall make provision for the appropriate continuation at the same width of the
existing streets in adjoining areas.
(e) AREAS NOT COVERED BY OFFICIAL MAP. In areas not covered by the
Comprehensive Plan, the layout of streets shall conform to the plan for the most
advantageous development of adjoining areas of the neighborhood. Streets shall be
designed and located in relation to existing and officially planned streets, topography and
natural terrain, streams and lakes and existing tree growth, public convenience and safety,
and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets.
(f) STREET CLASSIFICATIONS. Streets shall be classified as indicated below.
(1) Arterial Streets
(2)
. Arterial streets shall be arranged to provide through traffic for a
heavy volume of vehicles.
Collector Streets
(3)
. Collector streets shall be arranged so as to provide ready
collection of traffic from residential areas and conveyance of this traffic to the major
street and highway system and shall be properly related to special traffic generators
such as schools, churches and shopping centers and other concentrations of
population and to the major streets into which they feed.
Minor Streets
(4)
. Minor streets shall be arranged to conform to the topography, to
discourage use by through traffic, to permit the design of efficient storm and sanitary
sewerage system and to require the minimum street area necessary to provide safe
and convenient access to abutting property.
Proposed Streets
(5)
. Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract
being subdivided unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or
unless, in the opinion of the Common Council, such extension is not necessary or
desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision or land division or for
the advantageous development of the adjacent tracts.
Reserve Strips
(6)
. Reserve strips shall not be provided on any plat to control access to
streets or alleys, except where control of such strips is placed with the City under
conditions approved by the Common Council.
Alleys
(g) EXTRATERRITORIAL STREETS. Streets located in the extraterritorial plat
jurisdiction of the City of Menasha must also comply with the minimum town road
. Alleys may be provided in commercial and industrial districts for off-street
loading and service access, but shall not be approved in non-multiple family
residential districts. Dead-end alleys shall not be approved and alleys shall not
connect to a major thoroughfare.
090214
14:13
standards of Section 86.26, Wis. Stats.
(h) CONTINUATION. Streets shall be laid out to provide for possible continuation wherever
topographic and other physical conditions permit. Provision shall be made so that all
proposed streets shall have a direct connection with, or be continuous and in line with,
existing, planned or platted streets with which they are to connect. Proposed streets shall be
extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography
or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Plan Commission such
extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision
with existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. Deadend
streets not over five hundred (500) feet in length will be approved when necessitated by
the topography.
(i) MINOR STREETS. Minor streets shall be so laid out so as to discourage their use by
through traffic.
(j) NUMBER OF INTERSECTIONS. The number of intersections of minor streets with
major streets shall be reduced to the practical minimum consistent with circulation needs
and safety requirements.
(k) FRONTAGE ROADS. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial highway, the Common Council may require a frontage road, nonaccess reservation
along the rear of the property contiguous to such highway, or such other treatment as may
be necessary to ensure safe, efficient traffic flow and adequate protection of residential
properties.
(l) ARTERIAL STREET AND HIGHWAY PROTECTION. Whenever the proposed
subdivision contains or is adjacent to a major street or highway, adequate protection of
residential properties, limitation of access and separation of through and local traffic shall
be provided by reverse frontage, with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation
along the rear property line, or by the use of frontage streets.
(m) VISIBILITY. Streets shall afford maximum visibility and safety and shall intersect at right
angles where practicable.
(n) TANGENTS. A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be required between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
(o) STREET GRADES.
(1) Unless necessitated by exceptional topography subject to the approval of the
Commission, the maximum centerline grade of any street or public way shall not
exceed the following:
Arterial streets: six percent (6%).
Collector streets: eight percent (8%)
Minor streets, alleys and frontage streets: ten percent (10%).
Pedestrian ways: twelve percent (12%) unless steps of acceptable design are
provided.
The grade of any street shall in no case exceed twelve percent (12%) or be
less than one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%).
(2) Street grades shall be established wherever practicable so as to avoid excessive
grading, the promiscuous removal of ground cover and tree growth, and general
leveling of the topography. All changes in street grades shall be connected by
vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent in feet to fifteen (15) times the
algebraic difference in the rates of grade for major streets and one-half (1/2) this
minimum for all other streets.
(p) RADII OF CURVATURE. When a continuous street centerline deflects at any one (1)
point by more than ten (10) degrees, a circular curve shall be introduced having a radius of
090214
14:14
curvature on said centerline of not less than the following:
Arterial streets and highways: five hundred (500) feet.
Collector streets: three hundred (300) feet.
Minor streets: one hundred (100) feet.
(q) VERTICAL CURVES. All changes in street grades shall be connected by vertical curves
of a minimum length in feet equivalent to thirty (30) times the algebraic difference in grade
for major thoroughfares and twenty (20) times this algebraic difference for all other streets.
(r) HALF STREETS. Where a half street is adjacent to the subdivision, the other half street
shall be dedicated by the subdivider.
(s) INTERSECTIONS.
(1) Property lines at street intersections of major thoroughfares shall be rounded with a
radius of fifteen (15) feet or of a greater radius where the Plan Commission
considers it necessary.
(2) Provisions of the Zoning Code with respect to Traffic Visibility at street
intersections shall also apply here.
(3) Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly right angles as topography and other
limiting factors of good design permit.
(4) Number of streets converging at one (1) intersection shall be reduced to a minimum,
preferably not more than two (2).
(t) ALLEYS.
(1) Alleys shall be provided in all commercial and industrial districts, except that the
Common Council, upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission, may waive
this requirement where other definite and assured provisions are made for service
access, such as off-street loading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the
uses proposed. No alleys shall connect with a major thoroughfare. Alleys in
residential areas other than those zoned for multiple-family use shall not be
permitted. The width of alleys shall be no less than twenty-four (24) feet.
(2) Dead-end alleys are prohibited.
(u) STREET NAMES. New street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets, but
streets that are continuations of others already in existence and named shall bear the names
of the existing streets. Street names shall be subject to approval by the Plan Commission
and Common Council.
(v) STREET DESIGN STANDARDS.
(1) Standards
(2)
. The minimum right-of-way and roadway width of all proposed streets
and alleys shall be as specified in "Minimum Roadway Design Standards," available
from the Director of Public Works.
Cul-de-sacs
(3)
. Cul-de-sac streets designed to have one (1) end permanently closed
shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length. All cul-de-sac streets designed to
have one (1) end permanently closed shall terminate in a circular turnaround having
a minimum right-of-way radius of sixty (60) feet and a minimum inside curb radius
of forty (40) feet.
Temporary Dead-ends or Cul-de-sacs
(w) LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY AND RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY
TREATMENT. Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a limited
access highway or railroad right-of-way, the design shall provide the following treatment:
. All temporary dead-ends shall have a
maximum length of eight hundred (800) feet and a temporary cul-de-sac shall have a
minimum right-of-way radius of sixty (60) feet and a minimum inside curb radius of
forty (40) feet.
(1) Subdivision Lots. When lots within the proposed subdivision back upon the right090214
14:15
of-way of an existing or proposed limited access highway or a railroad, a planting
strip at least thirty (30) feet in depth shall be provided adjacent to the highway or
railroad in addition to the normal lot depth. This strip shall be part of the platted
lots but shall have the following restriction lettered on the face of the plat: "This
strip reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs, the building of structures hereon
prohibited."
(2) Commercial and Industrial Districts
(3)
. Commercial and industrial districts shall have
provided, on each side of the limited access highway or railroad, streets
approximately parallel to and at a suitable distance from such highway or railroad
for the appropriate use of the land between such streets and highway or railroad, but
not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
Streets Parallel to a Limited Access Highway
(4)
. Streets parallel to a limited access
highway or railroad right-of-way, when intersecting a major street and highway or
collector street which crosses said railroad or highway, shall be located at a
minimum distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet from said highway or railroad
right-of-way. Such distance, where desirable and practicable, shall be determined
with due consideration of the minimum distance required for the future separation of
grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
Minor Streets. Minor streets immediately adjacent and parallel to railroad rights-ofway
shall be avoided, and location of minor streets immediately adjacent to arterial
streets and highways and to railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided in residential
areas.
SEC. 14-1-9 DESIGN STANDARDS--BLOCK DESIGN.
(a) LENGTH; ARRANGEMENT. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be
appropriate for the topography and the type of development contemplated, but block length
in residential areas shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet nor have less
than sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth between street
lines. As a general rule, blocks shall not be less than five hundred (500) feet in length.
Blocks shall be so designated as to provide two (2) tiers of lots, unless it adjoins a railroad,
major thoroughfare, river or park where it may have a single tier of lots.
(b) PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYS. Pedestrian pathways, not less than twelve (12) feet wide,
may be required by the Common Council, upon the recommendation of the Plan
Commission, through the center of a block more than nine hundred (900) feet long, where
deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation and other community facilities.
(c) TREES. The Common Council may require that trees be planted on both sides of all
streets. Street trees (when planted within the right-of-way) shall not be less than sixty (60)
feet apart with a minimum of one (1) per lot. Trees on private property should be placed six
(6) or more feet inside the property line. The minimum size and type of any trees to be
planted shall conform to the provisions of applicable ordinances.
SEC. 14-1-10 DESIGN STANDARDS--LOTS.
(a) Size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of topography of the
subdivision and for the type of development contemplated, provided that no lot shall be
090214
14:16
smaller in area than the minimum lot size for the appropriate zone as established by the
Zoning Code.
(b) Lot dimensions and setbacks shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Code for the
appropriate district in which the property is located.
(c) Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial purposes
shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the
type of use and development contemplated, as required by the Zoning Code.
(d) Residential lots fronting on major streets and highways shall be platted with extra depth or
design or alleviate the effect of major street traffic on residential occupancy.
(e) Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit building setback from both
streets, as required by the Zoning Code.
(f) Every lot shall abut or face a public street. Lots outside the corporate limits may abut or
face a private street, if permitted by the Common Council.
(g) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to or radial to abutting street lines.
(h) In case a tract is divided into parcels of more than one and one-half (1-1/2) acres in areas,
such parcels shall be so arranged to permit redividing into parcels in accordance with this
Chapter and with the Zoning Code.
(i) Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to
provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation.
(j) In the subdividing of any land, regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree
growth, water courses, historic spots or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.
(k) All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a larger tract must
be added to adjacent lots, or a plan shown as to future use rather than allowed to remain as
unusable parcels.
(l) In the case where a proposed plat is adjacent to a limited access highway, other major
highway or thoroughfare, there shall be no direct vehicular access from individual lots to
such streets and roads. In the platting of small tracts of land fronting on limited access
highways or thoroughfares where there is no other alternative, a temporary entrance may be
granted; as neighboring land becomes subdivided and more preferable access arrangements
become possible, such temporary access permits shall become void.
090214
14:17
SEC. 14-1-11 DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
(a) DRAINAGE SYSTEM REQUIRED. A drainage system shall be designed and
constructed by the subdivider to provide for the proper drainage of the surface water of the
subdivision and the drainage area of which it is a part. A final plat shall not be approved
until the subdivider shall submit plans, profiles and specifications as specified in this
Section, which have been prepared by a registered professional engineer and approved by
the City Engineer.
(b) DRAINAGE SYSTEM PLANS.
(1) The subdivider shall submit to the City Engineer and Plan Commission a report on
the ability of existing watercourse channels, storm sewers, culverts and other
improvements pertaining to drainage or flood control within the subdivision to
handle the additional runoff which would be generated by the development of the
land within the subdivision. Additional information shall be submitted to
adequately indicate that provision has been made for disposal of surface water
without any damage to the developed or undeveloped land downstream or below the
proposed subdivision. The report shall also include:
a. Estimates of the quantity of storm water entering the subdivision naturally
from areas outside the subdivision.
b. Quantities of flow at each inlet or culvert.
c. Location, sizes and grades of required culverts, storm drainage sewers and
other required appurtenances.
(2) A grading plan for the streets, blocks and lots shall be submitted by the subdivider
for the area within the subdivision.
(3) The design criteria for storm drainage systems shall be based upon information
provided by the City Engineer, which includes but is not limited to the following:
open channel drainage ways with design flows exceeding 25cfs for a 10 year
recurrence storm event require special consideration for an increased easement
width to ensure adequate building setback from high water flows.
(4) Material and construction specifications for all drainage projects (i.e., pipe, culverts,
seed, sod, etc.) shall be in compliance with specifications provided by the Common
Council or City Engineer.
(c) GRADING. The subdivider shall grade each subdivision in order to establish street, block
and lot grades in proper relation to each other and to topography as follows:
(1) The subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way of all proposed streets
in accordance with the approved plans.
(2) Block grading shall be completed by one (1) or more of the following methods:
a. A ridge may be constructed along the rear lot lines which provides for
drainage onto the streets.
b. Parts of all lots may be graded to provide for drainage to the street or to a
ditch along the rear lot line.
c. Draining across rear or side lot lines may be permitted provided that
drainage onto adjoining properties is skillfully controlled.
(d) DRAINAGE SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS. The subdivider shall install all the storm
drainage facilities indicated on the plans required in Subsection (a) of this Section.
(1) Street Drainage. All streets shall be provided with an adequate storm drainage
system. The street storm system shall serve as the primary drainage system and
shall be designed to carry street, adjacent land and building storm water drainage.
No storm water shall be permitted to be run into the sanitary sewer system within
090214
14:18
the proposed subdivision.
(2) Off-Street Drainage
(e) PROTECTION OF DRAINAGE SYSTEMS. The subdivider shall adequately protect all
ditches to the satisfaction of the Common Council and the City Engineer. Ditches and open
channels shall be seeded, sodded or paved depending upon grades and soil types.
(Generally ditches or channels with grades up to one percent [1%] shall be seeded; those
with grades up to four percent [4%] shall be sodded and those with grades over four percent
[4%] shall be paved.)
. The design of the off-street drainage system shall include the
watershed affecting the subdivision and shall be extended to a watercourse or ditch
adequate to receive the storm drainage. When the drainage system is outside of the
street right-of-way, the subdivider shall make provisions for dedicating an easement
of the City to provide for the future maintenance of said system. Easements shall be
a minimum of twenty (20) feet, but the City may require larger easements if more
area is needed due to topography, size of watercourse, etc.
SEC. 14-1-12 EXTRA-SIZE OR OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS.
(a) DESIGN CAPACITY. All improvements shall be installed to satisfy the service
requirements for the service or drainage area in which the subdivision is located and the
improvements shall be of sufficient capacity to handle the expected development of the
overall service or drainage area involved.
(b) OFF-SITE EXTENSIONS. When streets or utilities are not available at the boundary of
the proposed subdivision, the City, or its duly authorized representative, shall require, as a
prerequisite to approval of a final plat, assurances that such improvement extensions shall
be provided as follows:
(1) Extensions of utilities onto the property involved shall be adequate to serve the total
development requirements of the service or drainage area. Utilities leaving the
property shall be constructed in such a manner as to make their extension practical
for servicing the adjacent areas of the service or drainage area.
(2) If the City, or its duly authorized representative, find that extensions across
undeveloped areas would not be warranted as a special assessment to the
intervening properties or as a governmental expense until some future time, the
developer shall be required, if he wishes to proceed with the development, to obtain
necessary easements or rights-of-way and construct and pay for such extensions.
Such improvements shall be available for connections by subdividers of adjoining
land and the subdivider may contract with adjacent property owners and/or
subdividers of adjacent land for reimbursement of the oversize and/or off-site
improvements constructed.
(c) LIFT STATIONS. Where sanitary sewer lift stations and force mains are required to lift
sewage to the gravity system, the subdivider shall have plans, profiles and specifications
prepared for the installation of such facilities. The installation, inspection, supervision and
engineering fees for lift stations and/or force mains shall be paid for by the subdivider
unless otherwise determined and agreed upon by the Common Council.
SEC. 14-1-13 NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
(a) GENERAL.
090214
14:19
(1) If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial
purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect to such land shall make such
provisions as the City may require.
(2) A non-residential subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site
plan approval set forth in the Zoning Code. A non-residential subdivision shall be
subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well as such additional
standards required by the City and shall conform to the proposed land use standards
established by the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map and Zoning Ordinance.
(b) STANDARDS. In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations, which are
appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the City that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically
adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The
following principles and standards shall be observed:
(1) Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of
industrial development anticipated.
(2) Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and
volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon.
(3) Special requirements may be imposed by the City with respect to street, curb, gutter
and sidewalk design and construction.
(4) Special requirements may be imposed by the City with respect to the installation of
public utilities, including water, sewer and storm water drainage.
(5) Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential
nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the
provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential
development and provisions for permanently landscaped buffer strips when
necessary.
(6) Streets carrying non-residential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be
extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas.
SEC. 14-1-14 REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS.
(a) GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. The following required improvements shall be installed
in accordance with the engineering standards and specifications which have been adopted
by the Common Council and filed with the Director of Public Works. Where standards and
specifications have not been adopted, the improvements shall be made in accordance with
good engineering practices.
(b) GUARANTEE FOR INSTALLATION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
(1) Payment for Installation of Improvements. The required improvements to be
furnished and installed by the subdivider, which are listed and described in this
Chapter, are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the subdivider;
provided, however, that in the case of an improvement, the cost of which would be
general policy be assessed only in part to the improved property and the remaining
cost paid out of general tax levy, provision may be made for payment of a portion of
the cost by the subdivider and the remaining portion of the cost by the City. If any
improvement installed within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to land
beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, provision may be made for causing a
portion of the cost of the improvement, representing the benefit to such land, to be
090214
14:20
assessed against the same and in such case the subdivider will be required only to
pay for such portion of the whole cost of said improvement as will represent the
benefit to the property within the subdivision.
(2) Required Agreement Providing for Proper Installation of Improvements
a. Prior to installation of any required improvements and prior to approval of
the final plat, the subdivider shall enter into a written contract with the City
requiring the subdivider to furnish and construct said improvements at his
sole cost and in accordance with plans and specifications and usual contract
conditions, which shall include provision for supervision of details of
construction by the City Engineer and grant to the Engineer authority to
correlate the work to be done under said contract by any subcontractors
authorized to proceed thereunder and with any other work being done or
contracted by the City in the vicinity.
.
b. The agreement shall require the subdivider to make an escrow deposit or in
lieu thereof to furnish a performance bond, the amount of the deposit and the
penal amount of the bond to be equal to one and one quarter (1-1/4) times
the Engineer's estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be furnished
under the contract, including the cost of inspection.
c. On request of the subdivider, the contract may provide for completion of
part or all of the improvements covered thereby prior to acceptance of the
plat, and in such event the amount of the deposit or bond shall be reduced in
a sum equal to the estimated cost of the improvements so completed prior to
acceptance of the plat only. If the required improvements are not complete
within the specified period, all amounts held under performance bond shall
be turned over and delivered to the City and applied to the cost of the
required improvements. Any balance remaining after such improvements
have been made shall be returned to the owner or subdivider. The Common
Council, at its option, may extend the bond period for an additional period
not to exceed two (2) years.
d. The time for completion of the work and the several parts thereof shall be
determined by the Common Council upon recommendation of the Engineer
after consultation with the subdivider.
e. The subdivider shall pay the City for all costs incurred by the City for review
and inspection of the subdivision. This would include preparation and
review of plans and specifications by the Engineer, Planner and Attorney, as
well as other costs of a similar nature.
(c) PROCEDURE.
(1) Construction Plans and Specifications
a.
. Construction plans for the required
improvements conforming in all respects with the standards of the City Engineer
and the ordinances of the City shall be prepared at the subdivider's expense by
professional engineer who is registered in the State of Wisconsin, and said plans
shall contain his seal. Such plans, together with the quantities of construction items,
shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his approval and for his estimate of the
total cost of the required improvements; upon approval they shall become a part of
the contract required. Simultaneously with the filing of the preliminary plat with the
City Clerk or as soon thereafter as practicable, copies of the construction plans and
specifications shall be furnished for the following public improvements:
Street Plans and Profiles showing existing and proposed grades, elevations
and cross sections of required improvements.
090214
14:21
b. Sanitary Sewer
c.
plans and profiles showing the locations, grades, sizes,
elevations and materials of required facilities.
Storm Sewer and Open Channel
d.
plans and profiles showing the locations,
grades, sizes, cross sections, elevations and materials of required facilities.
Water Main
e.
plans and profiles showing the locations, sizes, elevations and
materials of required facilities.
Erosion and Sedimentation Control
f.
plans showing those structures required
to retard the rate of runoff water and those grading and excavating practices
that will prevent erosion and sedimentation.
Planting Plans
g.
showing the locations, age, caliper, species and time of
planting of any required grasses, vines, shrubs and trees.
Additional
(2)
special plans or information as required by City officials.
Action by the City Engineer
(3)
. The City Engineer shall review or cause to be
reviewed the plans and specifications for conformance with the requirements of this
Code of Ordinances and other pertinent City design standards recommended by the
City Engineer and approved by the Common Council. If he rejects the plans and
specifications, he shall notify the owner, who shall modify the plans or
specifications or both accordingly. When the plans and specifications are corrected,
the City Engineer shall approve the plans and specifications for transmittal to the
Common Council. The Common Council shall approve the plans and specifications
before the improvements are installed.
Construction and Inspection
a. Prior to starting any of the work covered by the plans approved above,
written authorization to start the work shall be obtained from the City
Engineer upon receipt of all necessary permits and in accordance with the
construction methods of this Chapter.
.
b. Construction of all improvements required by this Chapter shall be
completed within two (2) years from the date of approval of the preliminary
plat by the Common Council, unless good cause can be shown for the
Mayor and Common Council to grant an extension.
c. During the course of construction, the City Engineer shall make such
inspections as he deems necessary to insure compliance with the plans and
specifications as approved. The owner shall pay the actual cost incurred by
the City for such inspections. This fee shall be the actual cost to the City of
inspectors, engineers and other parties necessary to insure satisfactory work.
(4) "As-Built" Plans
(d) STREET, ALLEY AND SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. The developer shall
construct streets and sidewalks as outlined on the approved plans based on the requirements
of this Code of Ordinances:
. After completion of all public improvements and prior to final
acceptance of said improvements, the subdivider shall make or cause to be made a
map showing the actual location of all valves, manholes, stubs, sewers and water
mains and such other facilities as the City Engineer shall require. This map shall be
in black pencil on tracing paper and shall bear the signature and seal of a
professional engineer registered in Wisconsin. The presentation of the map shall be
a condition of final acceptance of the improvements and release of the surety bond
assuring their completion.
(1) Grading. With the submittal of the final plat, the subdivider shall furnish drawings
which indicate the existing and proposed grades of streets and alleys shown on the
plat. Proposed grades will be reviewed by the City Engineer for conformance with
090214
14:22
City standards and good engineering practice. Street grades require the approval of
the Common Council after receipt of the City Engineer's recommendations. After
approval of the street grades, the subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-ofway
of the streets and alleys proposed to be dedicated, including the vision clearance
triangle on corner lots. In cases where an existing street right-of-way is make a part
of the plat or abuts the plat, the subdivider shall grade that portion of the right-ofway
between the existing pavement and the property line. The bed for the roadways
in the street rights-of-way shall be graded to subgrade elevation. The City Engineer
shall approve all grading within rights-of-way and said grading shall extend for a
sufficient distance beyond the right-of-way to insure that the established grade will
be preserved. Where electric and other communications or utilities facilities are to
be installed underground, the utility easements shall be graded to within six (6)
inches of the final grade by the subdivider, prior to the installation of such facilities;
earth fill piles or mounds of dirt or construction materials shall not be stored on such
easement areas.
(2) Street and Sidewalk Construction
a. After sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water utilities have been installed, the
subdivider shall construct as part of the subdivision, streets, curbs and
gutters and sidewalks including those adjacent to platted lots in existing
street rights-of-way abutting the plat. The subdivider shall surface roadways
to the widths prescribed by the Common Council on recommendation of the
Plan Commission and the City Engineer. Construction shall be to City
standard specifications for street improvements.
.
b. The Common Council shall have the option of not requiring the construction
of sidewalks within street rights-of-way in cases where it determines, after
consultation with the Plan Commission and the City Engineer, that
sidewalks are not necessary because of low density land use and low
pedestrian volumes or for access to schools and bus routes or for continuity
of existing sidewalk or bicycle route systems or because of cul-de-sac or
loop street pattern. Consideration shall also be given to the pattern of
development of adjoining lands and to the possibility of damage to trees.
c. Dedicated walkways shall be improved by the subdivider to a grade and
width approved by the City Engineer and with surfacing as required by the
Common Council based on the location and the amount and character of
use. The subdivider shall submit standard drawings indicating the existing
and proposed grades.
(3) Curb and Gutter
(e) SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM DESIGN STANDARDS. There shall be provided
a sanitary sewerage system in conformity with the master plan of sewers as approved by the
Common Council and/or sewerage district. The subdivider shall install adequate sanitary
sewer facilities and connect them to sewer mains subject to specifications and inspection of
the City Engineer. The subdivider shall pay all the costs of all sanitary sewer work
including the bringing of the sanitary sewer from where it exists to the subdivision in
question as well as providing all sanitary sewer work within the subdivision. The cost of
providing and installing sewer pipe of sizes larger or at a greater depth than required to
. After the installation of all utility and storm water drainage
improvements, the subdivider shall construct concrete curbs and gutters in
accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the Common
Council or its designee. Wherever possible, provision shall be made at the time of
construction for driveway access curb cuts.
090214
14:23
serve the area shall be borne by the City, as agreed upon between the land owner and the
Common Council prior to approval of the preliminary plat or certified survey map, pursuant
to this Chapter. The size, type and installation of all sanitary sewers proposed to be
constructed shall be in accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the
City.
(f) WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM DESIGN STANDARDS. There shall be provided a water
supply system in conformity with the master plan of the water system as approved by the
Common Council. The subdivider shall construct water mains in such a manner as to make
adequate water service available to each lot within the subdivision. If municipal water
service is not available, the subdivider shall make provision for adequate private water
systems as specified in applicable ordinances. The City may require the installation of
water laterals to the street lot line. The size, type and installation of all public water mains
proposed to be constructed shall be in accordance with plans and standard specifications
approved by the City.
(g) STORM WATER DRAINAGE FACILITIES. Pursuant to Sec. 14-1-10, the subdivider
shall provide storm water drainage facilities which may include curb and gutter, catch
basins and inlets, storm sewers, road ditches and open channels, as may be required. All
such facilities are to be of adequate size and grade to hydraulically accommodate the
twenty-five (25) year storm for open drainage systems and ten (10) year storm for conduit
systems. Storm drainage facilities shall be so designed as to present no hazard to life or
property, and the size, type and installation of all storm water drains and sewers proposed to
be constructed shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the City
Engineer. The subdivider shall pay all costs of all storm sewer work, except that the
subdivider shall not be required to pay for any storm sewers that are required to bring the
storm sewers to the subdivision nor shall they be required to install any storm sewers that
are more than twenty-four (24) inches in diameter.
(h) OTHER UTILITIES. The subdividers shall cause gas, electrical power and telephone
facilities to be installed in such a manner as to make adequate service available to each lot
in the subdivision. No such electrical or telephone service shall be located on overhead
poles along the front lot lines unless otherwise allowed due to exceptional topography or
other physical barrier. Plans indicating the proposed location of all gas, electrical power
and telephone distribution and transmission lines required to service the plat shall be
approved by the Common Council and such map shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(i) MATERIAL STANDARDS. All improvements constructed under this Chapter shall be of
the standards, where applicable, established by the State Highway Commission's "Standard
Specifications for Roads and Bridges." Where the Highway Commission's specifications do
not apply, the standards shall be as approved by the City Engineer.
(j) IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETE PRIOR TO APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.
Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to application for
approval of the final plat or execution of the contract for installation of the required
improvements shall be accepted as equivalent improvements in compliance with the
requirements only if the City Engineer shall certify that he is satisfied that the existing
improvements conform to applicable standards.
SEC. 14-1-15 EASEMENTS.
(a) UTILITY EASEMENTS. The Common Council, on the recommendation of the Plan
Commission and other appropriate agencies of the City shall require utility easements for
090214
14:24
poles, wire, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and head mains or other utility
lines. It is the interest of this Chapter to protect all established easements so as to assure
proper grade, assure maintenance of the established grade, prohibit construction of
permanent fences or retaining walls over underground installation and prevent the planting
of trees in the easement area.
(b) EASEMENT LOCATIONS. Such easements shall be at least ten (10) feet wide and may
run across lots or alongside of rear lot lines. Such easements should preferably be located
along rear lot lines. Evidence shall be furnished to the Plan Commission that easements and
any easement provisions to be incorporated in the plat or in deeds have been reviewed by
the individual utility companies or the organization responsible for furnishing the services
involved.
(c) DRAINAGE EASEMENTS. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream:
(1) There shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way
conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse and such further width or
construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose and as may be necessary to
comply with this Section; or
(2) The watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream may be relocated in such a
manner that the maintenance of adequate drainage will be assured and the same
provided with a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming to the
lines of the relocated watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as
will be adequate for the purpose and may be necessary to comply with this Section.
(3) Wherever possible, it is desirable that drainage be maintained by an open channel
with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume flow. In
all cases, such water course shall be of a minimum width established at the highwater
mark or, in the absence of such specification, not less than thirty (30) feet.
SEC. 14-1-16 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
(a) PURPOSE. The requirements of this Section are established to insure that adequate parks,
open spaces and sites for other public uses are properly located and preserved as the City
grows. It has also been established to insure that the cost of providing the park and
recreation sites and facilities necessary to serve the additional people brought into the
community by land development may be equitably apportioned on the basis of the
additional needs created by the development. The requirements shall apply to all lands
proposed for all residential development.
(b) DESIGN. In the design of a subdivision, land division, planned unit development or
development project, provision shall be made for suitable sites of adequate area for schools,
parks, playgrounds, open spaces, drainageways and other public purposes. Such sites as are
shown on the Official Map, Master Plan or Parks and Open Space Plan shall be made a part
of the design. Consideration shall be given to the preservation of scenic and historic sites,
stands of trees, marshes, lakes, ponds, streams, watercourses, watersheds and ravines and
woodland, prairie and wetland plant and animal communities.
(c) DEDICATION OF LANDS FOR STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS. Whenever a tract
of land to be subdivided embraces all or any part of an arterial street, drainageway or other
public way which has been designated in the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan
component or on the official map of the City, said public way shall be made a part of the
plat and dedicated or reserved by the subdivider in the locations and dimensions indicated
090214
14:25
on said plan or map and as set forth in this Chapter.
(d) DEDICATION OF SITES.
(1) Where feasible and compatible with the comprehensive or master plan of the City,
the developer shall provide and dedicate to the public adequate land to provide for
park, recreation and open space needs of the land development within the City of
Menasha. The Park and Recreation Board may make its recommendation to the
Planning Commission as to site location or acceptance of fees in lieu of dedication
or a combination of land and fees. The location of such land to be dedicated shall
be determined by the Plan Commission. Where the dedication is not compatible
with the comprehensive or master plan, or for other reasons is not feasible as
determined by the Plan Commission and as approved by the Common Council, the
developer shall, in lieu thereof, pay to the City a fee in accordance with Sec.
14-1-16(d)(2)c and d.
(2) The amount of land to be provided shall be determined on the following basis:
a. The amount of land to be dedicated shall be determined by the Common
Council with the recommendations of the Planning Commission in
accordance with the zoning classification for each intended residential lot in
the subdivision based on the formula in Sec. 14-1-16(d)(2)b.
b. R-1: Eight percent (8%) of gross residential acreage.
R-2: Ten percent (10%) of gross residential acreage.
R-3, R-4, or Planned Unit Development:
Twelve percent (12%) of gross residential acreage.
c. The amount of the fee in lieu of dedication shall be in accordance with the
zoning classification for each intended residential lot in the subdivision
based on the formula in Sec. 14-1-16(d)(2)d.
d. R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4: Five hundred and fifty Dollars ($550.00) per dwelling
unit.
e. The developer shall pay a lump sum of fifty percent (50%) at the time of
final plat approval, with the balance to be paid within one (1) year, on
condition that a performance bond in the amount of the unpaid balance, has
been executed by a surety company authorized to do business in Wisconsin
and approved by the City Attorney and is simultaneously filed with the City
Clerk. Any fee that remains unpaid after one year shall constitute a special
charge pursuant to sec. 3-2-12.
f. All fees received by the City as a result of this Section shall be deposited in a
nonlapsing park development fund, separate from the general fund of the
City. This special fund shall be used exclusively for park and recreation area
development, including site acquisition and related capital improvements.
Upon taking effect of this Chapter, the City Comptroller shall make an
accounting to the Common Council of all moneys previously received for
park purposes and the balance remaining of said moneys shall be deposited
in the above-mentioned park development fund. Disbursements from said
special fund are to be made only upon specific approval of the Common
Council.
g. Notwithstanding sec. 14-1-16(d)(2)f, the Park and Recreation Director is
authorized to expend amounts less than $5,000 without the specific approval
of the Common Council.
(3) Where the lot or parcel for which payment has been once made is further divided,
payment shall be required only for the additional residential units.
090214
14:26
(4) No payment shall be required for a parcel on which a permanent residential structure
has existed for at least one (1) year prior to the date of the division.
(5) For property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4, or classified as a Planned Unit
Development, or for any lands annexed to the City, where a final plat has already
been approved, the fee in lieu of dedication shall be made at the time of applying for
a building permit. If the land has not been platted, land dedication or fee in lieu of
dedication will be borne by the developer. If park land has been previously
dedicated or fees paid to another municipality, no additional land shall be dedicated
or fees charged.
(e) DEVELOPMENT OF AREA.
(1) When park land is dedicated, the subdivider is required to bring the dedicated land
up to the contours established in the approved street and utility plans, topsoiled with
a minimum of four (4) inches of quality topsoil, seeded as specified by City
officials, fertilized with a 16-6-6 fertilizer at the rate of seven (7) pounds per one
thousand (1,000) square feet and mulched as specified in the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction Sections 627 and 629. The topsoil
furnished for the park site shall consist of the natural loam, sandy loam, silt loam,
silty clay loam or clay loam humus-bearing soils adapted to the sustenance of plant
life, and such topsoil shall be neither excessively acid nor excessively alkaline. Fine
grading and seeding must occur within one (1) year following issuance of the first
building permit within that subdivision unless otherwise authorized by the Common
Council.
(2) It shall be the duty of the City to maintain the dedicated areas and the owner who
dedicated said land shall in no way be responsible for its maintenance or liability
thereon except that said owner shall not develop the surrounding area in a manner
which would unduly depreciate the purpose, use or value of the dedicated property
and except if such owner shall reside on one (1) of the subdivided parcels, in which
case he shall be responsible for the maintenance of adjacent public property as may
be required in other laws of the City.
SEC. 14-1-17 NOISE ABATEMENT ALONG HIGHWAYS.
All plats or subdivisions of land adjacent to any expressway, freeway, or other four-lane highway
shall be approved only if such complies with the following:
(a) CONSTRUCTION RESTRICTIONS FOR HABITABLE AND INSTITUTIONAL
STRUCTURES.
(1) No new single family residential structure shall be approved for construction
(excluding substantial repair or alteration) if any exterior hourly traffic sound level
Leq(h), any where within a proposed outdoor living area is projected to be equal to
or in excess of 67 dBA upon completion of the structure or anytime thereafter.
(2) No new multiple-family residence, dormitory, mobile home park, transient lodging,
school, hospital, nursing home or similar structure, or substantial modification of
such existing structure, shall be approved for construction if any exterior hourly
traffic sound level Leq(H), anywhere within a proposed outdoor living area on the
site is projected to be equal to or in excess of 67 dBA upon completion of the
structure or modification or anytime thereafter.
(3) Construction otherwise prohibited shall be allowed if there are no outdoor use areas
on the site of the proposed structure projected to be exposed to an hourly traffic
090214
14:27
sound level Leq(h), equal to or in excess of 67 dBA and provided that there is
incorporated into the design and construction of the structure such sound attenuation
measures as are necessary to reduce the maximum interior hourly traffic induced
sound level, Leq(h), in a habitable room to 52 dBA upon completion of the structure
or modification, or anytime thereafter.
(4) Prior to issuance of any building permit for any structure regulated pursuant to
Section (c), the owner of the structure shall submit to the Plan Commission and
Building Inspector, plans and specifications identifying the sound attenuation
measures to be incorporated into the design and construction of the structure to meet
the interior Leq(h) criteria.
(5) The Plan Commission and the Building Inspector may conduct such inspections and
measurements as are necessary to ensure the proper implementation of the sound
attenuation measures proposed pursuant to Subsection (d) and to ascertain
compliance with this section.
(b) RECREATIONAL AREA RESTRICTIONS.
(1) No land shall be designated or approved for construction or use as a public or
private exterior recreational area, including, but not limited to, children's
playgrounds, outdoor theaters and amphitheaters, picnic grounds, tennis courts and
swimming pools, if any exterior hourly traffic sound level, Leq(h), anywhere on the
site of the proposed recreational areas is projected to be equal to or in the excess of
67 dBA upon completion of the construction or designation of the site or anytime
thereafter.
(2) This section shall not apply to the designation or approval of any green belt or open
space in any area in which the noise level exceeds the level specified in Subsection
(a) regardless of whether such green belt or open space is open to public use,
provided that no recreational improvement or facility is constructed thereon.
(3) Designation or approval of exterior recreational area otherwise prohibited under
Subsection (1) shall be allowed if the noise level specified in that subsection can be
achieved by appropriate means of sound attenuation, such as berms, barriers, or
buildings, at the perimeter of or elsewhere on the site.
(4) No new interior recreational facility, including, but not limited to, gymnasiums, ice
or roller skating rinks, indoor swimming pools, and tennis courts, shall be approved
for construction if the hourly traffic sound level, Leq(h), anywhere on the site is
projected to be equal to or in excess of 67 dBA upon completion of the structure or
anytime thereafter, unless there is incorporated into the design and construction of
the structure such sound attenuation measures as are necessary to reduce the
maximum hourly traffic induced sound level, Leq(h), to 52 dBA.
(c) SITE STUDY REQUIREMENT.
(1) The Plan Commission has reason to believe that a full report is necessary to
determine whether a proposed project is prohibited, such report shall be made by the
applicant prior to approval of any subdivision, zoning or building permit
application. (If a full report has not been presented and the applicant believes the
project was wrongfully prohibited, he may file a full report within 21 days of the
Plan Commission decision and request reconsideration.) A full report shall contain
the following information and any other information which the Plan Commission
may reasonably require:
a. the existing maximum hourly traffic sound level, Leq(h), for a representative
sample of locations, measured in accordance with guidelines presented in
"Sound Procedures for Measuring Highway Noise: Final Report", August
090214
14:28
1981, U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration,
Arlington, VA, or modeled according to a methodology consistent with the
methodology in the FHWA Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model
(Report No. FHWA-RD-77-108;
b. the projected future Leq(h) at the site resulting from future traffic increases;
and,
c. where applicable, plans for sound attenuation measures on the site and/or of
the structure proposed to be built and the amount of sound attenuation
anticipated as a result of these measures.
(2) In determining whether an applicant should be required to submit a full report
pursuant to Subsection (1), the Plan Commission shall consider the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation's Administrative Code TRANS 405 and the Federal
Highway Administration's Procedures for Abatement of Highway Traffic Noise and
Construction Noise, Title 23, CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter J, Part 772.
(d) ZONING ORDINANCE OR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
(1) No proposed zoning ordinance or comprehensive plan for land adjacent to an
existing county, state or federal highway or planned transportation corridor shall be
approved unless such plan includes a sound analysis which:
a. identifies existing and projected traffic noise levels, dBA, Leq(h) for 20
years in and around the area under consideration; and,
b. ensures usage of adequate measure to avoid violation of any provision of
this ordinance.
(2) No zoning change application shall be approved unless the site feasibility study
submitted, as required by the Plan Commission, contains an analysis which shows:
a. the impact of existing and projected traffic noise levels, dBA, Leq(h) for 20
years on the intended use; and,
b. ensures the use of adequate measures to avoid violation of any provision of
this ordinance.
(e) TRUTH AND SELLING OR RENTING. No person shall sell or rent, or cause to be sold
or rented, any structure constructed after May 7, 1991 or property to be used for human
habitation, where the structure or property as defined in subsection (a) is exposed to sound
levels regularly equal to or in excess of 67 dBA, leq(h), without making full written
disclosure to all potential buyers or renters of the existence of sound levels and of the nature
of the sources.
SEC. 14-1-18 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
(a) Where, in the judgment of the Common Council, on the recommendation of the Plan
Commission, it would be inappropriate to apply literally the provisions of this Chapter
because of the proposed subdivision being located outside of the corporate limits or because
exceptional or undue hardship would result, the Council may waive or modify any
requirements to the extent deemed just and proper. Application for any such variance shall
be made in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for
consideration, stating fully all facts relied upon by the petitioner, and shall be supplemented
with maps, plans or other additional data which may aid the Plan Commission in the
analysis of the proposed project. The plans for such development shall include such
covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement
of the plan.
090214
14:29
(b) The Plan Commission shall not recommend nor shall the Common Council grant variations
or exceptions to the regulations of this Chapter unless it shall make findings based upon the
evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
(1) The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in
which the property is located;
(2) The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the
property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable generally to other
property;
(3) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions
of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were
carried out.
(c) Any recommendations by the Plan Commission shall be so endorsed by the Secretary and
transmitted to the Common Council. The Common Council, if it approves, shall do so by
motion or resolution and instruct the City Clerk to notify the Plan Commission and the
owner.
(d) Such relief shall be granted without detriment to the public good, without impairing the
intent and purpose of this Chapter or the desirable general development of the community in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan or Zoning Code of the City. A majority vote of
the entire membership of the Common Council shall be required to grant any modification
of this Chapter, and the reasons shall be entered in the minutes of the Council.
(e) The Common Council may waive the placing of monuments, required under Section
236.15(b), (c) and (d), Wis. Stats., for a reasonable time on condition that the subdivider
execute a surety bond to insure the placing of such monuments within the time required.
SEC. 14-1-19 ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.
(a) VIOLATIONS. It shall be unlawful to build upon, divide, convey, record or monument
any land in violation of this Chapter or the Wisconsin Statutes and no person shall be issued
a building permit by the City authorizing the building on, or improvement of, any
subdivision, land division or replat with the jurisdiction of this Chapter not of record as of
the effective date of this Code until the provisions and requirements of this Chapter have
been fully met. The City may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin
violations of this Chapter or the applicable Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) (1) Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this
Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit no less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00)
nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) and the costs of prosecution for each
violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture costs shall be imprisoned in
the County Jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding thirty (30) days. Each day
a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Recordation improperly made has penalties provided in Sec. 236.30, Wis. Stats.
(3) Conveyance of lots in unrecorded plats has penalties provided for in Sec. 236.31,
Wis. Stats.
(4) Monuments disturbed or not placed have penalties as provided for in Sec. 236.32,
Wis. Stats.
(5) Assessor's plat made under Section 70.27 of the Wisconsin Statutes may be ordered
by the City at the expense of the subdivider when a subdivision is created by
090214
14:30
successive divisions.
(c) APPEALS. Any person aggrieved by an objection to a plat or a failure to approve a plat
may appeal therefrom, as provided in Sections 236.13(5) and 62.23(7)(e)10 to 15 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, within thirty (30) days of notification of the rejection of the plat.
Where failure to approve is based on an unsatisfied objection, the agency making the
objection shall be made a party to the action. The court shall direct that the plat be
approved if it finds that the action of the approving or objecting agency is arbitrary,
unreasonable or discriminatory.
ARTICLE A
Building Code
SEC. 15-1-1 BUILDING CODE ESTABLISHED.
(a) TITLE. These regulations shall be known and cited as the "Menasha Building
Code" and shall be construed to secure their expressed intent and to ensure public
safety, health and welfare insofar as they are dependent upon building construction.
A violation of any provision therefrom shall be a violation of this Chapter.
(b) SCOPE. The provisions of this Chapter shall govern the design, construction,
alteration, demolition and moving of all buildings and structures. The Director of
Community Development shall have general supervision of the administration and
enforcement of this Chapter.
SEC. 15-1-2 STATE CODES ADOPTED.
(a) BUILDING AND HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIR CONDITIONING
CODE. The Wisconsin Administrative Code, Chapters ILHR 50 through 64, both
inclusive, and all amendments thereto, are hereby made a part of this code by
reference with respect to those classes of buildings to which such provisions apply.
A copy of said code is on file in the office of the Building Inspector.
(b) UNIFORM DWELLING CODE. Chapters ILHR 20 through 25, Wis. Adm.
Code, inclusive, and all amendments thereto, are hereby made a part of this code by
reference and shall apply to all one (1) and two (2) family dwellings and alterations
and additions thereto, the initial construction of which was commenced after the
effective dates of various chapters of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. A
copy of said code is on file in the office of the Building Inspector.
SEC. 15-1-3 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
(a) APPLICATION. The Uniform Dwelling Code, Chapters ILHR 21 through 25,
Wis. Adm. Code, and all changes, is hereby adopted by reference to apply to all
additions and remodeling of existing one (1) and two (2) family homes and any new
or remodeled garage and/or storage shed.
(b) EXCEPTIONS.
(1) Exterior Coverings. All exterior wall coverings shall be approved moistureand
weather-resisting materials of sufficient stiffness and properly attached
to resist rain and wind. All exterior intersections between wood or metal and
masonry veneer shall be caulked with elastic waterproofed material, except
where metal flashed. The bottom edge of the exterior siding immediately
over any exterior wall opening shall be so located as to permit the
headflashing to extend under the siding and to be turned up behind the
siding. No asphalt siding shall be used, except for remodeling to match the
existing building. No felt or sheathing shall remain exposed on exteriors.
(2) Re-roofing. A new roof covering may be applied on top of an existing roof
covering. No more than two (2) layers of roof covering will be allowed. If
additional layers of roofing material are requested, calculations shall be
submitted.
(c) FOUNDATION WALLS. The exterior of block foundation walls may be pargeted
with three-quarter (3/4) inch cement mortar and shall be waterproofed with an
approved bituminous material. Poured concrete foundation walls shall be
bituminous-coated.
SEC. 15-1-4 APPLICATION OF "MENASHA BUILDING CODE."
All buildings and structures hereafter erected, altered, repaired, moved or demolished that
are used or designed to be used for the purpose herein defined shall comply in full with the
requirements of this Code as follows:
(a) ZONING LAWS. No provision of this Code shall be construed to repeal, modify
or constitute an alternative to any lawful zoning regulations.
(b) NEW BUILDINGS. The construction requirements of the Menasha Building Code
shall apply to all buildings covered under Section 15-1-2 and any accessory
building.
(c) EXISTING BUILDINGS. This Code shall also apply to buildings and conditions
described in this Section:
(1) An existing building to be occupied as a one (1) or two (2) family dwelling,
which building was not previously so occupied.
(2) An existing structure that is altered or repaired, when the cost of such
alterations or repair during the life of the structure exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the equalized value of the structure, said value to be determined by
the assessor of the municipality.
(3) Additions and alterations, regardless of cost, made to an existing building
shall comply with the requirements of this code. The provisions of
Subsection (c)(4) of this Section shall also apply.
(4) Any addition or alteration, regardless of cost, made to a building shall be
made in conformity with applicable Sections of this code.
(d) ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS. The following provisions shall apply to
buildings altered or repaired:
(1) Alterations. When not in conflict with any regulations, alterations to any
existing building or structure, accommodating a legal occupancy and use but
of a nonconforming-type of construction, which involved either the
structural members of floors or roofs, beams, girders, columns, bearing, or
other walls, room, heating and air conditioning systems, arrangement, light
and ventilation, changes in location of exit stairways or exits, or any or all of
the above, then such existing construction shall be made to conform to the
minimum requirements of this code applicable to such occupancy and use
and given type of construction.
(2) Repairs. Repairs for purposes of maintenance or replacements in any
existing building or structure which do not involve the structural portions of
the building or structure, or which do not affect room arrangement, light and
ventilation, access to or efficiency of any exit stairways, or exits, fire
protection, or exterior aesthetic appearance and which do not increase a
given occupancy and use shall be deemed minor repairs. Ordinary repairs to
buildings may be made without application or notice to the building
inspection official. Such repairs shall include and not be limited to reroofing.
However, should any person, firm or corporation desire the
building inspection official to issue a roofing permit so that proper inspection
can be made, he can obtain one on a voluntary basis by paying the necessary
fee. The repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or
portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing
support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or
rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exit requirements; nor
shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alterations of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water pipe, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas,
soil, waste vent or similar piping, electrical wiring or mechanical or other
works affecting public health or general safety. Ordinary repairs shall not
include complete residing of a building.
(3) Alterations When Not Permitted. When an existing building or structure
which, for any reason whatsoever, does not conform to the regulations of this
Chapter has deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to an extent greater than
fifty percent (50%) of the equalized value of the building or structure, no
alterations or moving of such building or structure shall be permitted. Any
such building or structure shall be considered a menace to public safety and
welfare and shall be ordered vacated and thereafter demolished and debris
removed from the premises.
(4) Alterations and Repairs Required. When any of the structural members of
any building or structure have deteriorated from any cause whatsoever to less
than their required strength, the owner of such building or structure shall
cause such structural members to be restored to their required strength;
failing in which the building or structure shall be considered a menace to
public safety and shall be vacated, and thereafter no further occupancy or use
of the same shall be permitted until the regulations of this Chapter are
complied with.
(5) Extent of Deterioration. The amount and extent of deterioration of any
existing building or structure shall be determined by the Building Inspector.
(6) Use of Unsanitary Building. It shall be unlawful to occupy or use or permit
the occupancy or use of any building or structure that is unsanitary or
dilapidated, or deteriorated, or out of repair, thereby being unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use until the regulations of this Chapter have been
complied with.
(7) Maintenance.
a. All buildings and structures and all parts thereof, both existing and
new, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All service
equipment, means of egress, devices and safeguards which are
required by the Uniform Building Code in a building, or which were
required by a previous statute in a building when erected, altered or
repaired shall be maintained in good working order.
b. The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for the safe
and sanitary maintenance of the building or structure and its exit
facilities at all times.
(8) Emergency Measures.
a. Vacating Buildings. When, in the opinion of the Building Inspection
Official, there is actual and immediate danger of failure or collapse
of a building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger
life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is
endangered by the occupation of the building, the Building
Inspection Official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and
require the inmates and occupants to vacate the same forthwith. He
shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building a notice
reading as follows: "This Building is Unsafe and Its Use or
Occupancy has Been Prohibited by the Building Inspection Official,"
and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter such building or
structure, except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of
demolishing the same.
b. Closing Streets. When necessary for the public safety, the Building
Inspection Official may temporarily close sidewalks, streets,
buildings and structures and places adjacent to such unsafe buildings
and prohibit the same from being used.
c. Emergency Repairs. For the purposes of this section, the Building
Inspection Official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to
perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
d. Costs of Emergency Repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on
certificate of the Building Inspection Official, and the legal authority
of the municipality shall institute appropriate action against the
owner of the premises where the unsafe building or structure was
located for the recovery of such costs.
SEC. 15-1-5 PERMITS.
(a) PERMITS REQUIRED. No building or structure or any part thereof shall
hereafter be built, enlarged, altered or demolished within the municipality, or moved
within or out of the municipality, except as hereinafter provided, unless a permit
therefor shall first be obtained by the owner or his agent from the Building Inspector.
Permits required are as follows:
(1) Accessory structures.
(2) Air conditioning.
(3) Building.
(4) Electrical.
(5) Heating.
(6) Moving of buildings.
(7) Occupancy.
(8) Plumbing.
(9) Signs.
(10) Wrecking or Razing.
(11) Other permits as required.
(b) APPLICATION FOR PERMITS. Application for a building permit shall be
made in writing upon a blank form to be furnished by the Building Inspector and
shall state the name and address of the owner of the building and the owner of the
land on which it is to be erected, the name and address of the designer, and shall set
forth a legal description of the land on which the building is to be located, the
location of the building, the house number thereof and such other information as the
Building Inspector may require. With such application, there shall be submitted to
the Building Inspector two (2) complete sets of plans and specifications.
(1) Plans and Specifications. All plans shall be drawn to a scale not less than
one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot, on paper or cloth in ink, or by some other
process that will not fade or obliterate, and shall disclose the existing and
proposed provisions for water supply, sanitary sewer connections and
surface water drainage. All dimensions shall be accurately figured.
Drawings that do not show all necessary detail shall be rejected. A complete
set of plans for residential construction shall consist of:
a. All elevations.
b. All floor plans.
c. Complete construction details.
d. Fireplace details [three-quarters (3/4) inch per foot] showing
cross-section of fireplace and flues.
e. Plans of garage when garage is to be built immediately or location of
garage when it is to be built at a later date.
(2) All plans shall remain on file in the office of the Building Inspector until at
least one (1) year after the completion of the building, after which time the
Building Inspector may return the same to the owner, may keep them for
public record, or may destroy them.
(c) DEDICATED STREET AND APPROVED SUBDIVISION REQUIRED. No
building permit shall be issued unless the property on which the building is proposed
to be built abuts a street that has been dedicated for street purposes or has access to
public streets via private road reservations or easements. No building permits shall
be issued until the subdivision and required improvements are accepted by the
Common Council, upon the recommendation of the Building Inspector.
(d) UTILITIES REQUIRED.
(1) Residential Buildings. No building permit shall be issued for construction of
any residential building until suitable sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water
(including required hydrants for fire protection), grading and graveling are
installed as necessary to service the property for which the permit is
required.
(2) Non-Residential Buildings. No building permit shall be issued for
construction of any building, other than residential, until contracts have been
let for the installation of sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water (including
required hydrants for fire protection), grading and graveling are installed as
necessary to service the property for which the permit is required.
(3) Occupancy. No person shall occupy any building until the sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, water (including required hydrants for fire protection), grading
and graveling are installed as necessary to service the property.
(e) WAIVER OF SOME REQUIREMENTS. At the option of the Building
Inspector, plans, data, specifications and survey need not be submitted with an
application for permit to execute minor alterations and repairs to any building,
structure or equipment, provided the proposed construction is sufficiently described
in the application for permit.
(f) DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS.
(1) a. New lawns shall be graded so as to meet the sidewalk grade and the
grade of any existing neighboring lawns. The owner or building
must grade his lot so that surface water will not be impounded on his
or adjacent lots, or else he must provide adequate storm sewer, drain
tile or other facilities to conduct ponded water from his lot to the City
storm sewer or street.
b. Using a minimum slope of one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot, but no
more than one-half (1/2) inch per foot, the building or owner shall
take necessary physical and legal steps to insure that water will flow
from any point within a lot to a street right-of-way a natural or
constructed drainage right-of-way or easement, or a storm sewer
system, and that the grading of the lot does not conflict with the
drainage plan for the subdivision. The City's engineering department
will determine the sidewalk elevation at the time the street is opened.
(2) When required, plans shall show the present and proposed grades of the lot
on which it is proposed to erect the building for which a building permit is
sought and of the immediately adjoining property in sufficient detail to
indicate the surface water drainage before and after the completion of
grading. No permit shall be issued if the erection of the building and the
proposed grades shall unreasonable obstruct the natural flow of water from
the surface of adjoining property or obstruct the flow any existing ravine,
ditch, drain or storm water sewer draining neighboring property.
(3) No storm water or surface water drains may be connected with the sanitary
sewer system, whether installed above or below the surface of the ground.
(4) Storm water, clear water, surface water and ground water of the properties of
one (1) and two (2) family dwellings may be discharged onto flat areas of
streets or lawns so long as the water flows away from the buildings and not
onto neighboring lots and does not create a nuisance such as ponding of
water or buildup of ice on a public way. Clear water from other buildings
shall be discharged in accordance with ILHR 82.36 of the State Uniform
Plumbing Code.
(g) PERMITS ISSUED; TERM.
(1) If the Building Inspector finds that the proposed building will comply in
every respect with this Chapter, other municipal ordinances and all laws of
the State of Wisconsin and lawful orders issued pursuant thereto, he shall
issue a building permit. After being approved, the plans and specifications
shall not be altered in any respect which involves any of the
above-mentioned ordinances, laws or orders, or which involves the safety of
the building, except with the written consent of the Building Inspector filed
with such application.
(2) In case adequate plans are not presented, the Building Inspector, at his
discretion, may issue a permit for a part of the building before receiving the
plans and specifications of the entire building. It shall be unlawful to
commence work on any building or alteration before the building permit has
been issued. The issuance of a permit upon the plans and specifications shall
not prevent the Building Inspector from thereafter requiring the correction of
errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing building operations
being carried on thereunder when in violation of any ordinances of the
municipality or laws of the State of Wisconsin or lawful orders issued
pursuant thereto.
(3) For the construction of buildings requiring approval of the Department of
Industry, Labor and Human Relations of the State of Wisconsin, no permit
shall be issued until such approved plans are received by the Building
Inspector.
(4) No work is to be started unless a proper grade has been established by the
Director of Public Works, including the grade for sidewalks, curb and gutter,
driveways and general construction.
(5) A weatherproof card signed by the Building Inspector indicating the permit
has been issued shall be posted at the job site during construction. After
issuance of a building permit, the approved plans shall not be altered unless
any proposed change is first approved by the Building Inspector as
conforming to the provisions of this Chapter.
(6) The building permit shall become void unless operations are commenced
within (4) months from the date thereof or if the building or work authorized
by such permit is suspended at any time after work is commenced for a
period of sixty (60) days. The period of time may be extended by the
Building Inspector if the delay was due to conditions beyond the control of
applicant.
(7) Before any work is commenced or recommenced after the permit has lapsed,
a new permit shall be issued at the regular fee rate. In any event, all work
shall be completed within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance of
the permit.
(h) REVOCATION.
(1) The Building Inspector may revoke any permit, certificate of occupancy or
approval issued under the regulations of this Chapter and may stop
construction or use of approved new materials, equipment, methods of
construction, devices or appliances for any of the following reasons:
a. Whenever there is a violation of any regulation of this Chapter or of
any other ordinance, law or lawful orders of Wisconsin Statute
relating to the same subject matter.
b. Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes dangerous to
life or property.
c. Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provisions of the
application for permit or of the permit.
d. Whenever, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, there is
inadequate supervision provided on the job site.
e. Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been made in
the application for permit, plans, drawings, data specifications or
certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance of the permit or
approval was based.
f. Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of an approval
or occupancy given by the Building Inspector for the use of any new
materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices or appliances.
g. Whenever construction has not substantially started within four (4)
months of the issuance of permit.
(2) The notice revoking a permit, certificate of occupancy or approval shall be in
writing and may be served upon the applicant for the permit, owner of the
premises and his agent, if any, and on the person having charge of
construction.
(3) A revocation placard shall also be posted upon the building, structure,
equipment or premises in question by the Building Inspector.
(4) After the notice is served upon the persons as aforesaid and posted, it shall
be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any construction
operation whatsoever on the premises, and the permit which has been so
revoked shall be null and void, and before any construction or operation is
again resumed, a new permit, as required by this Chapter, shall be procured
and fees paid therefor, and thereafter the resumption of any construction or
operation shall be in compliance with the regulation of this Chapter.
(5) Appeals of such revocations or suspensions may be taken to the Common
Council.
(i) FEES DETERMINED. Before receiving a building permit, the owner or his agent
shall pay any applicable fees. In applying the provisions of this Chapter in respect to
new work, existing building, alterations and repairs, the physical value of the work
shall be determined by the Building Inspector on the basis of current costs or as
otherwise provided in the local ordinances.
(j) FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT. It shall be unlawful to commence work prior
to obtaining a permit therefor. Double fees shall be charged if work is commenced
prior to the issuance of a permit.
(k) REPORT OF VIOLATIONS. The police and other City officers shall report at
once to the Building Inspector any building which is being carried on without a
permit as required by this Chapter.
(l) On or before March 1 of each calendar year the Director of Community
Development shall recommend to the Common Council certain building permit fees.
If the same is not amended by the Common Council, said fees shall stand. Recertification
to the Common Council is not necessary in the following years and the
fees remain unchanged. The original recommendation shall be to the Administration
Committee.
SEC. 15-1-6 INSPECTIONS.
(a) NOTIFICATION. Upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, required
inspections of the construction of any buildings, structures or equipment shall be
made as follows:
(1) Inspection to determine if the construction of footings as to thickness, width,
placing of reinforced steel, if required, and foundations walls is in
compliance with approved plans, data and the terms of the permit.
Recertification of the footings and foundation location and elevation shall be
provided to the Building Inspector prior to pouring concrete.
(2) Inspection of all wall, floor and roof framing, fire stopping and bracing,
when completed, and of all pipes, chimneys, ventilating and other ducts,
shafts and equipment when in place, but before any such work is covered,
enclosed or concealed by other construction.
(3) Inspection prior to laying concrete for basement floor to inspect subgrade,
drain tile and forms.
(4) Upon the completion of any building, structure, equipment or construction
for which a permit was issued and before the same is occupied or used, a
final inspection shall be made by the Building Inspector, and until such
building, structure or equipment is in compliance with all the requirements
of this Chapter and terms of the permit, no occupancy shall be maintained.
If the construction conforms to the requirements of this Chapter, a certificate
of occupancy shall be issued.
(b) COORDINATED INSPECTIONS. All provisions of the laws and regulations of
the City and of legally adopted rules of local fire and health officials in respect to the
operation, equipment, housekeeping, fire protection, handling and storage of
flammable materials, liquids and gasses and the maintenance of safe and sanitary
conditions of use in occupancy in all buildings shall be strictly enforced by the
administrative officials to whom such authority is delegated. Whenever inspection
by any authorized enforcement officer discloses any violation of the provisions of
this Chapter or of any other rules, regulations or laws, he shall immediately notify
the administrative officer having jurisdiction of the violation.
(c) CERTIFIED REPORT. The Building Inspector may require a certified report of
all required inspections as regulated by this Chapter from the registered architect or
registered engineer supervising the construction after the work has been executed in
accordance with all of the regulations of this Chapter, approved plans, specifications
and terms of the permit, and further that such construction work was executed in
accordance with accepted architectural and engineering standard procedures.
(d) DISCLAIMER ON INSPECTIONS. The purpose of the inspections under this
Chapter is to improve the quality of housing in the City. The inspections and the
reports and findings issued after the inspections are not intended as, nor are they to
be construed as, a guarantee. The following disclaimer shall apply to each
inspection report: "The findings of inspection are intended to report conditions of
noncompliance with code standards that are readily apparent at the time of
inspection. Inspections do not involve a detailed examination of the mechanical
systems or the closed structural and nonstructural elements of the building and
premises. No warranty of the operation, use or durability of equipment and
materials not specifically cited in the inspection report is expressed or implied."
(e) STOP-WORK ORDER. Whenever the provisions of this Chapter or of the plans
approved thereunder are not complied with, a stop-work order shall be served on the
owner or his representative and a copy thereof shall be posted at the site of the
construction. Such stop-work order shall not be removed, except by written notice
of the Building Inspector after satisfactory evidence has been supplied that the
violation has been corrected.
SEC. 15-1-7 OCCUPANCY AND USE.
(a) CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
(1) The Building Inspector shall make a final inspection of all new buildings,
additions and alterations. If no violations of this or any other ordinance be
found, the Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy, stating
the purpose for which the building is to be used.
(2) No building, nor part thereof, shall be occupied until such certificate has
been issued, nor shall any building be occupied in any manner which
conflicts with the conditions set forth in the certificate of occupancy.
(b) USE DISCONTINUED.
(1) Whenever any building or portion thereof is being used or occupied contrary
to the provisions of this Chapter, the Building Inspector shall order such use
or occupancy discontinued and the building or portion thereof vacated, by
notice served on any person using or causing such use or occupancy to be
continued, and such person shall vacate such building or portion thereof
within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice or make the building or
portion thereof comply with the requirement of this Chapter.
(2) Any building, structure or premises or any part thereof hereafter vacated or
damaged by any cause whatsoever so as to jeopardize public safety or health
shall not hereafter be occupied or used under an existing certificate of
occupancy or without the same until an application has been filed and a new
certificate of occupancy issued.
(c) CHANGE OF USE. It shall be unlawful to change the use of any building,
structure, premises or part thereof without first obtaining from the Building
Inspector an approval of such change in the occupancy or use and a certificate of
occupancy therefor.
(d) HARDSHIP. The Building Inspector shall have the authority and power to permit
the occupancy of any building or structure in the municipality, prior to issuance of
any occupancy certificate, in all such cases of hardship as, in his judgment and
discretion, warrant occupancy before final stage of completion as set forth in this
Chapter. Before granting such permission, the Building Inspector shall first examine
the premises and determine if it is safe and sanitary. The Building Inspector shall
determine the time within which such building or structure can be completed; such
time should not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days.
SEC. 15-1-8 REGULATIONS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS.
(a) GENERAL. No person shall move any building or structure upon any of the public
rights-of-way of the municipality without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Building Inspector and upon the payment of the required fee. Every such permit
issued by the Building Inspector for the moving of a building shall designate the
route to be taken, the conditions to be complied with and shall limit the time during
which said moving operations shall be continued.
(b) MOVING DAMAGED BUILDINGS. No building shall be repaired, altered or
moved within or into the municipality that has deteriorated or has been damaged by
any cause (including such moving and separation from its foundation and service
connections in case of moved buildings) fifty percent (50%) or more of its equalized
value, and no permit shall be granted to repair, alter or move such building within or
into the municipality.
(c) CONTINUOUS MOVEMENT. The movement of buildings shall be a continuous
operation during all the hours of the day, and day by day and at night, until such
movement is fully completed. All of such operations shall be performed with the
least possible obstruction to thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed to remain
overnight upon any street crossing or intersection or so near thereto as to prevent
easy access to any fire hydrant or any other public facility. Lighted lanterns shall be
kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building during the night.
(d) STREET REPAIR. Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall,
within one (1) day after said building reaches its destination, report that fact to the
Building Inspector who shall thereupon, in the company of the Director of Public
Works, inspect the streets and highways over which said building has been moved
and ascertain their condition. If the removal of said building has caused any damage
to any street or highway, the person to whom the permit was issued shall forthwith
place them in good repair as they were before the permit was granted. On the failure
of the said permittee to do so within ten (10) days thereafter to the satisfaction of the
governing body, said body shall repair the damage done to such streets and hold the
person obtaining such permit and the sureties on his bond responsible for the
payment of same.
(e) CONFORMANCE WITH CODE. No permit shall be issued to move a building
within or into the municipality and to establish it upon a location within the said
municipality until the Building Inspector has made an investigation of such building
at the location from which it is to be moved and is satisfied from such investigation
that said building is in a sound and stable condition and of such construction that it
will meet the requirements of this Building Code in all respects. A complete plan of
all further repairs, improvements and remodeling with reference to such building
shall be submitted to the Building Inspector, and he shall make a finding of fact to
the effect that all such repairs, improvements and remodeling are in conformity with
the requirements of this Building Code and that, when the same are completed, the
building as such will be moved from the municipality to some point outside the
boundaries thereof, the provisions with respect to the furnishing of plans and
specifications for proposed alterations to such building may be disregarded.
(f) BOND.
(1) Before a permit is issued to move any building over any public way in this
municipality, the party applying therefor shall give a bond to the
municipality in a sum to be fixed by the Building Inspector and which shall
not be less than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00), nor more than Twentyfive
Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00), said bond to be executed by a corporate
surety or two (2) personal sureties to be approved by the governing body or
designated agent conditioned upon, among other things, the indemnification
to the municipality for any costs or expenses incurred by it in connection
with any claims for damages to any persons or property, and the payment of
any judgment, together with the costs and expenses incurred by the
municipality in connection therewith, arising out of the removal of the
building for which the permit is issued.
(2) The bond required by Subsection (f)(1) shall be further conditioned upon the
permittee erecting adequate barriers and, within forty-eight (48) hours, filling
in any related excavations or adopting and employing such other means,
devices or methods approved by the Building Inspector.
(g) INSURANCE. The Building Inspector shall require, in addition to said bond above
indicated, public liability insurance covering injury to one (1) person in the sum of
not less than One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) and for one (1) accident
in a sum not less than Two Hundred Thousand Dollars ($200,000.00), together with
property damage insurance in a sum not less than Fifty Thousand Dollars
($50.000.00), or such other coverage as deemed necessary.
(h) PLAN COMMISSION OR OTHER ASSIGNED BOARD OR COMMISSION.
(1) No such permit shall be issued unless it has been found as a fact by the Plan
Commission (or other assigned board or commission) of the municipality by
at least a majority vote after an examination of the application for the permit
which shall include exterior elevations of the building and accurate
photographs of all sides and views of the same, and in case it is proposed to
alter the exterior of said building, plans and specifications of such proposed
alterations and after a view of the building proposed to be moved and of the
site at which it is to be located, that the exterior architectural appeal and
functional plans of the building to be moved or moved and altered will not
be so at variance with either the exterior architectural appeal and functional
plan of the buildings already constructed or in the course of construction in
the immediate neighborhood or the character of the applicable district
established by the zoning ordinances of the municipality or any ordinance
amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto as to cause a substantial
depreciation in the property values of said neighborhood within said
applicable district. In case the applicant proposed to alter the exterior of said
building after moving the same, he shall submit with his application papers,
complete plans and specifications for the proposed alterations. Before a
permit shall be issued for a building to be moved and altered, the applicant
shall give a cash bond to the municipality's Plan Commission which shall not
be less than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) to be executed to the effect
that he will, within a time to be set by the Plan Commission, complete the
proposed exterior alterations to said building in the manner set forth in his
plans and specifications. Said cash bond shall also be used to cover any
incurred cost due to damage to any public property. This bond shall be in
addition to any other bond or surety which may be required by other
applicable ordinances of the municipality. No occupancy permit shall be
issued for said building until the exterior alterations proposed to be made
have been completed.
(2) Upon application being made to the Building Inspector, he shall request a
meeting of the Plan Commission to consider applications for moving permits
which he has found comply in all respects with all other ordinances of the
municipality. The Plan Commission may, if it desires, hear the applicant for
the moving permit in question and/or the owner of the lot on which it is
proposed to locate the building in question, together with any other persons,
either residents or property owners, desiring to be heard, giving such notice
of hearing as they may deem sufficient. Such hearing may be adjourned for
a reasonable length of time; and within forty-eight (48) hours after the close
of the hearing, the Plan Commission shall, in writing, make or refuse to
make the finding required by Subsection (h) hereof and file it in the office of
the Clerk, who shall send a copy of it to the Building Inspector.
(i) MOVING BUILDING FROM CITY. A building being moved through or from
within the City to outside the City shall meet all provisions of this Section, except
Section (h)(1) relating to Plan Commission approval.
(j) MOVING OF SMALL BUILDINGS ON TRUCKS OR TRAILERS.
(1) Small buildings of one (1) story in height and not more than fourteen (14)
feet wide, including cornices, may be moved on a truck or trailer equipped
with pneumatic tires.
(2) All provisions of this Section shall be met except for Section (h)(1) relating
to Plan Commission approval and also the bond requirement of Section
(f)(1) may be reduced to no less than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).
SEC. 15-1-9 RAZING OR REPAIR OF BUILDINGS.
(a) REMOVAL PROCEDURE. Whenever the Building Inspector and/or Common
Council find any building or part thereof within the City to be, in their judgment, so
old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or unfit for
human occupancy or use and that it would be unreasonable to repair the same, they
shall order the owner to raze and remove such building or part thereof, or if it can be
made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to raze and remove at
the owner's option. Such order and proceedings shall be as provided in Sec. 66.05,
Wis. Stats. The Building Inspector may require the owner or occupant of any
premises within the City to remove therefrom and dispose of, within a reasonable
stated time, any unsightly articles or material visible to the public and which he
reasonably finds detrimental to the appearance, neatness and cleanliness of the
neighborhood or the City in general.
(b) PERMIT REQUIRED. No building or structure shall be razed or demolished
unless a permit has been granted by the Building Inspector.
(c) APPLICATION. Any person wishing to raze or demolish a building or structure
shall make application to the Building Inspector on a form provided by the Building
Inspector. At the time of the filing of this application, the applicant must provide to
the City a certified check in the amount of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for
buildings less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) cubic feet, One Thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for buildings between twenty-five thousand (25,000) and fifty thousand
(50,000) cubic feet, and Two Thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for buildings in excess of
fifty thousand (50,000) cubic feet. In the event of a default by the applicant
concerning any of the terms or conditions of the demolition permit or any other
provisions of the City of Menasha Building Code, said certified check shall be used
by the City to complete the demolition work. In lieu of the certified check as above
mentioned, the Building Inspector may allow an applicant to provide a performance
bond, letter of credit or other suitable instrument equal to the estimated cost of the
demolition work in question. The Building Inspector shall require, in addition to
said bond above indicated, public liability insurance naming the City of Menasha as
an insured party, covering injury to one (1) person in the sum of not less than One
Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00), or such other coverage as deemed
necessary. A copy of said insurance shall be kept on file with the City Clerk.
(d) UTILITY DISCONNECTION. Prior to the issuance of any building demolition
permit, the applicant must provide the Building Inspector a proof of utility
disconnection.
(e) TIME LIMITATION OF PERMIT. Permits for the razing or demolition of a
building or structure shall be granted subject to the following provisions:
(1) The razing or demolition of all residential and all accessory buildings shall
be completed and the requirements of this Section be met within thirty (30)
days of issuance of a permit.
(2) The razing or demolition of all commercial, industrial or institutional
buildings shall be completed and the requirements of this Section be met
within thirty (30) days of issuance of a permit.
(3) The Building Inspector may issue, in writing, a ten (10) day extension of
these time limits upon receiving, in writing, good and sufficient reason for
such time extensions. No more than two (2) such time extensions shall be
permitted.
(4) If demolition or razing of a building or structure is begun but not completed
within the time limitations of the permit, the building Inspector shall initiate
condemnation under Sec. 66.05 Wis. Stats., and the permit holder shall be
considered in violation of this Section.
(f) FENCING REQUIRED. All residential, industrial and commercial demolition
building sites shall be adequately and securely fenced. The method of enclosure, as
well as the fencing material used, shall be approved by the Building Inspector.
(g) LOT MAINTENANCE. Whenever a building is demolished or removed, the
premises shall be maintained free from all unsafe or hazardous conditions by the
proper regulation of the lot, the restoration of established grades and the erection of
the necessary retaining walls and fences in accordance with applicable ordinances.
SEC. 15-1-10 ABANDONED SERVICE STATIONS.
(a) DEFINITIONS. As used in this Section:
(1) "Service station" shall mean automobile service station, truck service station
and any other type of vehicle service station.
(2) "Abandoned service station" shall mean any service station or any use
converted from a service station which has not taken down, dismantled and
removed from the site, all pumps, pump islands, signs, insignias, trademarks,
their supporting structures, mounts and foundations and all other aboveground
improvements which are uniquely associated with service station
operation which has not been open for business for at least one (1) year as a
service station.
(b) PURPOSE. It is hereby determined that abandoned service stations warrant special
consideration and regulation to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the City for the following reasons:
(1) They represent a degree of danger to life and property due to the use and
storage of flammable and combustible liquids or the hazardous accumulation
of vapors in underground tanks and other containers after such liquids are
removed.
(2) By their very nature, they are traditionally located at prominent locations at
major intersections and, therefore, are uniquely conspicuous and subject to
vandalism when abandoned.
(3) They have distinctive physical appearances which often cannot be easily or
inexpensively adapted to other uses.
(4) Abandoned service stations, the underground storage tanks of which have
been safeguarded or removed, often are not thereafter used as service
stations due to the cost of replacing such tanks or restoring them to a
serviceable condition.
(5) The unenclosed characteristic of service stations invite vandalism, arson and
other fire hazards.
(c) PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any abandoned service station is hereby declared a public
nuisance which shall be abated pursuant to the procedure herein provided.
(d) ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
(1) Initiation, Service and Posting. Upon discovery of conditions indicating that
a service station may have been abandoned, the Building Inspector shall
cause a notice to be served personally or by certified mail on the owner of
the real property on which the service station is located at his address as
disclosed on the last equalized assessment roll on file in the Assessor's office
or as known to the Building Inspector and on the person, if any, occupying
or otherwise in real or apparent charge and control of the service station.
The Building Inspector also shall cause the notice to be posted on the service
station.
(2) Additional Service. The Building Inspector also shall cause the notice to be
served on each of the following persons: the holder of any mortgage or other
lien or encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease of record;
and the holder of any other estate or interest of record in or to the service
station or the real property on which such service station is located. The
failure of the Building Inspector to make or attempt service on any person
who is required to be served pursuant to the provisions of this Subsection
shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly
served.
(3) Time of Service and Posting. The Building Inspector shall cause the notice
to be served and posted pursuant to the provisions of this Section at least
thirty (30) days before the date of any hearing as set in such notice.
(4) Proof of Service and Posting. Proof of service or posting of the notice shall
be documented at the time of service or posting by a declaration under
penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service or posting,
declaring the time, place and manner in which service or posting was made.
(5) Contents of Notice. The notice shall contain the following:
a. The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification
of the premises on which the service station is located.
b. A statement that the Building Inspector has discovered conditions
and a description of such conditions, indicating that the service
station may have been abandoned.
c. A statement of the date, time and place of a hearing before the Board
of Public Works at which any interested person may appear to offer
any relevant evidence and at the conclusion of which the Committee
shall decide whether or not the service station has been abandoned.
d. A statement advising that, if the Board of Public Works decides that
the service station is abandoned, the Board shall order that the public
nuisance be abated within a period of time not less than ninety (90)
days commencing upon service of the Committee's written order on
the persons identified in Subsection (d)(1) above. The public
nuisance shall be abated by any of the following means:
1. Reoccupation and reinstitution of a service station use
pursuant to all applicable provisions of this Chapter; or
2. Conversion to another use pursuant to all applicable
provisions of this Chapter; or
3. Removal of all buildings or structures, safeguarding or
removing any flammable or combustible liquid storage tanks
and cleaning of the site, all pursuant to applicable provisions
of this Chapter; or,
4. A statement advising that, if the service station is deemed a
nuisance and if such nuisance is not abated within the time
stipulated, it will be abated by the City and the cost of
abatement will be assessed on the land from which such
nuisance is removed and will constitute a lien on such land
until paid.
(e) DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the City
Attorney from commencing an action in the Circuit Courts of Winnebago County to
enjoin the nuisance.
(f) APPEALS. Appeals from the orders of the Board of Public Works shall be to the
Common Council upon timely notice filed pursuant to law.
(g) POLICE POWERS. It is further found and determined that the exercise of the City
police powers for the abatement of such conditions is reasonable encompassed
within the authorization of Chapter 62 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(h) REQUIREMENTS AFTER REMOVAL. Upon removal of the tanks, structures
and apparatus specified, the converted service station shall be resurfaced and
landscaped in a manner appropriate to the proposed commercial or industrial use.
SEC. 15-1-11 GARAGES AND SHEDS; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
(a) DEFINITIONS.
(1) An attached private garage shall mean a private garage attached directly to
the principal building or attached by means of an enclosed or open
breeze-way, porch, terrace or vestibule, or a detached private garage so
constructed as to be within eight (8) feet of the principal building, built
principally for the storage of automobiles.
(2) A detached private garage shall mean a private garage entirely separated
from the principal building by eight (8) feet or more.
(3) A storage shed shall mean any storage building not principally used for the
storage of automobiles.
(b) AREA. All detached private garages and sheds shall be governed by the following
unless otherwise provided for in appropriate zoning codes.
(1) Masonry-bearing wall, metal frame construction or wood frame
construction: eight hundred (800) square feet, maximum.
(2) Storage Sheds: 200 square feet maximum.
(c) FOUNDATIONS AND FOOTINGS. Attached private garages shall be provided
with the same type footings and foundations as required herein for the principal
building. Concrete floors shall not be less than four (4) inches in thickness.
Reinforcement shall be a minimum of six by six (6 x 6) inch, number ten by ten (10
x 10) wire mesh. The slab shall be provided with a thickened edge all around, eight
(8) inches wide and eight (8) inches below the top of slab. Exterior wall curbs shall
be provided not less than four (4) inches above the finished ground grade adjacent to
the garage. Bolts three-eighths (3/8) inch in diameter with nuts and washers
attached, six (6) inches long, shall be embedded three (3) inches in the concrete curb
of detached garages eight (8) feet on centers.
(d) FLOOR SURFACE. The floor in all private garages shall be of concrete
construction and sloped toward the exterior garage door or opening. No openings or
pits in the floor shall be permitted, except for drainage.
(e) CONSTRUCTION. Private garages shall be constructed in accordance with
ILHR 21 of the Uniform Dwelling Code with the following exceptions:
(1) Load-bearing foundation walls and partitions shall be constructed as herein
regulated, except as stated above.
(2) Detached private garages of wood frame construction shall be constructed
with the following requirements:
a. Studs may have a maximum spacing of twenty-four (24) inches on
centers.
b. Diagonal corner bracing may be applied on the inside surface of
studs.
c. Corner posts may consist of two (2) two by four (2 x 4) inch studs or
a single four by four (4 x 4) inch stud.
d. Horizontal bracing and collar beams may be two by six (2 x 6) inch
with a maximum spacing of four (4) foot on centers.
e. Garage headers:
SPAN FEET SIZE
0' - 3' 2 - 2x4
3' - 6' 2 - 2x6
6' - 8' 2 - 2x8
8' - 12' 2 - 2x10
12' - 16' 2 - 2x12
NOTE: When headers are not on gable ends one (1) additional member shall
be added for openings over eight (8) feet.
(f) GARAGE HEATING. All open flame equipment shall be effectively separate by
not less than one (1) hour fire-resistive wall, floor or ceiling; however, suspended
furnaces or directly-fired units that are fired with a liquid fuel or gas may be used
without an enclosure, provided that they are located at least seven (7) feet above the
floor and at least six (6) inches from any combustible wall or ceiling. All units shall
be supported by non-combustible brackets or hangers.
SEC. 15-1-12 BASEMENTS; EXCAVATIONS.
(a) BASEMENT SUBFLOORING. First floor subflooring shall be completed within
sixty (60) days after the basement is excavated.
(b) FENCING OF EXCAVATIONS. The owner of any premises on which exists an
opening or excavation which is located in close proximity to a public sidewalk or
street right-of-way as to constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall
erect a fence, wall or railing at least four (4) feet high between such openings or
excavation and the public right-of-way.
(c) CLOSING OF ABANDONED EXCAVATIONS. Any excavation for building
purposes, abandoned wells, open pits, old septic tanks or any uncovered foundation
which shall remain open for more than sixty (60) days shall be deemed abandoned
and a nuisance, and the Building Inspector shall order that unless the erection of the
building or structure on the excavation, well, pit or foundation shall commence or
continue forthwith, suitable safeguards shall be provided to prevent accidental injury
to children or other frequenters or that the excavation or foundation be filled to
grade. Such order shall be served upon the owner of record or the owner's agent,
where an agent is in charge of the premises, and upon the holder of an encumbrance
of record in the manner provided for service of a summons in the circuit court. If the
owner or the holder of an encumbrance of record cannot be found, the order may be
served by posting it on the premises and by publication in the official newspaper for
two (2) consecutive publications at least ten (10) days before the time for
compliance stated in the order commences to run. Such time shall be not less than
fourteen (14) nor more than twenty (20) days after service. If the owner of the land
fails to comply with the order within the time required, the Building Inspector shall
cause the excavation, well, pit, septic tank or foundation to be filled to grade. The
cost of such abatement shall be charged against the real estate and entered on the
next succeeding tax roll as a special charge and shall bear interest at a rate
established by the Common Council from the date of the report by the Building
Inspector on the cost thereof, pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 66.60, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 15-1-13 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Building Code, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings assigned to them in this Section. Words and phrases not herein otherwise defined
shall have the meanings accepted by common usage:
(a) ACCESSORY BUILDING - Accessory building means a detached building not
used as a dwelling unit but which is incidental to that of the main building and which
is located on the same lot. Accessory building does not mean farm building.
(b) ADDITION - Any new construction whereby an existing building or structure, or
building or structure in the course of construction, is increased in area or cubical
content.
(c) ADJOINING LOT LINE - The line between adjoining lots, plots of land or parcels
of land of different or same ownership.
(d) ALLEY - A municipal right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting properties. A street shall not be considered an alley.
(e) ALTERATION - A substantial change or modification other than an addition or
repair to a dwelling or to systems involved within a dwelling.
(f) APPROVED OR APPROVAL - An approval of the Department or its authorized
representative. (Approval is not to be construed as an assumption of any legal
responsibility for the design or construction of the dwelling or building component.)
(g) AREA - As applied to dimensions, means the maximum horizontal projected area of
a building, structure, room, apartment or open space, not including overhang.
(h) BUILDING - Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels or property of any kind.
(i) BUILDING EXISTING - A building erected prior to adoption of this Chapter or
one for which a legal building permit has been issued.
(j) BUILDING INSPECTOR - The officer charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Chapter or his/her regularly authorized deputy. Same for
Building Official.
(k) CUBIC CONTENTS - The actual cubic space enclosed within the outer surface of
the outside or enclosed walls, outer surfaces of the roof and the finished surfaces of
the lowest floors of a building or structure. Does not include the contents of courts
which are open to the sky.
(l) DEPARTMENT - The State of Wisconsin Department of Industry, Labor and
Human Relations.
(m) DETACHED BUILDING - Any building which is not physically connected to the
dwelling, except for a garage which is considered detached only if it is located eight
(8) feet or more from a dwelling unit.
(n) DWELLING - A building which is designed or used or which is intended to be
used as a residence or place of abode.
(o) FLOOR AREA - The net area of any floor space enclosed by exterior walls, fire
walls, or absolute fire separation, exclusive of open spaces.
(p) GARAGE - A building or portion thereof in which a motor vehicle containing
gasoline, distillate or other volatile flammable liquid in its tank is stored, repaired or
kept.
(q) GARAGE, PRIVATE - A building or portion of a building in which only motor
vehicles used by the tenants of the building or buildings on the premises are stored
or kept.
(r) LOT - A parcel of land in a single ownership, occupied or to be occupied by not
more than one (1) principal or main building and the accessory buildings or uses
customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as are required by this or
other codes, and having its principal frontage upon a street.
(s) LOT LINE - A line or lines dividing one (1) lot, plot of land or parcel of land from
an adjoining lot, plot of land or parcel of land.
(t) NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS - A lawfully existing building, premises,
structure, use, materials or equipment which do not conform to the requirements of
this Chapter.
(u) OCCUPANCY OR USE - The purpose for which a building, structure, equipment,
materials or premises or part thereof is used or intended to be used as regulated by
this Chapter.
(v) OWNER - Any person having a legal or equitable interest in the dwelling.
(w) PRINCIPAL BUILDING - A single main building or structure on a lot for specific
use or occupancies.
(x) REPAIR - The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the
purpose of its maintenance. The word "repair" or "repairs" shall not apply to any
change or construction.
(y) STRUCTURE - As specifically regulated by this Chapter, anything which is
constructed, erected and framed of component parts and which is fastened, anchored
or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground for any occupancy or use
whatsoever, excluding fencing.
(z) SQUARE FOOTAGE OF BUILDING - The actual area in square feet enclosed
by the exterior perimeter of the building walls on each separate floor level.
(aa) UNUSUAL CONSTRUCTION - Any construction methods or materials not
covered in this Chapter.
(bb) WISCONSIN INSIGNIA - A device or seal approved by the Department to certify
compliance with this Chapter.
SEC. 15-1-14 INVALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY.
If any Section, Subsection, paragraph, cause or provision of this Building Code shall be
adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the provisions so adjudged, and the
rest of this Chapter shall remain valid and effective.
SEC. 15-1-15 THROUGH SEC. 15-1-29 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
ARTICLE B
Electrical Code
SEC. 15-1-30 STATE ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.
(a) Wis. Adm. Code ILHR Ch. 24 is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this Chapter and shall apply to the construction and inspection of new one- and
two-family dwellings and additions or modifications to existing one- and two-family
dwellings.
(b) Subject to the exceptions set forth in this Chapter, ILHR 16, ILHR 17 and PSC 114
of the Wisconsin Administrative Code are hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this Chapter and shall apply to all buildings, except those covered in
Subsection (a) above.
SEC. 15-1-31 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
(a) RIGHT OF ACCESS TO BUILDINGS. The Electrical Inspector or his assistants
shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any public or private buildings,
premises or subway in the discharge of his official duties or for the purpose of
making any inspection or test of the electrical wires or appliances contained therein.
He shall be given prompt access to any premises upon notification to the proper
authority.
(b) AUTHORITY TO DISCONTINUE ELECTRICAL OPERATIONS. The
Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical
currents to any equipment which he shall find to be in an unsafe condition and cut or
discontinue electrical service in case of emergency and where such electrical
currents are dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the Fire
Department. No person, firm or corporation shall reconnect any equipment thus cut
off until written permission is given by the Electrical Inspector.
(c) PERIODIC INSPECTION. The Electrical Inspector periodically may make
inspection and thorough examinations of all the electrical wires and appliances
installed with the City of Menasha and when such wires and appliances are found to
be in a dangerous or unsafe condition he shall notify the person, firm or corporation
owning, using, operating or installing the same to place them in a safe condition.
Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to make the necessary repairs or
changes, and have such completed within fifteen (15) days after the receipt of such
notice shall be subject to a forfeiture as prescribed in this Chapter. The Electrical
Inspector is hereby empowered with authority to order the discontinuance of
electrical service to such defective wires or equipment until they have been repaired,
removed or changed as directed by the Electrical Inspector, subject to the limitations
of this Chapter.
SEC. 15-1-32 DEFINITIONS.
(a) ELECTRICAL WORK. "Electrical work" means and includes the installation,
superintending or inspection of electrical wiring and equipment for the production,
modification, utilization or safeguarding of electrical energy as covered by the
Wisconsin State Electrical Code, the provisions of which so far as applicable are
hereby adopted by reference thereto together with amendments hereafter validly
made.
(b) MASTER ELECTRICIAN. The work of a "Master Electrician" consists of the
planning or superintending and the installing, altering or repairing of electric wiring
and equipment, as covered by the Wisconsin State Electrical Code. Before any
person shall be licensed as a Master Electrician, he must have served at least three
(3) years as a Journeyman Electrician, must pass the examination for a Master
Electrician license and shall have complied with all requirements for a Master
Electrician license.
(c) JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIAN. The work of a "Journeyman Electrician"
consists of the installing, altering, or repairing of electrical wiring and equipment as
covered by the Wisconsin State Electrical Code. Before any person shall be licensed
as a Journeyman Electrician he shall have completed a four (4) year apprenticeship
in the trade and must pass the examination of a Journeyman Electrician license and
shall have complied with all requirements for a Journeyman Electrician license.
(d) ELECTRICAL APPRENTICE. An "Electrical Apprentice" is a person, sixteen
(16) years of age or over who shall enter into any contract of service, expressed or
implied, whereby he is to receive from or through his employer in consideration of
his services, as in whole or in part, instruction in the electrical craft. All Apprentice
Electricians shall be indentured and serve an apprenticeship under the State Statutes
before being eligible to make application for a Journeyman Electrician license.
(e) PLANT ELECTRICIAN. A "Plant Electrician" may be a Journeyman or Master
Electrician regularly employed by a person, firm or corporation and whose electrical
work for such employer is limited exclusively to the plant or shop of his employer.
SEC. 15-1-33 ELECTRICIAN LICENSES.
(a) No person shall perform the work of Master Electrician unless licensed by the City
of Menasha after having satisfactorily passed the examination for a Master
Electrician license.
(b) No person other than indentured Electrical Apprentices shall perform any of the
work of a Journeyman Electrician unless licensed by the City of Menasha after
having satisfactorily passed the examination for a Journeyman Electrician license.
(c) A Master Electrician license shall entitle the holder to the rights and privileges
conferred by a Journeyman Electrician license. Every Master and Journeyman
Electrician, while actually performing the work to which this Section applies, shall
carry such credentials as may be prescribed by the City of Menasha.
(d) No person, firm or corporation shall perform the work for which a Master
Electrician license is required, unless at all times a licensed Master Electrician is
regularly, fully and continuously employed to supervise the work.
(e) Master and Journeyman Electrician licenses shall be issued by the City of Menasha
subject to the provisions of this Section. Such licenses shall not be assignable or
transferable.
(f) Every Electrical Contractor and Journeyman Electrician of the City of Menasha who
is engaged in this work as his principal occupation, shall be licensed respectively as
Master Electrician or Journeyman Electrician without examination not later than
thirty (30) days after the date of this Chapter. Such persons, however, may be
required to show their qualifications as Master or Journeyman Electricians by an
affidavit of some person qualified in the opinion of the examining board to be a
competent judge of such qualifications.
(g) Employees of electrical, telephone, telegraph and railway utilities may perform the
planning or superintending and installation, operation and maintenance of equipment
and materials required for the operation of the business of such utilities without a
license, but when said employees perform said work on property or premises of
other persons, firms or corporations, except when making service connections and
installing and testing transformers, meters and other equipment ordinarily furnished
by and remaining the property of the electric company, they shall be licensed in the
same manner provided for in this Chapter, and failure to be so licensed shall
constitute a violation of this Chapter.
(h) Indentured apprentices, who shall be registered with the Electrical Inspector, may
work without a license, but shall at all times work under the immediate supervision
of a licensed Master or Journeyman Electrician. The operating engineers and their
assistants in charge of power generating plants, prime movers, and all auxiliary
equipment and appliances connected therewith, shall be exempt in the supervision,
maintenance, repairs, and in the operation of the electrical equipment under their
jurisdiction, and this Chapter shall not apply to them.
(i) Application for a license shall be made to the Electrical Inspector on forms furnished
by him. Before such a license shall be issued, the application therefor shall be
approved by the Board of Electrical Examiners which shall determine the fitness of
the applicant for the license.
(j) Fees for Master and Journeyman Electrician's Licenses shall be as set in Article E of
this Chapter. All such licenses shall be issued for one (1) year commencing on the
1st day of March and expiring on the last day of February following, unless sooner
revoked. The fees for such a license shall be paid to the City Treasurer.
(k) Any license granted under the provisions of this Article may be revoked by the
Board of Electrical Examiners if the license violates any ordinance or the law
relating to electrical work, or is guilty of installing electrical construction which is a
hazard to life or property. When a license is revoked a new license shall not again
be granted to the same licensee for a period of thirty (30) days nor until the faulty
construction is corrected in accordance with the provisions of the Electrical Code,
and the applicant shall have made application and paid the fees as required for the
original license. The Board of Electrical Examiners shall have discretionary power
to withhold the granting of a new license for cause for a period not to exceed six (6)
months.
SEC. 15-1-34 PERMITS.
(a) PERMITS. The Electrical Inspector shall issue permits for all electrical
installations for light, heat or power upon the filing of proper application which shall
be made on forms furnished by the Inspector, and shall prescribe the nature of the
work as well as such other information as may be required for inspection. In no case
shall any electrical work be started unless a permit has been obtained, unless the
same is expressly exempt from the effect of this Article.
(b) No permit shall be required for repairs made necessary for the proper maintenance
of an existing installation.
(c) Special permits shall be filed out by the Master Electrician for work that does not
require immediate inspection.
(d) On applying for a permit for temporary work, a specified period of time for which
such wiring is to remain in service must be stated. Service shall be cut off at the end
of this period and shall not again be connected without written permission from the
Electrical Inspector.
SEC. 15-1-35 INSPECTION.
Upon completion of the wiring of any building or before any working is to be hidden from
view, it shall be the duty of the person, firm or corporation doing the same to notify the
Electrical Inspector and he shall inspect the installation within twenty-four (24) hours of the
time such notice is received. If, upon inspection, it is found that such installation is fully in
compliance with this Chapter and does not constitute a hazard to life or property, he shall
approve the same and authorize concealment of such wiring or connection for electrical
service. If the installation is incomplete or not strictly in accordance with this Chapter, he
shall issue orders to the person, firm or corporation installing the same to remove all hazards
and make the necessary changes or additions within ten (10) days. Concealment of electric
work before inspection or failure to comply with an order of the Electrical Inspector shall
constitute a forfeiture punishable in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
SEC. 15-1-36 CERTIFICATES OF INSPECTION.
Electrical current shall not be turned on for any electrical installation until a certificate of
inspection has been issued by the Electrical Inspector. However, in occupied buildings
where a permit for light fixtures has been issued, the Electrical Inspector may authorize the
installation of meters for electric service after the wiring has been inspected and approved.
SEC. 15-1-37 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Except where noted below, the Wisconsin Administrative Code for electrical
construction materials and practices shall prevail:
(1) Physical Protection -- The Wisconsin Administrative Code's requirements
are construed to cover exposed wiring in basement areas or on surfaces of
walls, partitions, floors or ceilings.
(b) Where a building is served water through a non-metallic water service pipe from a
connection to a metallic water supply system, a continuous copper grounding
electrode conductor shall be installed from the electric service equipment to an
approved connection on the metallic water supply water system. The size and
method of installation of the grounding electrode conductor shall conform to the
requirements of the Wisconsin State Electrical Code.
SEC. 15-1-38 ARBITRATION.
When the Electrical Inspector condemns all or part of the electrical installation in any
building, the owner within five (5) days after receiving written notice of same from the
Electrical Inspector may file a petition in writing for review of such action of the Electrical
Inspector with the Chairman of the Electrical Examination Board, upon receipt of which
said Board shall at once proceed to determine thereby whether said electrical construction
complied with this Chapter and within three (3) days shall make a decision in accordance
with its findings.
SEC. 15-1-39 RECORDS OF PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS.
The Electrical Inspector shall keep complete records of all permits and inspections made,
and other official work performed under the provisions of this Chapter, and shall be
provided with the necessary supplies to carry out the provisions of this Chapter.
SEC. 15-1-40 PREFABRICATED OR MODULAR DWELLING UNITS.
(a) MODULAR OR PREFABRICATED RESIDENTIAL UNITS DEFINED. A
modular or prefabricated residential building is defined for the purposes of this
Electrical Code as one constructed away from the site upon which it is to be erected.
The building manufactured is either a completed one or in completed sections which
are intended for assembly at the building site into a finished unit. The modular or
prefabricated residential building is differentiated from a trailer in that the former is
not intended for delivery on its own running gear.
(b) PERMIT FEES. Permit fees for modular or prefabricated residential buildings
shall be the same as for on-site conventional wiring installations.
(c) INSPECTIONS. Duties of those seeking permits:
(1) Persons, firms or corporations seeking permits for the installation or
assembly of modular or prefabricated residential units shall furnish to the
City of Menasha Electrical Inspector suitable notice of when such units are
under construction. It shall then be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to
determine if the methods, materials, and practices employed by the
manufacturer meet the requirements of the City of Menasha Electrical Code.
This determination is to be made by inspection at the manufacturer of the
prefabricated or modular residential unit to determine whether the unit is in
complete compliance with the requirements of the City of Menasha
Electrical Code. The inspection requirement may be satisfied by an
inspection made by a local inspector who is licensed by the State in which
the fabrication or manufacturing takes place, or by others deemed qualified
by the authority which enforces this Electrical Code.
(2) The manufacturer of the modular or prefabricated residential unit shall
furnish to the Electrical Inspector of the City of Menasha or his authorized
agent, electrical wiring drawings of each unit, together with bills of materials
and a notarized affidavit certifying that the residential unit is in compliance
with the City of Menasha Electrical Code.
(3) The builder of the prefabricated or modular residential unit shall employ the
services of a Master Electrician who is licensed by the City of Menasha, who
in turn shall secure a wiring permit for all wiring on or in the building,
including the on-site wiring and the wiring done at the factory.
(d) CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED. Before any unit of a
prefabricated or modular construction nature, as defined in this Electrical Code, may
be occupied a certificate of occupancy must be obtained first from the Building
Inspector. The Building Inspector shall issue said certificate of occupancy only after
he has determined that all permit and inspection fees have been paid and bonds have
been filed.
(e) BOND REQUIRED. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the building of
prefabricated or modular homes in the City of Menasha shall prior to the issuance of
a permit by the Building Inspector file with him an official bond in a penal sum
equal to the cost of construction with a recognized surety company authorized to do
business in the State of Wisconsin. The bond surety must be approved by the City
Attorney and run for a period of four (4) years on the conditions that the City for the
use of itself or any citizen will be indemnified for damages by improper electrical
work.
SEC. 15-1-41 THROUGH SEC. 15-1-49 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
ARTICLE C
Plumbing Code
SEC. 15-1-50 STATE PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.
The provisions and regulations of Ch. 145, Wis. Stats., and Chapters ILHR 25 and ILHR 81
through 86, Wis. Adm. Code, are hereby made a part of this Chapter by reference and shall
extend over and govern the installation of all plumbing installed, altered or repaired in the
City. Any further amendments, revisions and modification of said Wisconsin Statutes and
Administrative Code incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this Chapter.
Where requirements of the state codes and the provisions of this Chapter conflict, the stricter
requirements shall govern.
SEC. 15-1-51 PLUMBING PERMITS.
(a) APPLICATION AND PERMITS. No plumbing shall be installed in the City of
Menasha without first filing an application and receiving a permit. This shall also
apply to any property annexed to the City before such buildings may be connected to
the drainage, sewer or water system of the City of Menasha. Each application must
be approved by the Plumbing Inspector before a permit to install such plumbing may
be issued. Licensed Master Plumbers only may receive such permits, with the
exception that a permit may be issued to a property owner to install plumbing in a
single family residence which is owned and occupied by such owner as his home.
(b) BOND REQUIRED.
(1) Before a permit may be issued for excavating for plumbing in any public
street, way or alley, the person applying for such permit shall have executed
with the City of Menasha and deposited with the Menasha City Treasurer a
corporate surety to be approved by the Plumbing Inspector in the sum of One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned that he will perform faithfully all
work with due care and skill, and in accordance with the laws, rules, and
regulations of plumbing.
(2) The bond shall state that the person will indemnify and save harmless the
City of Menasha and the owner of the premises against all damages, costs,
expenses, outlays, and claims of every nature and kind arising out of
unskillfulness or negligence on his part in connection with plumbing or
excavating for plumbing as prescribed in this Plumbing Code. Such bond
shall remain in force and must be executed for a period of one (1) year
except that on such expiration it shall remain in force as to all penalties,
claims and demands that have accrued thereunder prior to such expiration.
SEC. 15-1-52 WATER REGULATIONS.
(a) Water services shall be installed from the main up to and including the curb stop.
(b) All water service pipes shall be constructed of materials approved by the State of
Wisconsin as found in the Wisconsin Administrative Code, however, if it is
determined by the Menasha Utilities that said water pipes used do not provide
sufficient support for the water meter, the contracting plumber then shall be required
to supply sufficient bracing as determined by the Commission.
(c) Water service pipes shall extend at least twelve inches (12") above the floor or out of
the wall to facilitate reflanging if necessary.
(d) The Menasha Utilities shall install the meter and connections from the stop and
waste valve.
(e) The Menasha Utilities shall turn off the water on any leaking service that is not
repaired in a reasonable length of time, after notification to the consumer. This shall
be determined by the Superintendent.
(f) The water service shall be laid with not less than five and one-half feet (5-1/2') of
cover.
(g) All service pipes shall terminate at a point within the building where it is convenient
to set, remove for testing and read the meter.
(h) No soldered joints shall be allowed underground.
(i) No plumber shall be allowed to operate any water department valves, unless
authorized to do so by the Menasha Utilities. Curb stop may be operated by the
plumber.
(j) All installments shall conform to Wisconsin State Plumbing Code requirements.
(k) If a nonmetallic water service pipe is used, the contracting plumber shall leave the
trench open until a copper grounding electrode can be installed and connected to the
metallic water supply system as required in the City Plumbing Code.
SEC. 15-1-53 THROUGH SEC. 15-1-69 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
ARTICLE D
Mechanical Code
SEC. 15-1-70 HEATING, VENTILATING AND AIR CONDITIONING
STANDARDS.
The Wisconsin Administrative Code, ILHR Chapters 23 and 64, and all amendments
thereto, are hereby made a part of this Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Code by
reference and shall apply to all one (1) and two (2) family dwellings and alterations and
additions thereto.
NOTE: Before proceeding with the construction, installation, erection, alteration or
remodeling of any boiler, furnace, incinerator, wood burner, heat-producing apparatus,
air-cooled, water-cooled or mechanically-cooled air conditioning or refrigeration system,
storage tanks or other equipment pertaining to the use of flammable liquids, a permit shall
be first obtained from the Building Inspector.
SEC. 15-1-71 UNDERGROUND TANKS (ABANDONED, OUT-OF-SERVICE);
REMOVAL.
(a) TEMPORARILY OUT-OF-SERVICE. Tanks shall be rendered "temporarily
out-of-service" only when it is planned that they will return to active service at the
location within ninety (90) days. The following steps shall be carried out
successively:
(1) Removal of a flammable liquid which can be pumped out with a service
pump.
(2) Cap or plug the fill line, gauge opening and pump suction, using appropriate
sealing compound on pipe fittings. If fill line and gauge opening are
equipped with caps which can be properly locked, the secure locking of
these caps is sufficient.
(3) Leave the vent line open.
(b) ABANDONED TANKS. Tanks which are no longer in service may be rendered
"temporarily out-of-service" pending their removal in accordance with the procedure
outlined in Subsection (e).
(c) LEAKING TANKS. All tanks found to be leaking shall be removed as per
Subsection (e).
(d) CHANGE IN USE. Whenever there is a change in use of a premises which no
longer requires the use of existing underground tanks, they shall be removed as per
Subsection (e). This shall apply to all premises where the use has already changed
and all future changes in use.
(e) REMOVAL OF TANKS. Tanks shall be removed according to the following
successive steps:
(1) Remove all flammable liquid from connecting lines and tank.
(2) Disconnect and remove insofar as possible the suction, inlet, gauge and vent
lines.
(3) Cap or plug open ends of remaining lines.
(4) Close all openings in the tank with pipe plugs before the tank is removed
from the ground.
(5) Remove the tank from the premises within seventy-two (72) hours from the
time the tank is uncovered.
(6) Keep the tank tightly sealed with plugs or caps until it is removed from the premises
and during transportation upon its removal.
SEC. 15-1-72 AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION SYSTEMS.
(a) PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
(1) Except as hereinafter provided, before proceeding with the construction,
erection or installation of any air-cooled, water-cooled or
mechanically-cooled air conditioning or refrigeration system or unit in or to
serve any building, a permit shall first be obtained from the Building
Inspector.
(2) Permits shall not be required for the installation of any air conditioning or
refrigeration system or unit that does not use water for cooling and where the
source of operating power is obtained by plugging in an electrical cord
connection to an electrical outlet. This paragraph shall be applicable to
portable units.
(3) Application for a permit shall be made by the installing contractor upon a
form provided by the Building Inspector, shall be filled out completely and
shall provide the following information:
a. Name and address of contractor.
b. Location of premises where installation is proposed.
c. Name and address of owner.
d. Location of unit on premises, including distance to lot lines for
exterior apparatus.
e. Manufacturer's identification, classification and size of unit.
f. Nature of coolant.
g. If water-cooled, source of water and method of discharging
wastewater. (Refer to Plumbing Inspection Department.)
h. Where water conservation devices are required, manufacturers's
name, identification, classification and size of equipment.
i. Such additional information as shall be required by the Building
Inspector.
(b) EXTERIOR STRUCTURES. Where any unit of an air conditioning or
refrigeration system is located outside of the structure, said unit shall comply with
setback requirements as set forth in the Zoning Code, and said location shall be
subject to approval of the Building Inspector. Said location shall not, by noise or
sight, be detrimental to adjoining property.
SEC. 15-1-73 DOMESTIC-TYPE INCINERATORS.
(a) INCINERATORS. Domestic-type incinerators shall meet the requirements of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code, Chapters NR 400 through 499. Said Department
shall have approving authority for the equipment involved. Installation shall
conform to the following requirements, unless superseded by the manufacturer's
requirements.
(b) GAS BURNER CONNECTIONS. Where a gas burner is used, a lever handle
shut-off cock shall be provided before the union at an accessible location in the gas
line at the rear of the burner. Incinerators furnished with means for automatic
ignition of the gas at the main burner shall be equipped with a device which will
automatically shut off the main gas supply in the event the means of ignition
becomes inoperative or the means of keeping the valve of the device open becomes
inoperative, or both.
(c) MOUNTING.
(1) Domestic-type incinerators, except as hereinafter provided, shall be mounted
on floors of fire-resistive construction with non-combustible flooring or
surface finish and with no combustible material against the underside
thereof. Such construction shall extend not less than twelve (12) inches
beyond the incinerator base on all sides, except that at the front or side where
ashes are removed, it shall extend not less than eighteen (18) inches beyond
the incinerator.
(2) Domestic-type incinerators that are specifically approved for installation on a
combustible floor may be mounted in accordance with the condition of such
approval.
(d) MASONRY CHIMNEYS FOR INCINERATORS.
(1) Masonry chimneys for domestic-type incinerators shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements for masonry chimneys. All flues shall
terminate in a substantially constructed spark arrester with openings not
greater than one-half (1/2) inch, or be provided with other suitable means for
avoiding discharge of fly particles. Such screen shall be kept in repair at all
times.
(2) Domestic-type incinerators shall be connected to a chimney suitable for
solid fuel burning appliances.
(e) CLEARANCES.
(1) Domestic-type incinerators, except as provided herewith, shall be installed to
provide clearances between the unit and woodwork or other combustible
material of not less than thirty-six (36) inches at the sides and top and not
less than forty-eight (48) inches at the front and, in no case, shall the
clearance above the charging door be less than forty-eight (48) inches.
(2) Domestic-type incinerators that are specifically approved for installation
with clearance less than specified above may be installed in accordance with
the conditions of such approval, provided that, in any case, the clearances
shall be sufficient to afford ready accessibility for firing, clean out and any
necessary servicing, and with a minimum clearance of three (3) inches
between the sides and combustible material.
(3) Domestic-type incinerators may be installed in rooms, but not in confined
spaces such as alcoves, with reduced clearances to woodwork or other
combustible material, provided that the combustible material is protected
with an approved protective material but in no case shall this clearance be
less than three (3) inches to the protection.
(f) FLUE PIPES FOR INCINERATORS.
(1) Domestic-type incinerator flue pipes, except as herein provided, shall be
installed to provide clearance of not less than eighteen (18) inches to
woodwork or other combustible material.
(2) Domestic-type incinerator flue pipes may be installed in rooms, but not in
confined spaces such as alcoves, with reduced clearances to woodwork or
other combustible material, provided the combustible material is protected
with an approved protective material.
(3) Domestic-type incinerator flue pipes shall not pass through any combustible
wall or partition unless protected at the point of passage in accordance with
Section 15-1-70.
(g) REFUSE CHUTES. Refuse chutes shall not feed directly into incinerators.
SEC. 15-1-74 THROUGH SEC. 15-1-79 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
120194
15:1
ARTICLE E
Penalties and Fees
SEC. 15-1-80 PENALTIES AND VIOLATIONS.
(a) Any building or structure hereafter erected, enlarged, altered or repaired, or any use hereafter
established, or any plumbing, heating and ventilating or electrical work regulated by this
Chapter, in violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed an unlawful building,
structure or use. The appropriate inspector shall promptly report all such violations to the
Common Council and City Attorney, who shall bring an action to enjoin the erection,
enlargement, alteration, repair or moving of such building or structure or the establishment
of such use, or to cause such building, structure or use to be removed and may also be
subject to a penalty as provided in general penalty provisions of this Code of Ordinances. In
any such action, the fact that a permit was issued shall not constitute a defense, nor shall any
error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the pertinent inspector constitute a
defense. Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter may also be enforced by
injunctional order at the suit of the owner or owners of any real estate within the jurisdiction
of this Chapter.
(b) (1) If an inspection reveals a noncompliance with this Chapter or the Uniform Dwelling
Code, the pertinent Inspector shall notify the applicant and the owner, in writing, of
the violation to be corrected. All cited violations shall be corrected within thirty (30)
days after written notification unless an extension of time is granted pursuant to Sec.
ILHR 20.10(1)(c), Wis. Adm. Code.
(2) If, after written notification, the violation is not corrected within thirty (30) days, a
stop-work order may be served on the owner or his representative and a copy thereof
shall be posted at the construction site. Such stop-work order shall not be removed
except by written notice of the Building Inspector after satisfactory evidence has
been supplied that the cited violation has been corrected.
(3) Each day each violation continues after the thirty (30) day written notice period has
run shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the
City from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any
provision of this Chapter or the Uniform Dwelling Code.
(4) If any construction or work governed by the provisions of this Chapter or the
Uniform Dwelling Code is commenced prior to the issuance of a permit, double fees
shall be charged.
(c) Any person feeling aggrieved by an order or a determination of a City Building, Plumbing or
Electrical Inspector may appeal from such order or determination to the Board of Appeals.
Those procedures customarily used to effectuate an appeal to the Board of Appeals shall
apply.
(d) Except as may otherwise be provided by the State Statute or this Chapter, no officer, agent or
employee of the City charged with the enforcement of this Chapter shall render himself
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to person or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this Chapter. Any suit brought
against any officer, agent, or employee of the City, as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of his duties under this Chapter, shall be defended by the legal
120194
15:2
representative of the City until the final determination of the proceedings therein.
SEC. 15-1-81 BUILDING, ELECTRICAL, HEATING, VENTILATING, AIR
CONDITIONING, PLUMBING AND RELATED FEES.
(a) No person may receive a permit under Section 15 without having first paid the appropriate
fee. Such fees will be set and reviewed by the Common Council annually. A list of the fees
shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk and Director of Community Development.
(b) Heating contractors are required to obtain a license from the City of Menasha. Such licenses
shall be issued for one (1) year commencing on the 1st day of March and expiring on the last
day of February following, unless sooner revoked. The fees for such a license shall be
established by the Common Council annually and paid to the City Treasurer.
120194
15:1
CHAPTER 2
Construction Site Erosion Control
SEC. 15-2-1 AUTHORITY.
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the guidelines in Sec. 62.2345, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 15-2-2 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
(a) FINDINGS. The Common Council finds runoff from construction sites carries a significant
amount of sediment and other pollutants to the waters of the State and the City of Menasha.
(b) PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this Chapter to preserve the natural resources; to protect the
quality of the waters of the State and City; and to protect and promote the health, safety and
welfare of the people, to the extent practicable by minimizing the amount of sediment and
other pollutants carried by runoff or discharge from construction sites to lakes, streams and
wetlands.
SEC. 15-2-3 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS.
This Chapter applies to land disturbing and land developing activities on land within the boundaries
and jurisdiction of the City and the public and private lands subject to extraterritorial review under
Ch. 236, Wis. Stats. All State funded or conducted construction is exempt from this Chapter.
NOTE: State funded or conducted construction activities must meet the requirements contained in
the "State Plan for the Control of Construction Erosion and Stormwater Runoff,"
which contains similar requirements as contained in this Chapter, as a minimum.
SEC. 15-2-4 DEFINITIONS.
(a) AGRICULTURAL LAND USE. Use of land for planting, growing, cultivating and
harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption and pasturing or yarding of
livestock.
(b) COMMERCIAL LAND USE. Use of land for the retail or wholesale sale of goods or
services.
(c) CONSTRUCTION SITE CONTROL MEASURE. A control measure used to meet the
requirements of Sec. 15-2-7(b).
(d) CONTROL MEASURE. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion and
attendant pollution.
(e) CONTROL PLAN. A written description of the number, locations, sizes and other
pertinent information of control measures designed to meet the requirements of this Chapter
submitted by the applicant for review and approval by the Building Inspector.
(f) EROSION. The detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock fragments by water,
wind, ice or gravity.
(g) LAND DEVELOPING ACTIVITY. The construction of buildings, roads, parking lots,
120194
15:2
paved storage areas and similar facilities.
(h) LAND DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Any man-made change of the
land surface including removing vegetation cover, excavating, filling and grading but not
including agricultural land uses such as planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting of
crops; growing and tending of gardens; harvesting of trees; and landscaping modifications.
(i) LANDOWNER. Any person holding title to or having any interest in land.
(j) LAND USER. Any person operating, leasing, renting, or having made other arrangements
with the landowner by which the landowner authorizes uses of his land.
(k) RUNOFF. The rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface.
(l) SET OF 1 YEAR DESIGN STORMS. The following rain intensities and rain volumes or
corresponding values specific to the community for the storm durations of 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 6, 12
and 24 hours that occur approximately one per year. The following are typical
characteristics of these one year storms for most of Wisconsin.
Average
Storm Duration Rain Intensity Total Rain
(Hours) (Inches/Hour) (Inches)
0 1.8 0.9
1 1.1 1.1
2 0.7 1.3
3 0.5 1.5
6 0.3 1.7
12 0.2 2.0
24 0.1 2.3
(m) SITE. The entire area included in the legal description of the land on which the land
disturbing or land development activity is proposed in the permit application.
SEC. 15-2-5 DESIGN CRITERIA, STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR
CONTROL MEASURES.
All control measures required to comply with this Chapter shall meet the design criteria, standards
and specifications for the control measures based on accepted design criteria, standards and
specifications identified by the Building Inspector.
SEC. 15-2-6 MAINTENANCE OF CONTROL MEASURES.
All sedimentation basins and other control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this
Chapter shall be maintained by the applicant or subsequent landowner during the period of land
disturbance and land development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate
performance and to prevent nuisance conditions.
SEC. 15-2-7 CONTROL OR EROSION AND POLLUTANTS DURING LAND
DISTURBANCE AND DEVELOPMENT.
120194
15:3
(a) APPLICABILITY. This Section applies to the following sites of land development or land
disturbing activities:
(1) Those requiring a subdivision plat approval or the construction of houses or
commercial, industrial or institutional buildings on lots of approved certified surveys.
(2) Those requiring a certified survey approval or the construction of houses or
commercial, industrial or institutional buildings on lots of approved certified surveys.
(3) Those involving grading, removal of protective ground cover or vegetation,
excavation, land filling or other land disturbing activity affecting a surface area of
four thousand (4,000) square feet or more.
(4) Those involving excavation or filling or a combination of excavation and filling
affecting four hundred (400) cubic yards or more of dirt, sand or other excavation or
fill material.
(5) Those involving street, highway, road or bridge construction, enlargement, relocation
or reconstruction.
(6) Those involving the laying, repairing, replacing or enlarging of an underground pipe
or facility for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more.
NOTE: The above applicability criteria are specifically stated in 1983 Wisconsin Act 416 for
inclusion in this Chapter. Utility companies responsible for energy repair
work should enter into a "memorandum of agreement" with the Building
Inspector clearly stating their responsibilities if their activities may be
included under any of the above applicability criteria.
(b) EROSION AND OTHER POLLUTANT CONTROL REQUIREMENTS. The
following requirements shall be met on all sites described in Subsection (a).
(1) Site Dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by temporary
sedimentation basin, grit chambers, sand filters, up-slope chambers, hydro-cyclones,
swirl concentrators, or other appropriate controls designed and used to remove
particles of one hundred (100) microns or greater for the highest dewatering pumping
rate. If the water is demonstrated to have no particles greater than one hundred (100)
microns during dewatering operations, then no control is needed before discharge,
except as determined by the Building Inspector. Water may not be discharged in a
manner that causes erosion of the site or receiving channels.
NOTE: There are several ways to meet this particle size performance objective, depending
on the pumping rate. As an example, if the pumping rate is very low (1
gal/min), then an inclined or vertical enlargement pipe (about 8" in diameter
for 1 gal/min) several feet long would be an adequate control device to
restrict the discharge of one hundred (100) micron, and larger, particles. As
the pumping rate increases, then the "device" must be enlarged. At a
moderate (100 gal/min) pumping rate, a vertical section of corrugated steel
pipe, or concrete pipe section, or other small "tank" (about 4-1/2 feet across
for a 100 gal/min pumping rate) several feet tall would be adequate. With
these pipe sections or small tanks, inlet baffles would be needed to minimize
turbulence. With very large pumping rates (10,000 gal/min), sediment basins
(about 35 feet in diameter for a pumping rate of 10,000 gal/min) at least three
(3) feet in depth with a simple (but adequately sized) pipe outlet would be
needed. More sophisticated control devices (such as swirl concentrators or
hydro-cyclones) could be specially fabricated that would generally be smaller
than the simple sedimentation devices described above, but they would not
120194
15:4
be required.
(2) Waste and Material Disposal. All waste and unused building materials (including
garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials, or hazardous materials)
shall be properly disposed and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving
channel or storm sewer system.
(3) Tracking. Each site shall have graveled roads, access drives and parking areas of
sufficient width and length to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or
private roadways.
(4) Drain Inlet Protection. All storm drain inlets shall be protected with a straw bale,
filter fabric, or equivalent barrier meeting accepted design criteria, standards and
specifications.
(5) Site Erosion Control. The following criteria apply only to land development or land
disturbing activities that result in runoff leaving the site:
a. Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through the site shall be
diverted around disturbed areas, if practical. Otherwise, the channel shall be
protected as described below in Subsection (b)(5)c.3. Sheetflow runoff from
adjacent areas greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area shall
also be diverted around disturbed areas unless shown to have resultant runoff
velocities of less than 0.5 ft/sec across the disturbed area for the set of one (1)
year design storms. Diverted runoff shall be conveyed in a manner that will
not erode the conveyance and receiving channels.
NOTE: Soil and Conservation Service guidelines for allowable velocities in different
types of channels should be followed.
b. All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical sequence to minimize
the area of bare soil exposed at any one time.
c. Runoff from the entire area disturbed on the site shall be controlled by the
meeting either of the following:
1. All disturbed ground left inactive for seven (7) or more days shall be
stabilized by seeding or sodding (only available prior to September
15) or by mulching or covering, or other equivalent control measure.
2. For sites with more than ten (10) acres disturbed at one time, or if a
channel originates in the disturbed area, one or more sedimentation
basins shall be constructed. Each sedimentation basin shall have a
surface area of at least one (1%) percent of the area draining to the
basin and at least three (3) feet of depth and constructed in
accordance with accepted design specifications. Sediment shall be
removed to maintain a depth of three (3) feet. The basin shall be
designed to trap sediment greater than fifteen (15) microns in size,
based on the set of one (1) year design storms having durations from
0.5 to 24 hours. The basin discharge rate shall also be sufficiently
low as to not cause erosion along the discharge channel or the
receiving water.
3. For sites with less than ten (10) acres disturbed at one time, filter
fences, straw bales, or equivalent control measures shall be placed
along all sideslope and downslope sides of the site. If a channel or
area of concentrated runoff passes through the site, filter fences shall
be placed along the channel edges to reduce sediment reaching the
channel.
120194
15:5
d. Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than ten (10) cubic yards of
material should not be located with a downslope drainage length of less than
twenty-five (25) feet to a roadway or drainage channel. If remaining for
more than seven (7) days, they shall be stabilized by mulching, vegetative
cover, tarps or other means. Erosion from piles which will be in existence
for less than seven (7) days shall be controlled by placing straw bales or filter
fence barriers around the pile. In-street utility repair or construction soil or
dirt storage piles located closer than twenty-five (25) feet of a roadway or
drainage channel must be covered with tarps or suitable alternative control if
exposed for more than seven (7) days, and the storm drain inlets must be
protected with straw bales or other appropriate filtering barriers.
SEC. 15-2-8 PERMIT APPLICATION, CONTROL PLAN, AND PERMIT ISSUANCE.
(a) PERMIT APPLICATION. No landowner or land user may commence a land disturbance
or land development activity subject to this Chapter without receiving prior approval of a
control plan for the site and a permit from the Building Inspector. At least one landowner or
land user controlling or using the site and desiring to undertake a land disturbing or land
developing activity subject to this Chapter shall submit an application for a permit and a
control plan and pay an application fee to the Building Inspector. By submitting an
application, the applicant is authorizing the Building Inspector to enter the site to obtain
information required for a review of the control plan.
(b) CONTENT OF THE CONTROL PLAN FOR LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITIES
COVERING MORE THAN ONE ACRE.
(1) Existing Site Map. A map of existing site conditions on a scale of at least one (1)
inch equals one hundred (100) feet showing the site and immediately adjacent areas:
a. Site boundaries of adjacent lands which accurately identify site location;
b. Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and other water courses on and
immediately adjacent to the site. (Note: The local unit of government should
identify sensitive local waters that may need to be further addressed by the
control plan.);
c. 100 year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways;
d. Location of the predominant soil types;
e. Vegetative cover;
f. Location and dimensions of stormwater drainage systems and natural
drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site;
g. Locations and dimensions of utilities, structures, roads, highways, and
paving; and,
h. Site topography at a contour interval not to exceed five (5) feet.
(2) Plan of Final Site Conditions. A plan of final site conditions on the same scale as the
existing site map showing the site changes.
(3) Site Construction Plan. A site construction plan including:
a. Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities;
b. Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles;
c. Locations and dimensions of all construction site management control
measures necessary to meet the requirements of this Chapter;
d. Schedule of anticipated starting and completion date of each land disturbing
or land developing activity including the installation of construction site
120194
15:6
control measures needed to meet the requirements of this Chapter; and
e. Provisions of maintenance of the construction site control measures during
construction.
(c) CONTENT OF CONTROL PLAN STATEMENT FOR LAND DISTURBING
ACTIVITIES COVERING LESS THAN ONE ACRE, BUT MEETING THE
APPLICABILITY REQUIREMENTS STATED IN SEC. 15-2-7(a). An erosion control
plan statement (with simple map) shall be submitted to briefly describe the site and erosion
controls (including the site development schedule) that will be used to meet the requirements
of the Chapter.
(d) REVIEW OF CONTROL PLAN. Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the
application, control plan (or control plan statement), and fee, the Building Inspector shall
review the application and control plan to determine if the requirements of this Chapter are
met. The Building Inspector shall approve the plan, inform the applicant and issue a permit.
If the conditions are not met, the Building Inspector shall inform the applicant in writing and
may either require needed information or disapprove the plan. Within thirty (30) days of
receipt of needed information, the Building Inspector shall again determine if the plan meets
the requirements of this Chapter. If the plan is disapproved, the Building Inspector shall
inform the applicant in writing of the reasons for the disapproval.
(e) PERMITS.
(1) Duration. Permits shall be valid for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, or the
length of the building permit or other construction authorizations, whichever is
longer, from the date of issuance. The Building Inspector may extend the period one
or more times for up to an additional one hundred eighty (180) days. The Building
Inspector may require additional control measures as a condition of the extension if
they are necessary to meet the requirements of this Chapter.
(2) Surety Bond. As a condition of approval and issuance of the permit, the Building
Inspector may require the applicant to deposit a surety bond or irrevocable letter of
credit to guarantee a good faith execution of the approved control plan and any
permit conditions.
(3) Permit Conditions. All permits shall require the permittee to:
a. Notify the Building Inspector within forty-eight (48) hours of commencing
any land disturbing activity;
b. Notify the Building Inspector of completion of any control measures within
fourteen (14) days after their installation;
c. Obtain permission in writing from the Building Inspector prior to modifying
the control plan;
d. Install all control measures as identified in the approved control plan;
e. Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, control
measures and other facilities identified in the control plan;
f. Repair any situation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and
drainageways resulting from land developing or disturbing activities;
g. Inspect the construction control measures after each rain of 0.5 inches or
more and at least once each week and make needed repairs;
h. Allow the Building Inspector to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting
compliance with the control plan or for performing any work necessary to
bring the site into compliance with the control plan; and
i. Keep a copy of the control plan on the site.
120194
15:7
SEC. 15-2-9 INSPECTION.
The Building Inspector shall inspect construction sites at least once a month during the period
starting March 1 and ending October 31 and at least two (2) times during the period starting
November 1 and ending February 28 to ensure compliance with the control plan. If land disturbing
or land development activities are being carried out without a permit, the Building Inspector shall
enter the land pursuant to the provisions of Sections 66.122 and 66.123, Wis. Stats.
SEC. 15-2-10 ENFORCEMENT.
(a) The Building Inspector may post a stop-work order if:
(1) Any land disturbing or land developing activity regulated under this Chapter is being
undertaken without a permit;
(2) The control plan is not being implemented in a good faith manner; or
(3) The conditions of the permit are not being met.
(b) If the permittee does not cease the activity or comply with the control plan or permit
conditions within ten (10) days, the Building Inspector may revoke the permit.
(c) If the landowner or land user where no permit has been issued does not cease the activity
within ten (10) days, the Building Inspector may request the City Attorney to obtain a cease
and desist order.
(d) The Building Inspector or the Board of Appeals upon appeal may retract the stop-work order
or the revocation.
(e) Ten (10) days after posting a stop-work order, the Building Inspector may issue a notice of
intent to the permittee or landowner or land user of the Building Inspector's intent to perform
work necessary to comply with this Chapter. The Building Inspector may go on the land and
commence the work after fourteen (14) days from issuing the notice of intent. The costs of
the work performed by the Building Inspector, plus interest at the rate authorized by the
Building Inspector, shall be billed to the permittee or the landowner. In the event a permittee
or landowner fails to pay the amount due, the City Clerk shall enter the amount due on the
tax rolls and collect as a special assessment against the property pursuant to Section
66.60(16), Wis. Stats. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
subject to a forfeiture as provided in Section 1-1-7. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
(f) Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter may also be enforced by injunction.
SEC. 15-2-11 APPEALS.
(a) APPEALS. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that
there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the Building Inspector in
administering this Chapter. Upon appeal, the Board of Appeals may authorize variances
from the provisions of this Chapter which are not contrary to the public interest and where
owning to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter will
result in unnecessary hardship. The Board of Appeals shall use the rules, procedures, duties
and powers authorized by statute for zoning boards of appeals in hearing and deciding
appeals and authorizing variances.
(b) WHO MAY APPEAL. Any applicant, permittee, landowner or land user may appeal any
order, decision or determination made by the Building Inspector in administering this
120194
15:8
Chapter.
120194
15:1
CHAPTER 3
Fair Housing
SEC. 15-3-1 STATEMENT ON FAIR HOUSING.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to assure equal opportunity to all persons to live in
adequate housing facilities regardless of race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex,
handicap, sexual preference, marital status of persons maintaining a household, lawful source of
income, place of birth, or age, and, to that end, to prohibit discrimination in housing by any persons.
FAIR AND OPEN HOUSING
(a) The Common Council of the City of Menasha hereby adopts Section 106.50, Wisconsin
Statutes and all subsequent amendments thereto.
(b) The officials and employees of the City of Menasha shall assist in the orderly prevention and
removal of all discrimination in housing within the City by implementing the authority and
enforcement procedures set forth in Section 106.50, Wisconsin Statutes, as amended.
(c) The Community Development Department shall maintain forms for complaints to be filed
under Section 106.50, Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, and shall assist any person alleging a
violation thereof in the City of Menasha to file a complaint thereunder with the Wisconsin
Department of Work Force Development, Equal Rights Division, for the enforcement of
Section 106.50, Wisconsin Statutes, as amended.
SEC. 15-3-2 DEFINITIONS AS USED IN THIS CHAPTER.
(a) DWELLING. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed
for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered
for sale or lease for the construction thereof of any such buildings or structure.
(b) FAMILY. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor
organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts,
unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy and receivers.
(c) REAL PROPERTY. Buildings, structures, lands, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives and
condominiums.
(d) DISCRIMINATION/DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. Any difference in
treatment based upon race, color, religion, sex, sexual preference, ancestry, handicap, marital
status, place of birth or national origin; or any act that is unlawful under this Chapter.
(e) PERSON. Individuals, children, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates,
trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations and all other groups or
combinations.
(f) OWNER. Lessee, sublessee, co-tenant, assignee, managing agent or other person having
the right of ownership or possession, or the right to sell, rent or lease any housing
accommodation.
(g) FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any person as defined herein, engaged in the business of
lending money or guaranteeing loans.
(h) REAL ESTATE BROKER/REAL ESTATE SALESMAN. Any individual qualified by
120194
15:2
law, who, for a fee, commission, salary or for other valuable consideration, or who with the
intention or expectation of receiving or collecting same, lists, sells, purchases, rents or leases
any housing accommodations, including options thereupon, or who negotiates or attempts to
negotiate a loan, secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance, upon transfer of any housing
accommodation; or who is engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting
for collection of a fee in connection with a contract whereby he undertakes to promote the
sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation through its listing in a
publication issued primarily for such purpose; or an individual employed by or acting on
behalf of any of these.
(i) HOUSING ACCOMMODATION/DWELLING. Any building, mobile home or trailer,
structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed, or intended for occupancy as,
a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease
for the construction or location thereon of any real property, as defined herein, used or
intended to be used for any of the purposes set forth in this Subsection.
(j) MORTGAGE BROKER. An individual who is engaged in or who performs the business
or services of a mortgage broker as defined by Wisconsin Statutes.
(k) OPEN MARKET. The market which is informed of the availability for sale, purchase,
rental or lease of any housing accommodation, whether informed through a real estate broker
or by advertising by publication, signs or by any other advertising methods directed to the
public or any portion thereof, indicating that the property is available for sale, purchase,
rental or lease.
SEC. 15-3-3 UNLAWFUL PRACTICES.
In connection with any of the transactions set forth in this Section which affect any housing
accommodation on the open market, or in connection with any public sale, purchase, rental or lease
of any accommodation, it shall be unlawful within the City for a person, owner, financial institution,
real estate broker or real estate salesman, or any representative of the above, to:
(a) Refuse to sell, purchase, rent or lease, or deny to or withhold any housing accommodation
from a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, marital
status, sexual preference, sex, age, or place of birth; or
(b) To discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, purchase,
rental or lease or any housing accommodation, or in the furnishing of facilities or services in
connection therewith; or
(c) To refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell, purchase, rent or lease any housing
accommodation from or to a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, national
origin, handicap, marital status, sexual preference, sex, age, or place of birth; or
(d) To refuse to negotiate for the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation
to a person because of his race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, marital
status, sexual preference, sex, age, or place of birth; or
(e) To represent to a person that any housing accommodation is not available for inspection,
sale, purchase, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or to refuse to permit a person to
inspect any housing accommodation, because of his race, color, religion, national origin,
handicap, marital status, sexual preference, sex, age, or place of birth; or
(f) To make, publish, print, circulate, post or mail, or cause to be made, published, printed,
circulated, posted, or mailed, any notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy
or to sign or to use a form of application for the sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of
120194
15:3
any housing accommodation, or to make a record of inquiry in connection with the
prospective sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing accommodation, which
indicates any discrimination or any intent to make a discrimination.
(g) To offer, solicit, accept or use a list of any housing accommodation for sale, purchase, rental
or lease with the understanding that a person may be subjected to discrimination in
connection with such sale, purchase, rental or lease, or in the furnishing of facilities or
services in connection therewith; or
(h) To induce directly or indirectly, or attempt to induce directly or indirectly, the sale, purchase,
rental or lease, or the listing for any of the above, of any housing accommodation by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular race, color,
religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, marital status, sexual preference, sex, age, or
place of birth in the area to be affected by such sale, purchase, rental or lease will or may
result in either:
(1) The lowering of property values in the area;
(2) An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area; or
(3) A decline in the quality of schools serving the area.
(i) To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale, purchase, rental or lease, or
the anticipated listing of any of the above, or the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any
housing accommodation in any area in the City for the purpose of inducing or attempting to
induce any such listing or any of the above transactions; or
(j) To engage in or hire to be done, or to conspire with others to commit acts or activities of any
nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause panic, incite unrest or create or play upon
fear, with the purpose of either discouraging or inducing, or attempting to induce, the sale,
purchase, rental or lease, or the listing for any of the above, of any housing accommodation;
or
(k) To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person because he has opposed a
practice declared unlawful by this Chapter, or because he has filed a complaint, testified,
assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, hearing or
conference under this Chapter; or
(l) To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of the practices prohibited
by this Chapter; or to obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of
this Chapter; or any orders issued thereunder; or
(m) By canvassing, to commit any unlawful practices prohibited by this Chapter; or
(n) Otherwise to deny to, or withhold any housing accommodation from, a person because of his
race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, marital status, sexual preference,
sex, age, or place of birth; or
(o) For any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation,
association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part, in the making of
commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying
therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a
dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or
other terms or conditions of such loans or other financial assistance because of the race,
color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, marital status, sexual preference, sex, age,
or place of birth of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such
loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance
which is to be made or given; or
(p) To deny any qualified person access to or membership or participation in any
multiple-listing service, real estate brokers organization, or other service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him
120194
15:4
in their terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race,
color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, marital status, sexual preference, sex, age,
or place of birth.
SEC. 15-3-4 EXEMPTIONS.
This Chapter shall not apply to:
(a) A religious organization, association, or society or any nonprofit institution or organization
operating, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, which limits the sale, rental, or occupancy, of dwellings which it
owns or operates for other than commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or
which gives preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on
account of race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, marital status, sexual
preference, sex, age, or place of birth.
(b) A private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or
purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose,
and which limits the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or gives preference
to its members.
(c) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that such private individual
owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided
further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual not
residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of
such house prior to such sale the exemption granted by this Subsection shall apply only with
respect to one such sale within any twenty-four (24) month period; provided further, that
such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or
served on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a
portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family
houses at any one time; provided further, the sale, or rental of any such single-family house
shall be excepted from the application of this Chapter only if such house is sold or rented:
(1) Without the use of any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental
services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman or of such facilities or services
of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or
agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and
(2) Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or
written notice in violation of the provisions of 42 United States Code Section 3604;
and
(3) Without the violation of Section 15-3-3 of this Chapter; but nothing in this provision
shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and
other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
(d) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied
by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually
maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence.
SEC. 15-3-5 ENFORCEMENT.
Any person aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this Chapter may file a complaint with
120194
15:5
the Common Council within thirty (30) days after the aggrieved persons becomes aware of the
alleged unlawful practice and in no event more than sixty (60) days after the alleged unlawful
practice has occurred. The Common Council or duly authorized representative shall receive each
complaint and attempt to resolve each complaint. Failure to achieve a resolution acceptable to both
parties and compliance with this ordinance shall cause the Common Council to forward the
complaint and findings to appropriate state and federal agencies.
120194
15:1
CHAPTER 4
Grievances Regarding Access to Public Buildings
by Handicapped Persons
SEC. 15-4-1 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES REGARDING ACCESS TO PUBLIC
BUILDINGS BY HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
(a) STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. The City of Menasha is committed to providing adequate
access by handicapped or visually impaired persons to public buildings financed in part by
federal revenue sharing. This Section provides for a grievance procedure providing for
prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any action prohibited by the Office of
Revenue Sharing's (ORS) regulations (31 C.F.R. 51.55[d][2]) implementing Section 504 of
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C. 794); Section 504 states, in part, that
"no otherwise qualified handicapped individual...shall, solely by reason of his handicap, be
excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to
discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance..."
(b) COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.
(1) Complaints should be filed with the City Clerk, who has been designated to
coordinate Section 504 Compliance.
(2) A complaint should be filed in writing or verbally, contain the name and address of
the person filing it, and briefly describe the alleged violation of the regulations.
(3) A complaint should be filed within thirty (30) days after the complainant becomes
aware of the alleged violation. (Processing of allegations of discrimination occurring
before this grievance procedure was in place will be considered on a case-by-case
basis.)
(4) An investigation, as may be appropriate, shall follow a filing of a complaint. The
investigation will be conducted by an appropriate person designated by the City
Clerk who should review the handicapped Requirements Handbook published by the
Federal Programs Advisory Service.
(5) A written determination as to the validity of the complaint and description of the
resolution, if any, shall be issued by the designated person and a copy forwarded to
the complainant no later than thirty (30) days after its filing.
(6) The Section 504 coordinator shall maintain the files and records of the City relating
to the complaints filed.
(c) APPEALS.
(1) The complainant may appeal the decision of the Section 504 coordinator where he or
she is dissatisfied with the resolution. The appeal request shall be made within seven
(7) days to the City Clerk.
(2) The grievance shall be heard by the Common Council within ten (10) working days
after the filing of an appeals request. The grievance shall be heard at the City Hall at
a convenient time fixed by the Council. The City Clerk shall give at least three (3)
days written notice to the applicant by first class mail of any such grievance hearing.
(3) Either party to the grievance may be represented, present evidence by testimony or
otherwise, cross-examine witnesses and make argument either in person or by an
agent of his or her choosing. Proceedings may, and, upon request of the applicant,
shall, be recorded.
(4) The decision of the Common Council on the grievance appeal shall be in writing and
120194
15:2
shall state the reasons for the decision. The decision of the Council shall be rendered
within three (3) working days of the close of the hearing and the Common Council
shall immediately upon rendering the decision mail a copy thereof by first class mail
to the applicant at the current post office address given in his or her application and
record a copy of its determination with the City Clerk.
(d) OTHER REMEDIES. The right of a person to a prompt and equitable resolution of the
complaint filed hereunder shall not be impaired by the person's pursuit of other remedies
such as the filing of a Section 504 complaint with the Office of Revenue Sharing, U.S.
Department of the Treasury. Utilization of this grievance procedure is not a prerequisite to
the pursuit of other remedies. However, the City believes that resolution of the complaint
will be more promptly achieved if the City is able to provide a remedy before the complaint
is brought to an external organization.
(e) DUE PROCESS. This Section shall be construed to protect the substantive rights of
interested persons, to meet appropriate due process standards and to assure that the City
complies with Section 504 and the ORS regulations.
120194
15:1
CHAPTER 5
Housing Code
Purpose and Scope
SEC. 15-5-1 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known as the "Housing Code of the City of Menasha."
SEC. 15-5-2 SCOPE.
This chapter shall apply to all buildings or portions thereof used, designed or intended to be used for
human habitation. No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling for the
purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not comply with this chapter.
SEC. 15-5-3 INTERPRETATION.
The provisions of the chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements to protect the health, safety,
morals and welfare of the people of the City. Where this chapter imposes stricter requirements than
those imposed by other provisions of the law or ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
SEC. 15-5-4 DEFINITIONS.
For the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, certain words or terms are defined as follows:
(1) Accessory Building means a detached building, not used as a dwelling unit but is
incidental to that of the main building and which is located on the same lot.
(2) Approved means approval by the Building Inspector.
(3) Basement. A portion of a building located partly underground, but having half or
more of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining
ground.
(4) Basement, Half or Lower Level. A portion of a building located partly underground
but having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of
the adjoining ground.
(5) Boarder. A person who regularly receives lodging with or without meals at another's
home for pay or services.
(6) Boarding House. A building or boarding unit other than motel, hotel or tourist home,
where for compensation sleeping accommodations are provided with or without
meals for non-transients.
(7) Boarding Unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a habitable unit used or
intended to be used for living and/or sleeping but not for cooking or eating purposes.
(8) Building Inspector. The Building Inspector of the City.
(9) Dwelling. Any building or structure or part thereof which is used or intended to be
used for living or sleeping.
120194
15:2
(10) Dwelling Unit. A residential building, or portion thereof, intended for occupancy by
a single family, but not including hotels, motels and boarding houses.
(11) Extermination. The control or elimination of insects, rodents or other pests either by
eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible materials
that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping, by
blocking their access to a dwelling or by any other recognized and legal pest
elimination method approved by the Health Officer.
(12) Family. Any number of persons each related by blood, marriage, adoption, or foster
care arrangement living together as a single housekeeping unit, or a group of not
more than four (4) persons not so related, maintaining a common household, and
using common cooking and kitchen facilities.
(13) Fire Inspector. The Fire Inspector of the City.
(14) First Story. The story of a dwelling at or next above the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
(15) Garbage. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking or consumption of food.
(16) Health Officer. The Health Officer of the City.
(17) Hotel. A place where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to transients, in a
five or more rooms, and all related rooms, buildings and areas.
(18) Infestation. The presence within or around a dwelling, or in or near waste disposal
containers, of any insects, rodents or other pests.
(19) Motel. A hotel that furnishes on-premise parking for motor vehicles of guests as part
of the room charge, without extra cost, and that is identified as a "motel" rather than
a "hotel" at the request of the operator.
(20) Multiple Residence. Three (3) or more dwelling units in one structure.
(21) Occupant. Any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in one structure.
(22) Operator. Any responsible person who has charge, care or control of a building, or
part thereof, in which dwelling units are leased or let.
(23) Owner. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in the dwelling.
(24) Person. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of
any kind.
(25) Plumbing. Any water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water
closets, sinks, installed dishwashers and clothes washing machines, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, catch basins, drains, vents and other similar supplied
fixtures, including all connections to water or sewer lines.
(26) Premises. A platted or unplatted lot or parcel of land, either occupied or unoccupied
by any dwelling, and including any such accessory structure, or other structure
thereon.
(27) Room. A space within a building completely enclosed, except for openings for light,
ventilation, ingress or egress.
(28) Room, Habitable. Any room used for sleeping, living or dining purposes, excluding
such enclosed places as kitchens, closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, hallways,
laundries, storage spaces, utility rooms, and similar spaces.
(29) Rubbish. Any combustible or non-combustible waste material, except garbage.
Rubbish includes the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other
combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather,
tree branches, yard trimmings, leaves, tin cans, metal, mineral matter, glass,
crockery, and dust.
(30) Supplied. Paid for, arranged, furnished or provided by or under control of the owner
120194
15:3
or operator.
(31) Tourist or Transient. A person who travels from place to place away from his or her
permanent address for vacation, pleasure, recreation, culture, business or
employment.
(32) Tourist Home. A building or dwelling unit other than hotels and motels where for
compensation sleeping accommodations are provided with or without meals for
tourists or transients.
SECTION 15-5-5 THROUGH SECTION 15-5-9 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
120194
15:4
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SEC. 15-5-10 INSPECTION OF DWELLINGS.
(a) WHEN REQUIRED. Upon written complaint, if it is believed inspection is warranted to
safeguard the health and safety of the occupants of any dwelling and of the general public,
the Building Inspector shall have free access to dwelling for such inspections. Alternatively,
the Building Inspector may initiate an inspection if, in his judgement, the dwelling appears to
be in a condition that threatens the health and safety of its occupants or the general public,
(b) OWNER'S ACCESS FOR REPAIRS. Every occupant of a dwelling shall give the owner
thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such dwelling or its premises at any
reasonable hour to make repairs or alterations necessary to effect compliance with this
chapter or any lawful order issued pursuant thereto.
(c) CITY PERSONNEL NOT TO BE LIABLE. No officer, agent or employee of the City
shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter. Any suit
brought against any officer, agent or employee of the City as a result of the proper discharge
of his duties under this chapter shall be defended by the City Attorney until final
determination of the proceedings therein.
SEC. 15-5-11 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
(a) FOR NON-COMPLIANCE, GENERALLY. Whenever the Building Inspector
determines there has been any violation of this chapter, he shall give notice of such violation
to the person responsible therefor and order compliance with this chapter as herein provided.
Such notice and order shall be in writing on an appropriate form and shall include:
(1) A list of the violations, with reference to the Section of this Chapter violated, and an
order as to the remedial action required to effect compliance with this Chapter.
(2) Specification of a reasonable time for compliance.
(b) FOR "DANGEROUS DWELLINGS." The Building Inspector may determine that a
dwelling is a dangerous dwelling if any of the following defects are present:
(1) Those whose interior and exterior bearing walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to such an extent as to weaken the structural support they provide.
(2) Those which, excluding the foundation, show thirty-three percent (33%) or more
damage or deterioration of the members or fifty percent (50%) or more damage or
deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
(3) Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which
the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for
the purpose used.
(4) Those which have been so damaged by fire, wind or other causes as to no longer
provide shelter from the elements and which have become dangerous to the life,
safety, morals or general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the
City.
(5) Those which have become so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary,
vermin-infested or obsolete that they are likely to cause sickness or disease or injury
to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein or of the people
of the City.
(6) Those which lack light, air and sanitation facilities required by this Chapter to protect
120194
15:5
the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein.
(7) Those which lack the facilities required by this Chapter for egress in case of fire or
panic or those which have insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other
means of ingress and egress.
(8) Those whose parts are so attached that they may fall and injure occupants or the
public or other property.
(c) DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; ORDERS. All "dangerous dwellings," within the
terms of this nuisance, unfit for habitation, and shall be ordered vacated and repaired or
demolished in accordance with the provisions of 15-5-13.
(1) Where a "dangerous dwelling" is fifty percent (50%) or more damaged, decayed, or
deteriorated from its original structure, or where it cannot be repaired so as to comply
with the terms of this Chapter, it shall be ordered vacated and demolished in
accordance with the provisions of 15-5-1.
(2) For other provisions relating to dangerous buildings, see 15-1-4 of this Municipal
Code.
(3) Upon making such determination, the Building Inspector shall:
a. Affix upon the door or entrance to such dwelling a printed placard declaring
that such dwelling is unfit for human habitation and is ordered vacated. No
person shall deface or remove such placard from any dwelling which has
been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such. The
Building Inspector shall remove the placard whenever the defect upon which
the condemnation and placarding was based has been eliminated.
b. Serve notice as provided herein to the owner and occupant or lessee of any
building found by him to be a "dangerous dwelling" within the standards set
forth in Section 15-5-18 that:
1. The owner shall vacate and repair or demolish such building in
accordance with the terms of the notice and this Chapter; and
2. The occupant or lessee shall vacate such building; or, with the
consent of the owner, may have it repaired in accordance with the
notice and order, and continue occupancy.
SEC. 15-5-12 ORDERS TO VACATE.
(a) ISSUANCE. Where a notice of violation and order to comply have been served pursuant to
this Chapter and, upon reinspection at the end of the time specified for compliance the
violation has not been remedied and no petition for a hearing has been filed, the Building
Inspector may order the dwelling, or parts thereof affected by the continued violation,
vacated according to the following procedure:
(1) Dwellings shall be vacated within a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days.
(2) Vacated dwellings shall have outer doors firmly locked, and basement, cellar and
first and second story windows barred or boarded to prevent entry.
(3) Vacated dwellings shall not again be used for human habitation until written
approval is secured from the Building Inspector.
(b) NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS TO VACATE. If a dwelling, or part thereof, is
not vacated within the time specified in the order to vacate, the Building Inspector shall seek
a court order in a court of competent jurisdiction or issue a citation under 0-19-90 for the
vacation of such dwelling or part thereof.
120194
15:6
SEC. 15-5-13 VACATION AND REPAIR OR DEMOLITION.
(a) If the owner, occupant or lessee fails to comply with the order of the Building Inspector or
the action of the Housing Appeals Board after hearing, the Building Inspector shall, after
consulting with the City Attorney, cause the costs of such repair or demolition to be charged
against the land on which the building existed as a municipal lien or to be recovered in a
lawsuit against the owner.
(b) Where it reasonably appears there is immediate danger to any person, if a "dangerous
dwelling" as defined herein is not immediately vacated and repaired or demolished, the
Building Inspector shall, after consulting with the City Attorney, cause its immediate
vacation and repair or demolition. The costs of such emergency repair or demolition shall be
collected in the same manner as provided in Subsection (a) of this Section.
(c) The initial determination shall be made by the Department of Community Development.
They shall then issue a raze or repair order to be sent certified mail to all owners of the
property involved and any lien holders, and certify to the City Attorney same has been done.
(d) After the time period has expired and nothing has been done, or substantial compliance has
not come into effect, the Department of Community Development shall take such matter to
the Administration Committee who shall make a determination as to whether or not the
building should be razed and forward its recommendation to the Common Council.
(e) Should condemnation be ordered by the Common Council and the City Attorney has
concluded that all of the legal requirements have been met, he shall then sign the
condemnation order, which should read as follows:
"By order of the Common Council ..., ____________, City Attorney."
All procedures after that shall be handled by the City Attorney, who shall have sole
responsibility for the enforcement of this ordinance.
(f) Restoration of Site. All debris, rubbish and other materials not used for fill shall be removed
from the premises upon cmpletion of the demolition work and the site graded to conform
with the grade of adjoining premises.
(g) All work done by or on behalf of the City shall become a lien against the property and be
placed on the tax rolls.
SEC. 15-5-14 EMERGENCY ORDERS.
Whenever the Building Inspector finds an emergency exists which requires immediate action to
protect the health and safety of the residents or the public, he may issue an order so stating; and
notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, such order shall take effect and be complied
with immediately.
Upon petition to the Housing Appeals Board, petitioner shall be afforded a hearing pursuant to
Chapter 15-5-18 and 15-5-19.
SEC. 15-5-15 EMERGENCY DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICES OR UTILITIES.
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility to be removed
from or shut off from or discontinued in any occupied dwelling unit let or occupied by him, except
for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in
120194
15:7
progress or, during temporary emergencies, when discontinuance of service is approved by the
Building Inspector. Upon the discontinuance of gas or electric service for cause by a public utility
company or upon discontinuance of any City or other service cause, the Building Inspector shall be
notified and shall take immediate steps to have the responsible person correct conditions leading to
such discontinuance of services. This Section shall not be construed to prevent the cessation or
discontinuance of any such service upon order of the Building Inspector or any other authorized
official.
SEC. 15-5-16 NOTICE, CONTENT, SERVICE, TIME FOR REMEDIAL ACTION BY
OWNER.
Whenever the Director of Community Development or his designee determines that there has been a
violation of the Minimum Housing Code, Plumbing Code, Electrical Code, or Fire Code, or that
there is reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision, he shall give
written notice of such violation or alleged violation to the party responsible for maintaining the
premises in compliance with this title or agent as designated in writing.
(a) Include a description of real estate sufficient for identification;
(b) Include a statement of the alleged violation or violations;
(c) Include an order for remedial action;
(d) Allow reasonable time, of up to four months, for performance of any action required;
(e) Be served upon the responsible party or agent as designated in writing; provided, however,
that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such party, if a copy thereof is
delivered to him personally or if not found, by leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of
abode, in the presence of someone of the family of suitable age and discretion who shall be
informed of the contents thereof, or by sending a copy thereof by registered mail, with return
receipt required, to his last known address, or if the registered letter with the copy is returned
with a receipt showing it has not been delivered to him, by posting a copy thereof in a
conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice.
SEC. 15-5-17 HOUSING APPEALS BOARD CREATED.
(a) When the Board of Zoning Appeals hears appeals from any inspector under this ordinance, it
is deemed to be and sits as the Housing Appeals Board. The Board, in order to provide for
reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance, is empowered to pass upon
matters pertaining to this ordinance.
(b) The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting investigations and
shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the housing inspector with a duplicate
copy to the appellant and may recommend to the Common Council such new legislation as is
consistent with this Ordinance.
SEC. 15-5-18 HOUSING APPEALS BOARD--HEARINGS, PETITIONS,
CONTENTS, DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT,
RECORDS, OATHS AND AFFIRMATIONS.
(a) Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the
120194
15:8
enforcement of any provision of this Ordinance, may request and shall be granted a hearing
on the matter before the Housing Appeals Board; provided, that the person requesting the
hearing shall file a written petition with the Board and/or the Director of Community
Development requesting such hearing, specifying the grounds thereof. Such petition shall be
filed prior to expiration of the time stated on the order. The petition for hearing shall be filed
with the Board in duplicate, and shall set forth name, address and brief statement of grounds
for such hearing.
(b) The Director of Community Development and/or the City Clerk shall forthwith, upon the
filing of such petitions, transmit to the Board all of the papers constituting the record upon
which the petition for the hearing was taken.
(c) The Board shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations in connection with the
conduct of said hearing held in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
SEC. 15-5-19 HOUSING APPEALS BOARD--HEARINGS, TIMES,
POSTPONEMENTS, NOTICE OF HEARING, PETITION TO SHOW
CAUSE, EFFECTIVE DEFAULT, DISMISSAL.
(a) The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the petition, which shall be not less than
ten (10) days or more than thirty (30) days after the date on which the petition was filed;
provided also, that upon written application of the petitioner to the Board, it may postpone
the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such thirty-day (30) period, if in its
judgment, the petition has set forth a good and sufficient reason for such postponement.
(b) The Board shall give ten (10) days written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the
petitioner and to the Director of Community Development.
(c) At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause
why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
(d) The failure of the petitioner or his representative to appear at his hearing shall be grounds for
dismissal of the petition and shall terminate the right of further appeal.
SEC. 15-5-20 HOUSING APPEALS BOARD--NOTICE AND ORDER IF PETITION
FOR HEARING NOT FILED.
Any notice served pursuant to Section 1 of this ordinance shall automatically become an order if a
written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the board prior to expiration of the time
stated on the notice. Any occupancy permit which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed
automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of the board prior to the
expiration of the time stated on the notice.
120194
15:9
SEC. 15-5-21 DECISIONS OF THE BOARD--COMPLIANCE--TIME LIMITS,
PERMITS, REVOCATIONS.
(a) After such hearing the Board shall sustain, modify or withdraw the order depending upon its
findings as to whether the provisions of this Ordinance have been complied with. The Board
may also modify any order so as to authorized a variance from the provisions of this
Ordinance when because of special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
Ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship; provided, that the spirit of this Ordinance is
observed, public health and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.
(b) If the Board sustains or modifies such order, the owner, operator or occupant, as the case
may require, shall comply with all provisions of such order within a reasonable period of
time as determined by the Board.
(c) After a hearing in the case of any notice or order suspending any permit required by this
Ordinance, when such order has been sustained by the Board, the Board shall order the
permit revoked.
SEC. 15-5-22 DECISIONS OF THE BOARD, RECORD, SERVICE ON PETITIONER,
COURT REVIEW, STANDING, TIME LIMIT -- NOTIFICATION OF
BOARD, TIME LIMIT, CONTENTS.
(a) The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decisions of the Board, shall be
summarized, reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the
Board. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection
with the matter.
(b) A copy of the written decision of the Board shall be then served in the manner prescribed
under Section 1(e), of this Ordinance on the person who filed the petition for hearing.
(c) Any person or persons jointly or severely aggrieved by the decision of the Board, or any
taxpayer, may seek relief therefrom by having the decision reviewed by a court of competent
jurisdiction by certiorari, if the petition for the writ is presented to the court within fifteen
(15) days after the date of which the Board's decision was served on the person who filed the
petition for hearing and if the person aggrieved notifies the Board within seven (7) days after
the Board's decision was served on him of his intention to present such petition to the court.
Such petition duly verified, shall set forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part,
specifying the grounds thereof.
SEC. 15-5-23 EMERGENCY ORDERS, HOUSING INSPECTOR, NOTICE.
If the Housing Inspector shall determine that a building is in such condition that it constitutes a
public nuisance and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare
and if the owner, or occupant if appropriate, refuses to comply with orders within the time
prescribed, the Housing Inspector, or other designated officer, shall cause such building or part
thereof to be closed if unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use. The inspector shall post a
placard on the premises containing the following words:
THIS BUILDING CANNOT BE USED FOR HUMAN
HABITATION, OCCUPANCY OR USE.
120194
15:10
It is the duty of the housing inspector, or other designated officer, to prohibit the use of the building
or part thereof for human habitation, occupancy or use until the necessary repairs have been made.
The procedure followed shall be pursuant to Section 1.
SEC. 15-5-24 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF NOTICE.
No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, deface or remove the official notice or placard
from any dwelling or from dwelling unit.
120194
15:11
HOUSING STANDARDS
SEC. 15-5-25 SANITATION.
(a) FIXTURES.
(1) Required Fixtures. Every dwelling unit shall contain:
a. A kitchen sink in good working condition, properly connected to an
approved water and sewer system.
b. A room or rooms affording privacy and equipped with a flush water closet,
lavatory basin and bathtub and bathtub or shower in good working condition,
properly connected to an approved water and sewer system.
(2) Water Closets. No water closet shall be of the flush hopper, frost-proof hopper,
privy or similar type.
(b) ACCESS TO BATHROOMS AND WATER CLOSETS. Access to each bathroom or
water closet compartment and bathroom shall be reasonably impervious to water and easily
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(c) VENTILATION. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall be provided with
windows meeting the requirements for light and ventilation of habitable rooms prescribed in
Section 15-5-26 or with an approved mechanical or gravity ventilation system affording
adequate ventilation and maintained in good working condition at all times.
(d) RUNNING WATER.
(1) Running Water Required. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower
required under this Chapter shall be connected and supplied with hot and cold
running water.
(2) Water Heating Facilities. Every dwelling shall have supplied water heating facilities,
properly installed and connected to water lines maintained in safe and good working
condition and of a sufficient capacity to supply an adequate amount of water at every
required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at not less than one hundred
twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit.
SEC. 15-5-26 LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING.
(a) WINDOWS AND VENTILATION.
(1) Minimum Window Area. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area in every
sleeping room shall be eight percent (8%) of the net floor area of such room.
Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such
room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal to at least ten percent (10%)
of the total floor area. Habitable rooms, other than bedrooms, located in basements
need not be provided with natural light.
(2) Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window which can be
opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total
operable window area in every habitable room shall equal at least three and five
tenths percent (3.5%) of the net floor area, except where there is supplied some other
device affording adequate ventilation which is approved by the Building Inspector.
(b) SCREENS AND STORMS.
(1) All openable windows required by Subs. (a)(1) and (a)(2) shall be provided with
screens and storms; double and triple glazed windows do not require storm windows.
120194
15:12
Screens and storms and storm doors shall be maintained in good condition.
(2) Every basement window used for ventilation, and every other opening to a building
which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such
other device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
(c) ELECTRICAL OUTLETS.
Every habitable room shall contain at least one floor or wall type electric convenience outlet
and one ceiling electric lighting fixture or two electric convenience outlets, and, every water
closet compartment, bathroom or hall, furnace room or laundry room shall contain at least
one wall or ceiling type electric light fixture. Every electrical outlet and fixture shall be
properly installed and maintained in good and safe working condition and connected to an
approved source of electric power in a safe, approved manner.
(d) PUBLIC HALL LIGHTING.
Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be lighted to at least five
footcandles on the floor and stair at all times.
(e) HEATING FACILITIES.
Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed and vented,
maintained in safe operating condition and capable of heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms
and water compartments in each dwelling unit therein to at least sixty-seven (67) degrees
Fahrenheit measured three (3) feet above the floor level when the outside temperature is
negative-twenty (-20) degrees Fahrenheit.
(f) UNVENTED FURNACES AND SPACE HEATER. The use of unvented furnaces and
space heaters fueled by natural gas, kerosene, alcohol or other fuel shall be prohibited due to
concerns about oxygen depletion, contamination from carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide,
nitrogen dioxide, formaldehyde and other combustion related contaminants, and water vapor
buildups.
SEC. 15-5-27 DIMENSIONS AND GENERAL OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS.
(a) FLOOR SPACE.
(1) Minimum Total Floor Space. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred
fifty (150) square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least one
hundred (100) additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant, in
addition to the floor area included in water closet compartments, bathrooms and halls
or passageways.
(2) Sleeping Rooms. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall contain at least
seventy (70) square feet of floor space for one occupant, or fifty (50) square feet of
floor space for each occupant if more than one.
120194
15:13
(b) CEILING HEIGHT OF HABITABLE ROOMS.
At least half (1/2) the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not
less than seven (7) feet of unfinished ceiling height. The floor area of any part of a room
where the ceiling height is less than five (5) feet shall not be considered part of the required
floor area.
(c) BASEMENT. Except as herein provided, no basement space may be used as a habitable or
dwelling unit.
(1) Where the entire floor of the basement is below grade and the basement is utilized
for sleeping, at lest two exits shall be provided. The two exits shall not be accessed
by the same stairway and shall be in accordance with the following:
a. One of the exits shall be a stairway which leads to the first floor.
b. The second exit maybe a stairway which leads to grade, or a door located at
the basement level which leads to grade via an exterior stairs or an outside
window which can be opened from the inside without the use of tools. The
window shall not be less than twenty (20) inches in width, twenty-four (24)
inches in height and five and four tenths (5.4) square feet in area, with the
bottom of the sill located not more than forty-four (44) inches above the
floor. If a window is provided as the second exit, a window shall be located
in each bedroom. If the window is located below grade, an areaway shall be
provided. The width of the areaway shall be one and one-half (1-1/2) times
the depth of the areaway. The areaway shall be a minimum of three (3) feet
measured perpendicular from the wall. The areaway shall be constructed to
prevent rainfall flowing into the areaway from entering the bedroom.
SEC. 15-5-28 MAINTENANCE OF DWELLINGS.
(a) STRUCTURAL SOUNDNESS.
(1) Members. Every foundation, door, outer wall, ceiling and roof shall be weathertight,
watertight and rodent proof, shall be capable of affording privacy and shall be kept in
good repair.
(2) Openings. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway or stairway shall be
weathertight, watertight and rodent proof and shall be kept in good working
condition and repair.
(3) Stairs and Porches. Every inside and outside stair and handrail, porch and porch rail
shall be constructed to safely support the maximum load that normal use may require
and shall be kept in safe condition and good repair at all times. The Building
Inspector may require a handrail for each stair if deemed necessary.
(4) Every stairway of more than three (3) risers shall have a handrail of a height
corresponding to requirements of State Law.
(b) PLUMBING. All plumbing shall be properly installed and maintained in a sanitary
condition free from defects, leaks and obstructions.
(c) NUMBER OF EXITS. Except as provided in Subsections (1) or (2) there shall be at least
two (2) directions of travel from each dwelling unit door by means of exits to grade,
stairways, interior enclosed stairways, ramps, fire escapes or horizontal exits.
(1) Dwelling units may have two (2) exits or exit access doors having only one direction
of travel provided the exit access doors lead to separate exits. In duplexes, the
second exit may be a window or door leading to a roof or rescue platform. The
window shall comply with the requirements of 15-5-27(c).
120194
15:14
(2) A rescue platform (exterior balcony) of combustible construction may be used as a
required second exit, provided the following conditions are satisfied:
a. The exit serves a single dwelling unit;
b. The exit platform is located not more than ten (10) feet above the adjacent
exit discharge grade;
c. The platform area is at least fourteen (14) square feet, with a minimum
dimension of three (3) feet;
d. The platform is designed for eighty (80) pounds per square foot live load plus
dead load and railing are provided.
e. All wood used in the construction of the rescue platform shall be pressure
treated wood unless the wood is inherently resistant to decay.
(d) SUPPLIED EQUIPMENT TO BE EFFECTIVE. Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment and utility required under this chapter shall be so constructed and installed that it
will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory working
condition.
(e) SMOKE DETECTORS. All dwelling units subject to the provisions of this code shall be
provided with working, approved, and installed smoke detectors on each inhabited floor.
The owner shall be responsible for installing and maintaining the smoke detectors in good
working order. Tenants shall be responsible for informing the owner of any smoke detector
malfunction, including the need for a new battery. The owner shall check batteries at the
beginning of a new lease and shall replace the battery at least annually.
SEC. 15-5-29 GARBAGE AND TRASH DISPOSAL.
(a) RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER OR OWNER-OCCUPANT. Every owner or
owner-occupant shall be responsible for the cleanliness of all parts of a dwelling and
premises shared in common by more than one family, and for the provision of the following
utilities and services, except where such responsibility is assumed, by agreement, by an
operator or an occupant:
(1) Garbage and rubbish disposal facilities in every multiple residence.
(2) Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests; provided where only one dwelling
unit is infested, the occupant of such infested unit shall be responsible for such
extermination unless the dwelling is not maintained in a reasonably rat-proof or
insect-proof condition.
(3) All other facilities, utilities, services or conditions required by this chapter.
(b) RESPONSIBILITY OF OCCUPANT. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall be
responsible for keeping the occupied area and premises and all plumbing equipment and
facilities in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of or
stored in proper containers in a neat and sanitary manner, unless disposed of or stored by the
owner or owner-occupant as provided in Sub. (a)(1).
SECTION 15-5-30 THROUGH SECTION 15-5-34 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
120194
15:15
BOARDING HOUSE REGULATIONS
SEC. 15-5-35 BOARDING HOUSE LICENSES.
(a) REQUIRED. No person shall operate a boarding house, unless he has first obtained a
boarding house license from the City Clerk. The license shall be issued in the name of the
operator and for a specific dwelling.
(b) APPLICATION. Application for a boarding house license shall be made to the Building
Inspector. No license shall be issued until the operator, to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector, has complied with this chapter.
(c) POSTING OF LICENSE. Every license issued hereunder shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the boarding house at all times.
(d) TRANSFER PROHIBITED. No such license shall be transferable.
(e) EXPIRATION DATE. Every boarding house license shall expire at the end of one year
following its date of issuance unless suspended or revoked sooner as herein provided.
(f) DENIAL OF LICENSE. Any person whose application for a boarding house license has
been denied may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter under the procedure
provided herein.
(g) SUSPENSION OF LICENSE. Any person whose license to operate a boarding house has
been suspended, or who has received notice from the Health Officer or Building Inspector
that his license is to be suspended unless existing conditions or practices at his boarding
house are corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
Board of Public Works or other designated body under the procedure provided herein;
provided if no petition for such hearing is filed within ten (10) days following the day on
which such license was suspended, such license shall be deemed to have been automatically
revoked.
(h) SPECIAL USE PERMIT. Any boarding house created after June 1, 1989, requires a
Special Use Permit from the Menasha Common Council before a license may be issued.
SEC. 15-5-36 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
Whenever the Health Officer or Building Inspector, upon inspection of any boarding house finds
conditions or practices exist in violation of this chapter, written notice shall be given to the operator
of such boarding house stating that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a
reasonable period as determined by the Health Officer or Building Inspector, the operator's boarding
house license shall be suspended. At the end of such period, the Health Officer or Building
Inspector shall reinspect such boarding house, and if he finds such conditions or practices have not
been corrected, he shall give notice in writing to the operator that the license has been suspended.
Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such operator shall immediately cease operation of such
boarding house, and no person shall occupy for sleeping or living purposes any room therein.
SEC. 15-5-37 NOTICE OF SALE.
Whenever any person holding a license issued hereunder sells, transfers, gives away or otherwise
disposes of ownership of, interest in or control of any boarding house, he shall give notice in writing
to the office of the City Clerk and the Building Inspector within twenty-four (24) hours thereafter.
Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control
120194
15:16
of such boarding house.
SEC. 15-5-38 MINIMUM HOUSING REGULATIONS FOR BOARDING HOUSES.
All boarding houses shall meet the minimum housing standards as set forth in 15-5-25, 15-5-29, and
in addition shall meet the following:
(a) SANITARY FACILITIES. At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system, approved by the Plumbing
Inspector, and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight (8) persons or
fraction thereof residing in a boarding house, including members of the operator's family
wherever they share the use of such facilities; provided, in a boarding house where rooms are
let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than half (1/2) the required
number of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be
reasonably accessible from common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities.
Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times. No
such facilities shall be located in a basement except by written approval of the Building
Inspector.
(b) LINEN AND TOWELS. The operator of every boarding house shall change supplied bed
linen and towels therein at least once each week and prior to the letting of any room to any
occupant. The operator shall be responsible for maintaining all supplied bedding in a clean
and sanitary manner.
(c) EXITS. At least two exits shall be provided for each occupied floor level. Every room shall
have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as
required by State Laws and City Ordinances.
(d) MAINTENANCE. The operator of every boarding house shall be responsible for the safe
and sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings and for maintenance in a safe and
sanitary condition of every other part of the boarding house and shall be responsible for the
safe and sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire building is leased or
occupied by the operator.
(e) ON-SITE OPERATOR REQUIRED. If a boarding house has more than six available
rental rooms, an on-site operator or manager is required. The on-site manager may be a
tenant living on the premises. If a boarding house has less than six (6) rental units, no on-site
operator is required. In the case where no on-site operator is required, the owner or operator
of said rooming facility shall provide to the tenants the owner or operator's telephone
number, and shall also post in a place accessible to all tenants a listing of telephone numbers
for all emergency and maintenance service needs.
(f) SMOKE DETECTORS. Every floor level including the basement, and every boarding unit
shall be protected with an approved smoke detector.
(g) FIRE EXTINGUISHERS. An approved fire extinguisher shall be provided on each floor
level including the basement.
120194
15:17
SEC. 15-5-39 APPLICABILITY TO HOTELS AND MOTELS.
Every provisions of this subchapter shall also apply to hotels and motels, except to the extent that
any such provision may conflict with the State Statutes or with the lawful regulations of any State
Board or agency.
SEC. 15-5-40 PRINCIPLES OF CONSTRUCTION.
Principles of Construction, Conflict of Provisions, Severability of Provisions, Effective Date of
Ordinance, and General Penalty Provisions found in Title 1, Chapter 1, Sections 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7 of
the Menasha Code are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference.