Title 1, Administrative
Chapter 1-1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
§ 1-1-1. Title. [2016 Code]
This code of ordinances constitutes the official code of ordinances of the city
of Monroe. This code shall be known and cited as the Monroe City Code,
and is hereby published by authority of the council and shall be kept up to
date as provided in sections 1-1-3 and 1-1-4 hereof.
§ 1-1-2. Acceptance. [1977 Code; 2016 Code]
This code shall be received without further proof in all courts and in all
administrative tribunals in this state as the code of ordinances of the city of
general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated
in section 1-2-1 of this code.
§ 1-1-3. Amendments. [2-2-1988; 2016 Code]
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining
to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code.
§ 1-1-4. Clerk to maintain code. [2-2-1988; 2016 Code]
The city clerk shall maintain one current and official copy of this code
in electronic and printed form. It shall be unlawful for any person to
alter, substitute, replace or deface in any way any provision of this code
maintained by the city clerk in such a manner that the meaning of any
provision may be changed or omitted. The city clerk may distribute copies of
this code to any city official or to any member of the public upon payment of
appropriate charges. Any person having in his or her custody a copy of this
code originally supplied by the city clerk shall make every effort to maintain
said code in an up-to-date and efficient manner.
Chapter 1-2
SAVING CLAUSE
§ 1-2-1. Repeal of general ordinances. [2016 Code]
All general ordinances of the city passed before the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication reserved from repeal, and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
1-1:1
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution
of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from
the city; and all special ordinances.
§ 1-2-2. Public ways and public utility ordinances. [2016 Code]
No code relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue
of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such
code or codes in respect to such provisions only.
§ 1-2-3. Court proceedings. [2016 Code]
(A) Prior acts. No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any
act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right
accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way
whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued
or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that
the proceedings shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of
such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such
provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any
judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
(B) Extend to all repeals. This section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance
making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other
ordinance.
(C) Pending actions. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed
as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city adopted before this code, and the provisions of all
general ordinances contained in this code shall be continuing
provisions and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall
adoption of this chapter discontinue, abate, modify or alter any penalty
accrued or to accrue, or affect the liability of any person, or waive any
right of the city under any provision thereof in force when this code is
adopted.
§ 1-2-1 MONROE CODE § 1-2-4
1-1:2
§ 1-2-4. Severability clause. [1977 Code; 2016 Code]
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this code, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid
or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this
code, or any part hereof. The council hereby declares that it would have
passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
Chapter 1-3
RULES OF INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS
§ 1-3-1. Rules of interpretation. [2016 Code]
The following rules shall be observed in the general use of this code:
(A) Every word in this code using the masculine or feminine gender may
extend and be applied to the other gender and bodies corporate as well,
and every word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing,
and every word importing a plural number may extend and be applied
to one person or thing. These rules of construction shall not be applied
to any provision that contains any express language excluding such
construction or when the subject matter or context of such provision
may be repugnant thereto.
(B) All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to
the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood
according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
(C) All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more public
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to
a majority of such officers or persons unless it shall be otherwise
expressly declared in the laws giving the authority.
(D) Explaining stated times:
(1) The word "month" means a calendar month unless otherwise
expressed. The word "year" means a calendar year unless
otherwise expressed.
(2) The word "week" means seven days; but publication in the
newspaper of any notice or other matter for a stated number of
weeks shall mean one insertion in each week, unless specifically
§ 1-2-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-3-1
1-1:3
§ 1-3-2. Definitions, general. [2016 Code]
In this code, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AGENT — Means a person acting on behalf of another.
ALLEY — Means a public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary
means of access to abutting property.
stated to be for each day of the week or for more than one day in
each week.
(3) The time within which an act is to be done as provided in any of the
provisions of this code, when expressed in days, shall be computed
by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the
last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded and when any such time is
expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday shall be excluded.
(4) In all cases where any code shall require any act to be done in a
"reasonable time," or "reasonable notice" to be given to any person,
such reasonable notice or time shall mean such time only as may be
necessary for the prompt execution of such duty, or compliance
with such notice.
(E) The word "Preceding" and the word "following," when used by way of
reference to any section of this code, shall mean the section next
preceding or next following that in which said reference is made unless
some other section is especially designated in such reference.
(F) When any section of this code requires an act to be done which may by
law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requisition
shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized
agent.
(G) All references to "Wisconsin statutes" or "Wis. Stats." shall mean the
Wisconsin statutes as of the adoption of this code and as amended or
renumbered from time to time. All references to "Wisconsin
Administrative Code" or "Wis. Adm. Code" shall mean the Wisconsin
Administrative Code as of the adoption of this code and as amended or
renumbered from time to time.
(H) Intent to defraud. Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to
constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
(I) Liability of employers and agents. When the provisions of any section of
this code prohibit the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the
employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting
the said person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the
penalty set forth.
§ 1-3-1 MONROE CODE § 1-3-2
1-1:4
CITIZEN — Means any person residing within the corporate limits of the
city.
CITY — Means the city of Monroe, county of Green, state of Wisconsin.
COUNCIL — Means the common council for the city.
EMPLOYEE — Means an employee of the city unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
FEE — Means a sum of money charged by the city for the issuance of a
license or permit or for the provision of a service.
KNOWINGLY — Means a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the
act or omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
MERCHANDISE — Means any form of personal property offered for sale by
a seller, and includes wares, goods, or materials provided by a seller that
are incidental to services offered or provided by the seller.
NEGLIGENT — Means a want of such attention to the nature of probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in
acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE — Means mean anything offensive or obnoxious to the health
and welfare of the inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to,
or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of
another person or to the community.
OCCUPANT — When applied to a structure or land means any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such structure or land whether alone or
with others.
OFFENSE — Means any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the
omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICER — Means an officer of the city unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
OWNER — When applied to a structure or land means any person who
has a lawful right to occupy such structure or land and includes any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole
or of a part of such structure or land and any person who has charge,
care or control of such structure or land as executor, executrix, trustee,
receiver or guardian of any such person. Whenever the structure or land
is subject to conditional sales contract, lease with option to purchase, or
any other form of written contract under the terms of which any person is
entitled to a conveyance of legal title upon payment of consideration, the
term "owner" shall mean the person who shall have a contractual right,
rather than the person who is holding the legal title. "Owner" when applied
to personal property means any person who has a lawful right to possession
of such personal property and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant
in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such personal
property.
§ 1-3-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-3-2
1-1:5
PERMIT — Means a written approval issued by an authorized city official
allowing a person to undertake a type of work, event or activity for which a
permit from the city is required by this code.
PERSON — Means a natural person, partnership, limited partnership, joint
venture, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, and
includes where appropriate to the context an association, society,
institution, enterprise or governmental agency.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Means every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created.
RETAILER — Means a person who sells goods, merchandise, articles or
things in small quantities direct to the consumer.
SELLER — Means a person who sells or contracts to sell real or personal
property or services.
SEMITRAILER — Means a vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used
in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and
that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle, but does not
include a mobile home or a mobile recreational vehicle. A vehicle used with
a ready-mix motor truck to spread the load is considered a semitrailer.
SPECIAL EVENT — Means a planned extraordinary occurrence or
temporary aggregation of attractions, open to the public, that: a) is
conducted on public property; b) is conducted on private property and has a
substantial impact on public property; c) has activities that request special
temporary food or liquor licenses; or d) requires special city services,
whether open to the public or not, including, but not limited to, any of the
following: street closures, provisions of barricades, garbage cans, stages
or special no parking signs, special electrical services, or special police
protection. Special events include, but are not limited to, neighborhood and
community festivals, parades, processions, fairs, and bicycle or foot races.
Farmers' markets and public assemblies are not special events.
STREET — Means a way or thoroughfare that is used for vehicular travel by
the public, including both streets and avenues, but not including an alley.
STRUCTURE — Means any man-made object with form, shape and utility,
either permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the
ground, stream bed or lake bed, including but not limited to, roofed and
walled buildings, signs, gas or liquid storage tanks and culverts.
THIS CODE — Means this Monroe City Code.
TRAILER — Means a vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
property or passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by
a motor vehicle, but does not include a mobile home.
WILLFULLY — When applied to the intent with which an act is done or
omitted, means a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the
omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to
injure another, or to acquire an advantage.
§ 1-3-2 MONROE CODE § 1-3-2
1-1:6
WRITTEN, IN WRITING — Means any mode of representing words and
letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law
to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the
proper handwriting of such person, or if he or she cannot write, by his or
her proper mark.
§ 1-3-3. Section and subsection headings. [2016 Code]
The section and subsection headings of the several sections and subsections
of this code are intended only to indicate the content of the section or
subsection and shall not be construed to be titles of such sections, nor
be construed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope,
meaning or intent of the provisions of any section or subsection thereto.
Chapter 1-4
GENERAL PENALTY
§ 1-4-1. General penalty. [2016 Code]
Any person convicted of a violation of a provision of this code shall forfeit a
sum not exceeding $1,000.00, but not to exceed any limitations provided by
the Wisconsin statutes.
§ 1-4-2. Costs. [2016 Code]
When a forfeiture is imposed as the whole or any part of the punishment
of any offense, or when a penalty or forfeiture is recovered for doing or
neglecting to do any act, by virtue of any of the provisions of this code,
the court shall also order the defendant to pay, and shall give judgment for,
the costs of prosecution, whether the section under which said prosecution
or proceeding is had shall specifically so direct or not and in default of
payment, the person adjudged guilty shall be committed to the county jail
for a term not exceeding six months, unless a different term is specifically
provided.
§ 1-4-3. Application. [2016 Code]
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section
of this code, the same as though it were a part of each section. Any
person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a
continuing nature is forbidden or declared to be unlawful shall be subject to
a Class 1 forfeiture, unless said penalty exceeds any limitations provided by
Wisconsin statutes. A separate offense shall exist for each day such duty or
obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless specifically
provided in this code. Where the same offense is made punishable or is
created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer
may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall
be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the
§ 1-3-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-4-3
1-1:7
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or
penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. Whenever the doing
of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach or penalty
specifically declared for such breach, his chapter shall apply and each day
during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 1-4-4. Liability of officers. [2016 Code]
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be construed to make such officer or employee liable for any forfeiture
or penalty for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the
council to impose such forfeiture or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.
Chapter 1-5
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
§ 1-5-1. Council, mayor and alderpersons. [8-4-1981; 5-15-2007;
8-16-2011; 2016 Code; 4-6-2016; 9-6-2016]
(A) Council. The council shall consist of the mayor and nine alderpersons.
(B) Beginning date of terms. The regular terms of the mayor and
alderpersons shall begin on the third Tuesday of April succeeding their
election.
(C) Mayor. The mayor shall be elected for a two-year term in the annual
spring election of even-numbered years.
(D) Election of Alderpersons.
(1) Charter ordinance. Pursuant to Section 66.0101 of the Wisconsin
Statutes, the city adopts the method of choosing alderpersons as
set forth herein and hereby elects to not be governed by Sections
62.08 and 62.09(1)(a) of the Wisconsin Statutes with respect to the
number and method of choosing of alderpersons. Existing
alderpersons shall hold their respective offices as of the effective
date hereof for the balance of their terms.
(2) Elected at large. Alderpersons shall be elected at large for a twoyear
term in the annual spring election. Four alderpersons shall be
elected in each of the odd-numbered years and five in each of the
even-numbered years.
(3) First year implementation of charter ordinance. For proper
implementation of this charter ordinance, the alderpersons
receiving the top four most at large votes shall have a two-year
term with successor elections held in odd-numbered years. The
alderperson finishing with the fifth most at large votes will have a
§ 1-4-3 MONROE CODE § 1-5-1
1-1:8
§ 1-5-2. Salaries of mayor and alderpersons. [1-21-1997; 2016
Code]
The mayor and each alderperson shall receive the following salaries payable
monthly:
§ 1-5-3. Meetings. [1969 Code; 1977 Code; 2016 Code; 6-5-2018]
§ 1-5-4. Mayor presiding officer of council. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
§ 1-5-5. Quorum; voting requirements. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
one-year term with successor elections being a two-year term and
held in even-numbered years.
(A) Mayor. The salary of the mayor shall be in an amount set from time to
time by resolution of the council.
(B) Alderpersons. The salary of each alderperson shall be in an amount set
from time to time by resolution of the council.
(A) Regular meetings: The council shall meet annually on the third Tuesday
of April to organize and elect a council president. Regular meetings
shall be held on the first and third Monday in each month, except if the
first or third Monday falls on an officially recognized holiday or a
regular or special election day the meeting shall be on first day
following such holiday or election day. The starting time of regular
meetings shall be set by resolution of the council.
(B) Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the mayor, or
president of the council when mayor is not available. At such meetings
of the council no business shall be transacted but that for which the
meeting shall have been called, unless by unanimous consent of the
council.
(C) Meetings public. Meetings shall be open to the public, and the council
may punish by forfeiture, members or other persons for disorderly
behavior.
(A) The mayor shall be the presiding officer at all regular and special
council meetings, and as such he or she shall take the chair at the hour
appointed for the council to meet, and shall immediately call the
members to order, and may, at the insistence of any two members, order
the attendance of absentees. In the absence of the mayor, the president
of the council shall take his or her place or any member may call the
council to order.
(B) The presiding officer shall maintain decorum and decide all questions of
order subject to an appeal to the council.
(A) Two-thirds of all the alderpersons must be present to constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. The mayor shall not be counted
§ 1-5-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-5-5
1-1:9
§ 1-5-6. Committees, boards and commissions. [4-2-2012; 4-8-2015;
2016 Code]
in computing a quorum, majority or minimum number or proportion
of votes of the council required for passage of a measure and shall
not vote except in case of a tie. No member is to leave the council or
committee of the whole without leave of absence.
(B) All bylaws and ordinances and all resolutions and orders for the
appropriation or payment of money shall require, for their passage or
adoption, the concurrence of a majority of all the alderpersons.
(A) Standing committees. The standing committees of the council shall be
as follows:
(1) Board of public works.
(2) Finance and taxation committee.
(3) Public safety committee.
(4) Judiciary and ordinance review committee.
(5) License committee.
(6) Salary and personnel committee.
(B) Appointment of standing committees. Unless otherwise expressly
provided in this code or by law, standing committees shall be appointed,
and the chairperson thereof designated, by the mayor annually at the
time of the organization of the council, and such appointments and
chair designations shall not require confirmation by the council.
(C) Reports of standing committees. All standing committees to whom any
matter shall be referred shall report thereon in the manner directed by
the council, or if no manner of reporting is directed, in the manner
determined by the committee.
(D) Special boards, committees and commissions. Special boards,
committees and commissions of the city shall be as follows:
(1) Board of review.
(2) Board of police and fire commissioners.
(3) City plan commission.
(4) Zoning board of appeals.
(5) Board of park and recreation commissioners.
(6) Senior citizens board.
(7) Airport board of management.
§ 1-5-5 MONROE CODE § 1-5-6
1-1:10
§ 1-5-7. Order of business. [1969 Code; 9-7-1993; 2016 Code;
6-5-2018]
The business scheduled to be taken up at any meeting shall be determined
by the presiding officer. The presiding officer may schedule any item out
of order. At all regular meetings the following order shall generally be
observed for disposing of business before the council:
(8) Visitors and promotion commission.
(9) Ethics board.
(10) Historic preservation commission.
(11) Housing authority.
(12) Monroe municipal park fund committee.
(13) Monroe redevelopment authority.
(14) Revolving loan fund committee.
(15) Business improvement district board.
(E) Appointment of special boards, committees and commissions. Unless
otherwise expressly provided in this code or by law, special committees
shall be appointed, and the chairperson thereof designated, by the
mayor annually at the time of the organization of the council, and such
appointments and chair designations shall require confirmation by the
council.
(F) Other appointments. Appointments to any committee, board or other
body not enumerated in this code shall be made in the manner required
by law or specified by the body for whom such appointment is made. If
no manner of appointment is required by law or specified by the body
for whom such appointment is made then the appointment shall be
made by the mayor, and such appointment shall require confirmation by
the council.
(A) Correction of minutes: The presiding officer shall inquire if any member
of the council wishes to offer a correction to the minutes of the last
meeting. If no member offers a motion to correct the minutes, or if a
motion is made and seconded but not adopted by the council, the
minutes shall be deemed approved as drafted;
(B) Petitions, memorials, communications: Presentation of petitions,
memorials and communications;
(C) Accounts and claims: Presentation of accounts and other claims against
the city;
(D) Business presented by mayor: Business may be presented by the mayor;
(E) Appearance: Appearance by citizens;
§ 1-5-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-5-7
1-1:11
§ 1-5-8. Rules of procedure. [1969 Code; 4-18-2006; 2016 Code;
2-7-2017; 5-16-2017]
(F) Reports: Reports of officers and committees and introduction and
consideration of all ordinances, resolutions and motions;
(G) Other business: Consideration of other business pending before the
council;
(H) Miscellaneous.
(A) Resolutions reduced to writing. All resolutions shall be in writing.
(B) Petitions referred to committee. Each petition shall be presented by the
presiding officer or the city clerk, who shall briefly state the substance,
and shall then be referred to a committee.
(C) Questions, when before council. When a question is before the council,
no motion shall be received unless to adjourn, lay on the table the
previous question, to commit, or to amend, which several questions
shall have precedence in the order in which they are inserted.
(D) Voting procedure.
(1) Form of questions for voting. Where a roll call vote is taken the
question shall be stated by the presiding officers as follows: "As
many as are in favor answer 'yes', those opposed will answer 'no'
and the clerk will call the roll."; and in doubtful cases, the presiding
officer may direct or any member may call for a division.
(2) Order of voting for recorded votes. Commencing with the first
meeting of the council after the regular election and qualification of
new members, the city clerk shall determine the order of roll call
voting based on the seniority of unbroken service of the
alderpersons. The alderperson with the longest seniority of
unbroken service on the council as an alderperson shall be the first
alderperson called to cast his or her vote on a question for which a
roll call vote has been called. If two or more alderpersons share the
same seniority of unbroken service, then the alderperson with the
total service on the council shall be deemed to have the higher
priority and if there is still a tie, then it shall be determined
alphabetically based on the alderperson whose last name starts
closest to the letter "A." The alderpersons shall vote in descending
order of seniority. Thereafter, for each subsequent roll call vote, the
alderperson who voted second in the previous roll call vote shall be
the first to cast his or her vote and the alderperson who voted first
in the previous roll call vote shall cast his or her vote last.
(3) Recording votes. The ayes and nos shall be taken and recorded
upon any question before the council upon the call of any two
members.
§ 1-5-7 MONROE CODE § 1-5-8
1-1:12
§ 1-5-9. Ordinance procedure. [1969 Code; 5-21-1991; 4-15-1997;
7-9-1997; 2016 Code]
(4) Votes. Every person present when a question is put shall vote,
unless the presiding officer shall excuse him or her for good cause.
(5) Tie votes. The presiding officer shall, in all cases, be entitled to vote
in case of a tie. It shall be in order for any member who voted in the
majority on any question or for any member who voted in the
negative when the council was equally divided, to move a
reconsideration vote on the same or next succeeding regular
meeting of the council. A motion to reconsider, having been put and
lost, shall not again be in order.
(E) Motions. When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be in possession
of the council and shall be stated by the presiding officer, or being in
writing shall be delivered to the clerk to be read previous to debate.
After a motion is stated by the presiding officer, it shall not be
withdrawn except by consent of the council. When a member is about to
speak to a question or make a motion, he or she shall address the
presiding officer, and the presiding officer shall pronounce the name of
the member entitled to the floor, and the member shall confine himself
to the question under consideration. No member shall speak more than
twice on any question nor more than 10 minutes at any one time
without leave of three-fourths of the members present.
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, unless the council is
engaged in voting, and shall be decided without debate.
(F) Division of the question. Any member may call for a division of the
question, as such is allowed.
(G) Rules of order. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the
proceedings of the council shall be governed by the latest edition of
Robert's Rules of Order.
(H) Citizens' right to address council. Any citizen shall have the right to
speak to the council under the "Appearances by the Public" agenda item
provided such citizen registers with the City Clerk prior to the meeting
his or her name, address and topic to be discussed. Each citizen shall be
limited to five minutes unless the council agrees by two-thirds vote to
extend the time. Any speaker who requires an interpreter because of a
disability or limited English proficiency may speak for 10 minutes.
(A) Title of proposed ordinances. The style of all ordinances shall be: "The
council of the city of Monroe do ordain as follows." No bylaw or
ordinances shall contain more than one subject which shall be clearly
explained in its title.
(B) Consideration by council. An ordinance may be proposed by an
alderperson at a regular or special meeting of the council by submitting
a written copy thereof to the clerk and to each alderperson present. An
§ 1-5-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-5-9
1-1:13
ordinance shall be deemed to be introduced when a public hearing has
been scheduled. After an ordinance has been introduced it shall be
considered by the council as a whole.
(1) Public hearing. If the proposed ordinance has been recommended
for passage by the judiciary and ordinance review committee, the
presiding officer shall set a date and time for public hearing. If the
proposed ordinance has not been recommended for passage by the
judiciary and ordinance review committee, a public hearing shall
be scheduled only upon passage of a motion suspending the rules
and directing the presiding officer to schedule the proposed
ordinance for a public hearing.
(2) Reading. No reading shall be required when an ordinance is
proposed or introduced.
(3) Final passage. No ordinance shall be put on for final passage on the
same day on which it was introduced unless by a suspension of the
rules.
(C) Availability of copies. After introduction, copies of the proposed
ordinance shall be available to the public at the office of the city clerk.
Any person may receive a copy of such proposed ordinance upon
request made to the city clerk.
(D) Public hearing procedure. At the public hearing, the chairperson of the
judiciary and ordinance review committee, or any other member of such
committee, may read the proposed ordinance, but no reading shall be
required. If the proposed ordinance is not read, the member of the
council who introduced the proposed ordinance shall orally summarize
the content and purpose of the proposed ordinance. The presiding
officer shall open the meeting for a public hearing and recognize
separately those persons wishing to speak in favor of and opposed to
the proposed ordinance. The presiding officer shall have authority to
limit the amount of time allotted to each speaker. Upon closing the
public hearing, the presiding officer shall state the ordinance is ready
for adoption. Thereupon, upon motion made and seconded, the council
shall act upon the ordinance.
(E) Time of going into effect. Every ordinance which does not expressly
prescribe the time when it shall go into effect shall take effect and be
enforced on the day following its passage and publication.
(F) Recording ordinances. All ordinances passed by the council shall be
recorded by the city clerk in the book kept for that purpose, and shall be
published in the official newspaper of the city. The clerk shall procure a
copy of such publication, verified by the affidavit of the printer or
publisher, and file the same in his or her office.
§ 1-5-9 MONROE CODE § 1-5-10
1-1:14
§ 1-5-10. Appointment of officers. [2016 Code]
The appointment of all officers by the council shall be by ballot and shall
be annually made, or more often, if necessary to fill vacancies. Except as
expressly provided in this code, all appointments made by the mayor shall
be subject to the approval of the council.
§ 1-5-11. Suspension of rules. [7-9-1997; 2016 Code]
The assent of two-thirds of all the members of the council shall be required
to suspend or modify the rules contained in section 1-5-8, subsection
1-5-9(B) or subsection 1-5-9(C) of this chapter.
§ 1-5-12. Filling vacancies on Common Council [Added 11-18-2019]
When filling any vacancy in the office of the mayor or in the office of the
alderperson, § 17.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall control. The procedure
for appointment for any vacancy shall be as follows:
Chapter 1-6
CITY OFFICERS
§ 1-6-1. General provisions and requirements. [12-20-2005; 2016
Code]
(A) The City Clerk shall post the vacancy and the deadline established by
the Council for any person desiring to be considered for the vacancy on
the City's website, on three public places within the City and shall
publish a Class 2 notice of the vacancy in its official newspaper.
(B) All qualified individuals desiring to be considered for the vacancy must
submit a written application to the City Clerk, together with nomination
papers with the same number of signatures of City residents required to
run for such office by ballot by the deadline established by the Council.
(C) Appointment to fill the vacancy shall be by majority vote of the Council
from those eligible individuals that have complied with subsection (B)
herein. If no individual receives a majority vote, then Council may
reopen the vacancy and restart the process stated above.
(A) City assessor. The city elects not to be governed by section 70.05(1) of
the Wisconsin statutes insofar as such section requires the election of
the city assessor.
(B) Sealer of weights and measures. The city shall employ no sealer of
weights and measures but shall provide for such service utilizing
employees of the state as provided in section 98.04 of the Wisconsin
statutes.
(C) Selection of certain city officers. Pursuant to section 66.0101 and
section 62.09 of the Wisconsin statutes, the city elects the methods of
§ 1-5-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-6-1
1-1:15
§ 1-6-2. City administrator. [12-20-2005; 2016 Code]
choosing the city officers as set forth herein and hereby elects to not be
governed by section 17.12(1)(c) of the Wisconsin statutes.
(1) City administrator. The city administrator shall be appointed by the
council.
(2) Police and fire chiefs. The chiefs of the police and fire departments
of the city shall be appointed by the board of police and fire
commissioners.
(3) Other officers and department heads. Except as expressly provided
herein all officers and department heads of the city shall be
appointed by a majority vote of the council and may be terminated
by a majority vote of the council.
(D) Official oath. Every person elected or appointed to any office shall take
and file the official oath within 10 days after notice of his or her election
or appointment.
(E) Bond. In addition to officers otherwise required by law to furnish a
bond, the council may require bonds of any officers. All official bonds
must be approved by the city administrator, and when so approved,
shall be filed within 10 days after the officer executing the same shall
have been notified of his or her election or appointment, and official
bonds filed with the city clerk shall be recorded in a book kept for that
purpose.
(F) Certificate of appointment. When an appointed officer has filed the oath
and bond, if required, the clerk shall issue to such officer a certificate of
appointment. If the appointment is to be to a board or commission, the
appointee shall file the certificate with the secretary thereof.
(G) Powers. There is hereby vested in each board, commission and officer of
the city all the necessary power and authority to execute all the duties
required by said board, commission or officer by the laws of the state,
or any of its lawfully constituted agencies or by this code.
(H) Compensation. All compensation, expense allowances and
reimbursements paid to any elected or appointed official of the city or
any employee of the city shall be set by resolution of the council.
Whenever such salaries are to be changed or established, the council
shall, not later than the first regular meeting in February, fix the
amount of salary of each officer entitled to a salary that may be elected
or appointed for a definite term during the ensuing year.
(A) Office created. To provide the city with a more efficient, economical,
coordinated, responsible and responsive municipal government under a
system of part-time mayor and part-time alderpersons and at a time
when municipal government is becoming increasingly complex, the
position of city administrator is created.
§ 1-6-1 MONROE CODE § 1-6-2
1-1:16
(B) Application. Each candidate shall file an application with the city
stating in detail his or her education, experience and other
qualifications for the position. All eligible candidates shall be examined
by the salary and personnel committee. The salary and personnel
committee may provide for tests to determine the fitness of the
candidates, which tests shall be uniformly applied to all candidates.
(C) Removal. The city administrator shall serve for an indefinite term,
subject to removal by a majority vote of all members of the council.
(D) Duties and responsibilities. The city administrator shall serve as the
chief administrative officer of the city responsible to and under the
general direction and policy of the mayor and council and shall be
responsible to the mayor and council for proper administration of all
activities of the city. To this end, the city administrator shall have the
following powers and duties:
(1) Carry out all actions and directives of the council which require
administrative implementation or where the mayor or council has
so directed.
(2) Direct, coordinate and expedite the activities of all city
departments, except where such authority is vested by Wisconsin
Statute or this code in boards, commissions or other city officers.
(3) Develop budgeting procedures, prepare and administer the annual
operating and capital budgets under such guidelines as may be
provided by the council and in coordination with all department
heads, the finance and taxation committee and the mayor.
(4) Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment for
which funds are provided in the budget; receive bids or proposals
for purchases or contracts for presentation to the council for
approval unless the taking of bids is waived by the council.
(5) Serve as a member of the city management negotiation team which
is responsible for the negotiation of all collective bargaining
agreements with the city's recognized bargaining units.
(6) Report regularly to the mayor and council on the current financial
condition and future needs of the city; research the availability of
alternative sources of funding for local programs and advise the
council of methods of procuring such funds.
(7) Act as public relations officer and government affairs officer.
(8) Prepare reports and recommendations for the mayor, the council
and advisory boards and commissions on operational or policy
matters before them and on any other actions necessary to improve
the overall health, safety and welfare of the city.
(9) Submit as necessary recommendations or suggestions for
improving the health, safety or welfare of the city and shall operate
§ 1-6-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-6-2
1-1:17
§ 1-6-3. City clerk. [12-20-2005; 2016 Code; 5-16-2017; 6-5-2018]
a system whereby city departments, as well as persons having
business with the mayor or council or any city department may
properly and efficiently conduct such business.
(10) Establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communication
between citizens and city government to assure that complaints,
grievances, recommendations and other matters receive prompt
attention and to assure that all such matters are expeditiously
resolved.
(11) Promote the economic well-being and growth of the city through
public and private sector cooperation.
(E) Supervision and cooperation. All officers, department heads and other
employees of the city shall serve under the supervision and direction of
the city administrator and shall cooperate with and assist the city
administrator so that the affairs of the city will be most economically
and efficiently administered.
(F) Residency. The city administrator shall establish residence within the
city within six months following his or her appointment to the office of
city administrator and shall remain a resident of the city. The residency
requirement may be waived by the council.
(G) Authority of salary and personnel committee. The salary and personnel
committee may develop, and from time to time modify, a more complete
job description for the city administrator, which job description shall
not conflict with the duties set forth in subsection (D) of this section.
(A) Qualifications. Each candidate for the office of city clerk must be over
the age of 18 years and must reside within the city. The residency
requirement may be waived by the council.
(B) Application. Each candidate shall file an application with the city
stating in detail his or her education, experience and other
qualifications for the position. All eligible candidates shall be examined
by the city administrator. The city administrator may provide for tests to
determine the fitness of the candidates, which tests shall be uniformly
applied to all candidates.
(C) Duties. The city clerk shall perform the duties of clerk as provided by
law or the council. The city clerk shall be responsible for the
publication, filing, indexing, and safekeeping of all proceedings of the
council, shall be responsible for all election duties as required by law
and shall keep and maintain all election records and be responsible for
all property used in the holding of elections. The city clerk shall publish
all required legal notices unless otherwise provided, shall file and keep
all contracts, bonds, oaths of office and other documents not required to
be filed elsewhere and, except as otherwise expressly provided, shall
issue all licenses required by this code or state statute. The city clerk
§ 1-6-2 MONROE CODE § 1-6-3
1-1:18
§ 1-6-4. City treasurer. [12-20-2005; 2016 Code]
§ 1-6-5. City attorney. [12-20-2005; 2016 Code]
shall be the custodian of the official city seal. The city clerk shall
prepare the tax roll and tax notices as required by Wisconsin statutes.
The city clerk shall be the official secretary to all the boards,
commissions and committees found within Title 2 of the Monroe City
Code, as well as for the Historic Preservation Commission, Monroe
Municipal Park Fund, Redevelopment Authority, Revolving Loan
Committee, and Business Improvement District, and shall be
responsible for keeping all minutes and records of such boards,
commissions and committees. The city clerk shall have the authority to
designate such duties to third parties, but the city clerk shall maintain
ultimate responsibility and oversight over such designees in order to
maintain accurate and uniform minutes and records.
(A) Qualifications. Each candidate for the office of city treasurer must be
over the age of 18 years and must reside within the city. The residency
requirement may be waived by the council.
(B) Application. Each candidate shall file an application with the city
stating in detail his or her education, experience and other
qualifications for the position. All eligible candidates shall be examined
by the city administrator. The city administrator may provide for tests to
determine the fitness of the candidates, which tests shall be uniformly
applied to all candidates.
(C) Duties. The city treasurer shall perform the duties of treasurer as
provided by law or the council. The city treasurer shall collect and
account for all taxes, license monies, fees, accounts of charges due or
owing to the city, shall be responsible for the collection, receiving,
safekeeping, and accounting for all monies and securities of the city
and attend to all related treasury affairs, and shall perform such other
duties as are required by state law or this code.
(A) Qualifications. Each candidate for the office of city attorney must
possess a license to practice law in Wisconsin and must reside within
the city. The residency requirement may be waived by the council.
(B) Application. Each candidate shall file an application with the city
stating in detail his or her education, experience and other
qualifications for the position. All eligible candidates shall be examined
by the city administrator. The city administrator may provide for tests to
determine the fitness of the candidates, which tests shall be uniformly
applied to all candidates.
(C) Duties. The city attorney shall perform all the duties of the city attorney
as provided in the Wisconsin statutes, or otherwise provided by the
mayor, city administrator or council.
§ 1-6-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-6-5
1-1:19
§ 1-6-6. Director of public works. [12-20-2005; 2016 Code]
§ 1-6-7. City assessor. [12-20-2005; 2016 Code]
§ 1-6-8. Building inspector. [12-20-2005; 2016 Code]
(D) Assistants. The city attorney may appoint one or more assistant city
attorneys, each of whom shall possess a license to practice law in
Wisconsin. An assistant city attorney shall have the duties and perform
such services as directed by the city attorney.
(A) Qualifications. Each candidate for the office of director of public works
shall be generally knowledgeable of the construction and operation of
public works including the maintenance of streets and public ways, the
operation of parks and other municipal recreation facilities, the
operation of a municipal airport and the general oversight and
operation of a city engineering office. Each candidate for the office of
director of public works shall reside within the city. The residency
requirement may be waived by the council.
(B) Application. Each candidate shall file an application with the city
stating in detail his or her education, experience and other
qualifications for the position. All eligible candidates shall be examined
by the city administrator. The city administrator may provide for tests to
determine the fitness of the candidates, which tests shall be uniformly
applied to all candidates.
(A) Qualifications. Each candidate for the office of city assessor must
possess the minimum certification required by the Wisconsin
Department of Revenue necessary to serve as city assessor in the city.
(B) Duties. The duties and powers of the city assessor shall include those
enumerated in chapter 70 of the Wisconsin statutes and such other
duties as shall be prescribed by law, supervisory personnel of the
Wisconsin department of revenue and council. The assessor shall attend
all meetings of the board of review.
(A) Qualifications. Each candidate for the office of building inspector shall
be generally informed on the quality and strength of building materials,
on the prevailing methods of building construction and on good practice
in fire prevention and safe exit facilities.
(B) Residence. Each candidate for the office of building inspector must
reside within the city. The residency requirement may be waived by the
council.
(C) Application. Each candidate shall file an application with the city
stating in detail his or her education, experience and other
qualifications for the position. All eligible candidates shall be examined
by the city administrator. The city administrator may provide for tests to
§ 1-6-5 MONROE CODE § 1-6-8
1-1:20
§ 1-6-9. Comptroller. [12-20-2005; 2016 Code]
determine the fitness of the candidates, which tests shall be uniformly
applied to all candidates.
(D) Duties. The building inspector shall devote such time as is necessary to
properly carry out the duties of the office, including without limitation
the following:
(1) Receive applications required by this code;
(2) Issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates;
(3) Examine premises for which permits have been issued and shall
make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of the law are
complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely;
(4) Enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, repair,
removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and
maintenance of buildings except as may be otherwise provided for;
(5) When requested by the council, or when the interests of the city so
require, make investigations of matters referred to in this code and
make written reports on same;
(6) Issue such notices or orders as may be necessary to enforce
compliance with law to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to
secure necessary safeguards during construction, or to require
adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures.
(E) Records. The building inspector shall keep a record of:
(1) All applications for building permits and regularly number each
permit in the order of its issue.
(2) The number, description and sizes of all buildings erected during
his or her term of office, indicating the kind of materials used and
the cost of each building and the aggregate cost of all buildings of
the various classes.
(3) All inspections made and of all removal and condemnation of
buildings, and permits issued.
(F) Cooperation of other officials. The building inspector may request, and
shall receive to the extent necessary to properly carry out the
responsibilities of his or her office, the assistance and cooperation of
other city officials including, but not limited to, the chief of police in
enforcing orders and the city attorney in prosecuting violations.
(A) Qualifications. Each candidate for the office of comptroller must
possess knowledge of municipal finance and accounting and shall
reside within the city. The residency requirement may be waived by the
council.
§ 1-6-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-6-9
1-1:21
Chapter 1-7
CITY PERSONNEL
§ 1-7-1. Salaries. [11-20-1979; 2016 Code]
All compensation, expense allowances and reimbursements paid to any
appointed official of the city or any employee of the city shall be set by
resolution of the city.
§ 1-7-2. Wisconsin retirement system. [11-20-1979; 2016 Code]
Chapter 1-8
CITY BOUNDARIES
§ 1-8-1. City boundaries. [2016 Code]
Upon passage of an ordinance annexing territory to the city the clerk shall
record the ordinance with the register of deeds. The clerk shall certify
annually to the secretary of state and record with the register of deeds
a legal description of the total boundaries of the city as those boundaries
existed on December 1, unless there has been no change in the 12 months
preceding.
§ 1-8-2. Official map. [2016 Code]
(B) Application. Each candidate shall file an application with the city
stating in detail his or her education, experience and other
qualifications for the position. All eligible candidates shall be examined
by the city administrator. The city administrator may provide for tests to
determine the fitness of the candidates, which tests shall be uniformly
applied to all candidates.
(C) Duties. The duties of the comptroller shall be as set forth in section
62.09(10) of the Wisconsin statutes, provided however, the appointment
of a deputy shall be first approved by the city administrator if the funds
necessary therefore are provided in the comptroller's budget or council.
The comptroller shall perform such other duties as city administrator,
mayor or council may direct.
(A) Pursuant to section 40.21 of the Wisconsin statutes, the city shall
participate in the Wisconsin retirement system.
(B) The effective date of participation shall be January 1, 1948.
(A) There shall be adopted an official map of the city consisting of two
sheets, which shall be and remain on file in the office of city clerk, and
which is made a part hereof by reference as follows: sheet 2 of 2 (street
development plan), showing the location and width of streets within the
§ 1-6-9 MONROE CODE § 1-8-2
1-1:22
Chapter 1-9
WARDS AND ALDERMANIC DISTRICTS
§ 1-9-1. Ward boundaries. [7-17-2001; 7-5-2011; 4-6-2016; 2016
Code]
The city shall be divided into 10 wards, the boundaries of which shall be as
follows:
FIRST WARD: All of the territory within the boundaries of the City of
Monroe lying north of the Highway 11-81 bypass and east of Aebly Road,
east of the east Right of Way of N. 18th Avenue, east of center line of 18th
Avenue, north of the centerline of 6th Street, east of the centerline of 19th
Avenue, north of the centerline of 7th Street, west of the centerline of 25th
Avenue and north of the center line of 6th Street, to the City limits.
SECOND WARD: All of the territory within the boundaries of the City of
Monroe lying south of the center line of 6th Street, east of the center line of
25th Avenue, south of the center line of 7th Street, east of the center line of
22nd Avenue, north of the center line of 11th Street, east of the center line
of 25th Avenue, north of the center line of 17th Street, west of the center
line of 28th Avenue, north of the centerline of 16th Street and east of the
center line of County Highway K, to the City limits.
THIRD WARD: All of the territory within the boundaries of the City of
Monroe lying west of the center line of County Highway K, south of the
center line of 16th Street, east of the center line of 28th Avenue, south of
the center line of 17th Street, west of the center line of 25th Avenue, south
city limits; and sheet 1 of 2 (street expansion plan), showing the
location and width of the extension of the major street system of the city
into the adjacent unincorporated area over which the city can exercise
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(B) No land subdivision plat shall be approved unless such plat conforms to
the official map.
(C) The council may, after a public hearing as provided in section
62.23(6)(c) of the Wisconsin statutes, change or add to the official map
of the city so as to establish the exterior lines of planned new streets,
highways and parkways or to widen, narrow, extend or close streets,
highways or parkways.
(D) To conserve the integrity of the official map, no building shall be
erected or located within the bed of any street or highway shown on the
official map unless a permit shall first have been applied for and issued
under section 62.23(6) of the Wisconsin statutes.
(E) The city clerk shall file with the register of deeds of Green County a
certificate showing any changes or additions to the official map.
§ 1-8-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-9-1
1-1:23
of the center line of 13th Street, east of the center line of 23rd Avenue,
south of the center line of 14th Street, east of the center line of 22nd
Avenue, south of the center line of 16th Street, east of the center line of
20th Avenue, south of the center line of 17th Street and east of the center
line of 17th Avenue, to the City limits.
FOURTH WARD: All of the territory within the boundaries of the City of
Monroe lying west of the center line of 20th Avenue, south of the center line
of 16th Street, east of the center line of 13th Avenue, south of the center
line of 18th Street, east of the center line of 11th Avenue, north of the center
line of 30th Street, west of the center line of 17th Avenue and north of the
center line of 17th Street, to the City limits.
FIFTH WARD: All of the territory within the boundaries of the City of
Monroe lying south of the center line of 30th Street, west of the center line
of 11th Avenue, south of the center line of 21st Street, west of the center
line of State Highway 69, south of the center line of 17th Street, south of the
center line of West 17th Street, east of the Badger State Trail corridor, west
of the east Right of Way of State Highway 69, and north of the city limits.
SIXTH WARD: All of the territory within the boundaries of the City of
Monroe lying south of the center line of 9th Street, east of the center line of
11th Avenue, north of the center line of 12th Street, east of the center line
of 12th Avenue, south of the center line of 14th Street, east of the center
line of 9th Avenue, south of the center line of 16th Street, east of the center
line of State Highway 69, north of the center line of 21st Street, west of
the center line of 11th Avenue, north of the center line of 18th Street, west
of the center line of 13th Avenue, north of the center line of 16th Street,
west of the center line of 22nd Avenue, north of the center line of 14th
Street, east of the center line of 23rd Avenue, south of the center line of
13th Street, south of the center line of Byers Court, south of the center line
of 13th Street and west of the center line of 14th Avenue.
SEVENTH WARD: All of the territory within the boundaries of the City of
Monroe lying south of the center line of 7th Street, west of the center line of
19th Avenue, south of the center line of 6th Street, east of the center line of
15th Avenue, south of the center line of 9th Street, east of the center line of
14th Avenue, north of the center line of 13th Street, north of the center line
of Byers Court, north of the center line of 13th Street, west of the center
line of 25th Avenue, south of the center line of 11th Street and west of the
center line of 22nd Avenue.
EIGHTH WARD: All of the territory within the boundaries of the City of
Monroe lying west of the center line of 18th Avenue, north of the center line
of 6th Street, west of the center line of 15th Avenue, north of the center line
of 9th Street, east of the apparent center line of 7th Avenue, north of the
center line of 8th Street and east of the center line of State Highway 69, to
the City limits.
NINTH WARD: All of the territory within the boundaries of the City of
Monroe lying west of the center line of State Highway 69, south of the
§ 1-9-1 MONROE CODE § 1-9-1
1-1:24
center line of 8th Street, west of the apparent center line of 7th Avenue,
south of the center line of 9th Street, west of the center line of 11th Avenue,
south of the center line of 12th Street, west of the center line of 12th
Avenue, north of the center line of 14th Street, west of the center line of
9th Avenue, north of the center line of 16th Street, west of the center line
of State Highway 69, north of the center line of 17th Street, north of the
center line of West 17th Street and west of the Badger State Trail corridor,
to the City limits.
TENTH WARD: All of the territory within the boundaries of the City of
Monroe lying within Sections 29, 30, 31 and 32 of Township 2 north, Range
8 east, Green County Wisconsin.
§ 1-9-2. Polling place. [7-17-2001; 7-5-2011; 4-6-2016; 2016 Code;
9-17-2018]
Except as provided otherwise by resolution of Council or in an emergency
situation, the polling place for all wards shall be located at the basement
floor of City Hall at 1110 18th Avenue, Monroe, Wisconsin.1
Chapter 1-10
OFFICIAL CITY LOGO
§ 1-10-1. Form of official city logo. [7-21-2009; 4-6-2016; 2016
Code]
The logo graphically displayed in Figure 1, including the shapes, colors and
words depicted thereon, is hereby declared to be the official city logo for
the city of Monroe and shall be referred to as the official city logo.
Figure 1 Official City Logo
§ 1-10-2. Finding. [7-21-2009; 4-6-2016; 2016 Code]
The council hereby finds that the official city logo a symbol of the authority
and jurisdiction of the city and, as such, it is a valuable asset of the city and
its citizens.
1. Editor's Note: Former § 1-9-3, Aldermanic districts, which immediately followed this
section, as amended 4-6-2016, was repealed 9-6-2016.
§ 1-9-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-10-3
1-1:25
§ 1-10-3. Use of official city logo. [7-21-2009; 4-6-2016; 2016 Code]
§ 1-10-4. Penalty. [4-6-2016; 2016 Code]
A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be
subject to a Class 3 forfeiture. A separate offense exists each calendar day
during which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 1-11
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT AND EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT
§ 1-11-1. Policy and purpose. [10-20-2015; 2016 Code]
To assure in case of an emergency the continuation of effective, legally
constituted leadership, authority and responsibilities in the government of
the city, it is necessary to provide for emergency management of the city
and to provide for an interim successor to the mayor who can exercise the
powers and discharge the duties of the mayor in the event that the mayor
is killed, missing, disabled or for some other cause unable to perform the
duties and functions of the office.
§ 1-11-2. Definitions. [10-20-2015; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
ALL-HAZARD EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN — Means a document that
defines the city's response to emergencies while providing for the safety
and welfare of its citizens, sets forth lines of authority, responsibilities and
organizational relationships, and shows how all actions will be coordinated
among city departments and agencies, county, state and federal agencies,
and other local units of government.
DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY — Means a person who is currently
authorized to perform all of the functions, exercise all of the powers and
discharge all of the duties of an office in the event the office is vacant or at
(A) Use by the city. Officers, employees and agents of the city, its
departments and its enterprises, are hereby authorized to use the
official city logo in communications, publications or displays, including
electronic communications, publications or displays, developed,
distributed or displayed by officers, employees or agents of the city, its
departments or enterprises, in their official capacity.
(B) Use by others. Except as expressly provided in subsection (A) of this
section, no person shall cause or permit the official city logo, or any
logo that is deceptively similar to the official city logo, to be used for
any purpose unless the use thereof is expressly authorized by the
council, or unless the use thereof is pursuant to a written policy
approved by the council.
§ 1-10-3 MONROE CODE § 1-11-2
1-1:26
such times as it lacks administration due to the death, absence or disability
of the incumbent officer.
EMERGENCY — Means an unexpected and urgent natural or humancaused,
occurrence that threatens or negatively impacts life, health,
property, infrastructure, the environment, the security of the city, or critical
systems, including computer or telecommunications systems, including any
attack or series of attacks by an enemy of the United States causing, or
which may cause, substantial damage or injury to persons or property in the
United States by sabotage, the use of bombs, missiles, shellfire or atomic,
radiological, chemical, bacteriological or biological means or other weapons
or process.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — Means all measures undertaken by or on
behalf of the city to prepare for and minimize the effect of an emergency
or the imminent threat of an emergency or to make repairs to or restore
infrastructure or critical systems that are destroyed or damaged by an
emergency.
INTERIM SUCCESSOR — Means the person who succeeds to the duties,
powers, and office of the mayor upon the death of an incumbent mayor.
UNAVAILABLE — Means either that a vacancy in office exists and there is
no deputy authorized to exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties
of the office, or that the lawful incumbent of the office (including any deputy
exercising the powers and discharging the duties of an office because of
vacancy) and his or her duly authorized deputy are absent or unable, for
physical, mental or legal reasons, to exercise the powers and discharge the
duties of the office.
§ 1-11-3. Interim successors. [10-20-2015; 2016 Code; 2-7-2017]
The order of succession to the office of mayor shall be first, the president
of the council, and then the alderperson by seniority of unbroken service
on the council. If two or more alderpersons share the same seniority of
unbroken service, then the alderperson with the most total service on the
council and if there is still a tie, then it shall be determined alphabetically
based on the alderperson whose last name starts closest to the letter "A."
No person shall take office as interim successor unless he or she may, under
the constitution and statutes of the state of Wisconsin in force at the time,
hold the office of mayor.
(A) Status of interim successor. The person who becomes mayor as interim
successor shall hold the office until the end of the then current term of
office after the next mayoral election.
(B) Formalities of taking office. An interim successor shall take the oath of
office as mayor as soon as practicable upon succeeding to the office.
§ 1-11-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-11-4
1-1:27
§ 1-11-4. Temporary assumption of powers and duties. [10-20-2015;
2016 Code]
If the mayor is temporarily unavailable for any reason and it is necessary
that some act within the scope of the duty or authority of the mayor
be performed, then the person with the highest ranking of the interim
successors immediately available shall temporarily assume the powers and
duties of the office of mayor. That person shall continue to exercise the
powers and duties of the mayor until a person with a higher rank among
potential interim successors is available, or until the incumbent mayor
resumes the exercise of authority.
§ 1-11-5. Determination of ranking. [10-20-2015; 2016 Code]
The city clerk shall determine the rank order of the potential interim
successors under section 1-11-3 after each aldermanic election or other
event that causes a change in the membership on the council, and shall keep
the rankings up to date as necessary between elections. The rankings shall
be recorded in the clerk's files and such other place as will be convenient.
§ 1-11-6. Emergency management. [10-20-2015; 2016 Code]
(A) Director of emergency management. The position of director of
emergency management is hereby created. The director of emergency
management shall be appointed by the council and shall serve for an
indefinite term, subject to removal by a majority vote of a quorum of the
council. He or she shall take and file an official oath.
(1) Coordination with other agencies and organizations. The director
of emergency management shall coordinate all activities involved
in emergency management within the city and shall maintain
liaison and cooperate with emergency management agencies and
organizations of other political subdivisions and of the state and
federal governments, and shall participate in county and state
emergency management activities upon request, and shall have
such additional authority, duties and responsibilities as are
authorized by this section and as may from time to time be required
by the council.
(2) All-hazard emergency operations plan. The director of emergency
management shall coordinate the preparation of an all-hazard
emergency operations plan for the city. In developing the all-hazard
emergency operations plan, the director of emergency
management shall utilize the services, equipment, supplies and
facilities of the existing departments and agencies of the city to the
maximum extent practicable; and the officers and personnel of all
such departments and agencies are directed to cooperate with and
extend such services and facilities for emergency management
purposes. When the council has approved the all-hazard emergency
operations plan it shall be the duty of all departments and utilities
of the city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan.
§ 1-11-4 MONROE CODE § 1-11-6
1-1:28
Chapter 1-12
(3) Absence or incapacity. In the absence or incapacity of the director
of emergency management, the duly authorized deputy of the
director of emergency management shall have all of the duties,
responsibilities and authority hereinabove vested in the director of
emergency management, and shall constitute the acting director of
emergency management.
(B) Declaration of emergency. Upon the declaration by the governor, by the
mayor or by the council of a state of emergency within the city, the
director of emergency management shall issue all necessary
proclamations as to the existence of such state of emergency and shall
issue such warnings or alerts as shall be required in the all-hazard
emergency operations plan. All city agencies shall take action in
accordance with the all-hazard emergency operations plan after the
declaration of an emergency and the issuance of official state of
emergency warnings. Such state of emergency shall continue until
terminated by the issuing authority, provided that any such declaration
not issued by the governor may be terminated at the discretion of the
council. Contemporaneous with the issuance by the mayor of a
declaration of emergency under this section the mayor shall call a
special meeting of the council for the purpose of conducting such
business as may be necessary to address circumstances arising from
such emergency. Actions taken by the mayor in good faith before such
meeting pursuant to the authority granted by subparagraph (C) of this
section shall be binding upon the city to the extent that third parties
have acted in good faith in reliance upon the mayor's authority.
(C) Emergency regulations. Whenever necessary to meet an emergency for
which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the council, the
mayor, following a declaration of emergency under subsection (B) of
this section, may by proclamation promulgate and enforce such orders,
rules and regulations relating to the conduct of persons and the use of
property as shall be necessary to protect the public peace, health and
safety, and preserve lives and property to insure the cooperation
necessary in emergency situations. Such proclamations may be
rescinded by the council at any time.
(D) Obstruction of emergency operations. It shall be unlawful for any
person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay the enforcement of any
order, rule, regulation or all-hazard emergency operations plan issued
pursuant to this section, or to do any act forbidden by any order, rule,
regulation or all-hazard emergency operations plan issued pursuant to
the authority contained in this section. A person who violates this
subsection shall be subject to a class 1 forfeiture.
(E) Authority to seek state and federal disaster assistance. The city
administrator is herewith authorized to prepare and execute the
necessary applications to secure state or federal disaster relief should
such assistance become available.
§ 1-11-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-11-6
1-1:29
NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF HANDICAP
§ 1-12-1. Policy. [10-16-1984; 2016 Code]
It is the policy of the city not to discriminate on the basis of handicapped
status in admission or access to, or treatment or employment in, its
programs, services, and activities.
§ 1-12-2. Compliance. [10-16-1984; 2016 Code]
The office of city clerk is designated as the office responsible for
coordinating implementation of handicapped nondiscrimination
requirements.
§ 1-12-3. Grievance procedure. [10-16-1984; 2016 Code]
Any city officer, official, or employee of the city who receives a complaint
alleging that the city is practicing discrimination on the basis of
handicapped status shall refer such complaints (other than complaints
alleging employment discrimination) to the city clerk. The city clerk shall
investigate the allegations and attempt to resolve the grievance within 20
days of the receipt of the complaint. The complainant shall receive a written
statement from the city clerk regarding the action or actions taken, if any,
to resolve the complaint. If the complainant is not satisfied with the city
clerk's determination, he or she may appeal the matter to the council's
judiciary and ordinance review committee. The appeal must be in writing
to the chairperson of the committee, and must be made within 10 days of
the complainant's receipt of the city clerk's determination. The judiciary
and ordinance review committee, upon receipt of the appeal, shall hold a
hearing on the matter within 30 days. At any hearing, the complainant shall
have the right to give direct testimony, to call witnesses, or present other
evidence in support of the complaint, and to require the presence of any
city official, officer, or employee for examination. Upon completion of the
hearing, the committee shall, if it finds that discrimination on the basis of
handicapped status exists, make recommendations to the council as may
be necessary to remedy such discrimination. A written statement of the
committee's findings and recommendations, if any, shall be given to the
complainant within 10 days following the hearing held by the committee.
Chapter 1-13
FINANCE AND TAX PROCEDURES
§ 1-13-1. Budget system. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
(A) Annually before September 2, each officer, department or board having
fiscal powers or responsibilities shall file with the city administrator an
itemized statement of disbursements to be made to carry out the
powers and duties of such officer, department or board for the ensuing
calendar year. Such statement shall be presented in the form
§ 1-11-6 MONROE CODE § 1-13-1
1-1:30
prescribed by the city administrator and shall be designated as the
"fiscal estimates" and shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the
main fiscal categories applicable to such officer, department or board.
(B) The city administrator shall consider such fiscal estimates in
consultation with the officer, department director or presiding officer,
and shall then determine the total amount to be recommended in the
budget for such officer, department or board.
(C) Annually before October 2 the city administrator shall prepare and
submit to the finance and taxation committee a proposed budget
presenting a financial plan for conducting the affairs of the city for the
ensuing calendar year. The budget shall include the following
information:
(1) All existing indebtedness and all anticipated revenue from all
sources during the ensuing year and likewise list all proposed
appropriations for each department activity and reserve account
during the ensuing year.
(2) Actual revenues and expenditures for the preceding year, actual
revenues and expenditures for not less than the first six months of
the current year, all estimated revenues and expenditures for the
balance of the current year and for informational purposes list by
fund all anticipated unexpended or unappropriated balances, and
surpluses, if any.
(3) Such other information as may be required by the finance and
taxation committee.
(D) Annually before November 2 the finance and taxation committee shall
submit to the council a proposed annual budget and the draft of an
appropriation resolution providing for the expenditures proposed for
the ensuing fiscal year. Upon the submission of the proposed
appropriation resolution to the council it shall be deemed to have been
regularly introduced therein. The council shall hold a public hearing on
the budget and the proposed appropriation resolution by giving notice
thereof and conducting said hearing in the manner prescribed by
section 65.90, Wisconsin statutes. Following the public hearing the
proposed appropriation resolution may be changed or amended and
shall take the same course in the council as other resolutions.
(E) Upon written recommendation of the finance and taxation committee
the council may, at any time, by a two-thirds vote of the entire
membership, transfer any portion of an unencumbered balance of an
appropriation to any other purpose or object. Notice of such transfer
shall be given by publication within 10 days thereafter in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city as a class one notice.
(F) No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in
pursuance of the annual appropriation resolution, or of such resolution
§ 1-13-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-13-1
1-1:31
§ 1-13-2. Delinquent taxes; interest; penalty. [7-7-1992; 2016 Code]
§ 1-13-3. Service charge on returned checks or drafts. [12-4-2001;
2016 Code]
All monies owed to the city under contract, license fees, assessments, fines,
forfeitures or any other payments due by any party shall be paid to the
city in legal tender of the United States of America; provided, however,
city agents and employees may accept checks or drafts in payment if the
tendering party agrees to pay a service charge, in an amount set from time
to time by resolution of the council, on such checks or drafts which are
dishonored for any reason whatsoever, which charge shall be in addition
to remedies available if suit is commenced. The tendering party shall be
deemed to have agreed to the foregoing service charge by issuing such
check or draft. However, where convenient and where such checks or drafts
are accepted as a matter of course, the city departments are directed to
post a sign or other written notice to advise the payer of such charge at the
place where the check or draft is tendered. Departments are authorized to
refuse to accept a check or draft from any person who has an outstanding
obligation to the city for the fee assessed by this section. Departments may
also apply any future payments from any person owing a fee first to the fee
and then to the obligation intended to be paid.
Chapter 1-14
when changed as authorized by subsection (E) of this section. At the
close of each fiscal year any unencumbered balance of an appropriation
shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to re-appropriation;
but appropriations may be made by the council, to be paid out of the
income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other
objects or works which will not be completed within such year, and any
such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it
was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned.
(A) Overdue or delinquent real estate taxes, personal property taxes,
special assessments, special charges and special taxes that are
included in the tax roll are subject to an interest charge of one percent
per month or fraction of a month pursuant to section 74.47(1) of the
Wisconsin statutes.
(B) In addition to the interest charge, overdue or delinquent real estate,
personal property taxes, special assessments, special charges and
special taxes that are included on the tax roll shall be subject to a
penalty of one-half of one percent per month or fraction of a month as
authorized by section 74.47(2) of the Wisconsin statutes.
(C) All interest and penalties on payments of delinquent personal property
taxes collected by the city treasurer shall be retained by the city
treasurer for the city as authorized by section 74.47(3)(e) of the
Wisconsin statutes.
§ 1-13-1 MONROE CODE § 1-13-3
1-1:32
CITATIONS FOR CODE VIOLATIONS
§ 1-14-1. Method adopted. [11-5-1988; 2016 Code]
Pursuant to section 66.0113 of the Wisconsin statutes, the city hereby elects
to use the citation method of enforcement of codes.
§ 1-14-2. Contents of citation. [11-5-1988; 2016 Code]
(A) The citation shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the alleged violator;
(2) Factual allegations describing the alleged violation;
(3) The time and place of the offense;
(4) The section of this code violated;
(5) A designation of the offense in such manner as can readily be
understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so;
(6) The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court;
(7) A statement which in essence informs the alleged violator:
A) That a cash deposit based on the schedule established by this
chapter may be made which shall be delivered or mailed to the
clerk of county court or chief of police before the time of the
scheduled court appearance.
B) That if a deposit is made, no appearance in court is necessary
unless he or she is subsequently summoned.
C) That if a cash deposit is made and the alleged violator does not
appear in court, he or she will be deemed to have entered a
plea of no contest, or, if the court does not accept the plea of no
contest, a summons will be issued commanding him or her to
appear in court to answer the complaint.
D) That if no cash deposit is made and the alleged violator does
not appear in court when specified, an action may be
commenced to collect the forfeiture.
(8) A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit,
the statement which accompanies the citation shall be signed to
show that the statement required under subsection (7) of this
section has been read. Such statement shall be sent or brought
with the cash deposit.
(9) Such other information as the city deems necessary.
(B) The form of the citation to be used by the city is hereby made a part of
this chapter by reference.
§ 1-13-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-14-3
1-1:33
§ 1-14-3. Schedule of deposits. [4-5-1978; 4-18-1978; 2016 Code]
§ 1-14-4. Issuance of citation. [8-15-2006; 2016 Code]
Citations for violations of this code shall be issued only by a law
enforcement officer.
§ 1-14-5. Procedure. [11-20-1979; 2016 Code]
Section 66.0113(3) of the Wisconsin statutes, relating to violator's options
and procedure on default, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference.
§ 1-14-6. Nonexclusivity. [4-5-1978; 4-18-1978; 2016 Code]
Chapter 1-15
CODE OF ETHICS FOR CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 1-15-1. Declaration of policy. [3-5-2002; 2016 Code]
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper
channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for
personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its
government. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a
code of ethics for all city of Monroe officials and employees. The purpose of
this code is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all
such officials and employees, to set forth those acts or actions that conflict
with the best interests of the city and conflict with or are incompatible with
the proper discharge of duties and required independence of judgment.
§ 1-15-2. Definitions. [3-5-2002; 2016 Code]
As used in this chapter:
(A) A schedule of cash deposits is established for use with citations issued
under this code.
(B) Deposits shall be made in cash, money order or certified check to the
clerk of county court or chief of police who shall provide a receipt
therefor.
(A) Other ordinance. Adoption of this chapter does not preclude the council
from adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of
any other law relating to the same or other matter.
(B) Other remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude
the city or any authorized officer from proceeding under any other law
or by any other enforcement method to enforce any code, regulation or
order.
§ 1-14-3 MONROE CODE § 1-15-2
1-1:34
ANYTHING OF VALUE — Means any money or property, privilege or benefit,
favor, service, payment, advance, forbearance, loan, or promise of future
employment, but does not include political contributions which are reported
under the campaign financing laws of Wisconsin, or hospitality extended for
a purpose unrelated to city business by a person or an organization.
ASSOCIATED — Includes, when used with reference to an organization, any
organization in which a city official or a member of his or her immediate
family is a director or officer or owns or controls, directly or indirectly, and
severally or in the aggregate, at least two percent of the outstanding equity.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an elected city official who is appointed
by the mayor and approved by the council to serve as an officer or board
member of a private nonprofit organization does so in his or her official
capacity as a representative of the city of Monroe and, as such, is not
"associated" with the private organization.
CITY OFFICIAL — Means each person holding an elected office of the city,
each employee of the city and each member of a city board, committee,
commission, subcommittee and ad hoc committee.
EMPLOYEE — Means each person who performs services on behalf of the
city under the auspices of any city department, division, utility or other
enterprise, whether such position is paid or unpaid, including, without
limitation, members of the Monroe fire department, members of the Monroe
police auxiliary and independent contractors.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Means an individual's spouse or relative by
marriage, lineal descent or adoption who receives, directly or indirectly,
more than one-half of his or her support from the individual or from whom
the individual receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half of his or
her support.
ORGANIZATION — Means any public or private, profit or nonprofit,
religious, educational, charitable, civic or political organization or entity but
does not include governmental bodies.
PERSONAL INTEREST — Means any interest greater than nominal, direct
or indirect, arising from blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or from
close business, political or other associations.
§ 1-15-3. Application. [3-5-2002; 2016 Code]
This chapter applies to all city officials.
§ 1-15-4. Responsibility of public office. [3-5-2002; 2016 Code]
City officials are agents of the city and hold office for the benefit of the
public. They are bound to uphold the constitution of the United States
and the constitution of this state and to carry out impartially the laws of
the nation, state and municipality. They are bound to discharge faithfully
the duties of their office regardless of personal considerations, recognizing
that the public interest must be their primary concern. City officials shall
adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the standard
§ 1-15-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-15-4
1-1:35
for their positions by the appropriate authority. They shall not exceed their
authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and shall work in
full cooperation with others unless prohibited from so doing by law or by
officially recognized confidentiality of their work.
§ 1-15-5. Standards of conduct. [3-5-2002; 7-1-2014; 2016 Code;
1-7-2019]
(A) Use of office or position. No city official may use or attempt to use his or
her position or office to obtain financial gain or anything of value or any
advantage, privilege or treatment for the private benefit of himself or
herself or his or her immediate family, or for an organization with which
he or she is associated. This subsection does not prohibit a city official
from using the title or prestige of his or her office to obtain campaign
contributions that are permitted and reported as required by the
campaign financing laws of Wisconsin.
(B) Influence and reward. No person or entity may offer or give to a city
official or member of a city official's immediate family, directly or
indirectly, and no city official may solicit or accept from any person or
entity, directly or indirectly, anything of value if it could reasonably be
expected to influence the city official's vote, official actions or
judgment, or could reasonably be considered as a reward for any
official action or inaction on his or her part.
(C) Limitations on actions. No city official may take any official action
affecting, directly or indirectly, a matter in which he or she, a member
of his or her immediate family, or an organization with which he or she
is associated, has a financial or personal interest or use his or her office
or position in a way that produces or assists in the production of a
benefit, direct or indirect, for him or her, a member of his or her
immediate family either separately or together, or an organization with
which the city official or his or her immediate family member is
associated. This subsection does not prohibit a city official from taking
any action concerning the lawful payment of salaries or employee
benefits or reimbursement of actual and necessary expenses, or
prohibit a city official from taking official action with respect to any
proposal to create, modify or repeal a code, resolution or matter
benefiting the public.
(D) Privilege and advantage. No city official shall take for personal use or
convenience or grant to any person for the personal use or convenience
of such person any privilege, anything of value, special consideration,
treatment or advantage beyond that which is available to every other
person except as may be specifically provided for by law or authorized
by the council, including, without limitation, any use, nominal or
otherwise, of city owned equipment, vehicles, materials or property.
(E) Outside employment. No city official shall engage in or accept
employment or render service, whether compensated or
uncompensated, when such employment or service would impair or
§ 1-15-4 MONROE CODE § 1-15-5
1-1:36
§ 1-15-6. Sanctions. [3-5-2002; 2016 Code]
Violation of any provisions of this chapter should raise conscientious
questions for the city official concerned as to whether voluntary resignation
reasonably appear to impair his or her independence of judgment or
action in the performance of official duties.
(F) Disclosure of matters pertaining to a closed session prohibited. No city
official may disclose any information discussed, debated or acted upon
in a closed session of the council or its standing committees unless first
authorized by council.
(G) Employee restrictions. No employee of the city shall:
(1) Engage in non-city related activities for which compensation is
received to such an extent as to interfere with the proper
performance of the duties and responsibilities of his or her official
position.
(2) Receive and retain anything of value if the employment or activity
for which it is given arises from the employee's use of the city's
time, information, facilities, equipment, services or supplies which
are not generally available to all residents of the city. Employees
shall not receive and retain from the city or on behalf of the city
transportation, lodging, meals, food or beverage, or reimbursement
therefor, unless the same were incurred or received primarily for
the benefit of the city, and not primarily for his or her private
benefit, or that of any other person.
(3) Receive and retain honoraria, such as money or anything of value,
other than commemorative or other items of nominal value for, or
in recognition of, activities related to, or arising from, their city
roles or positions. Employees may accept and retain from persons
or entities other than the city the cost or reimbursement of actual
and reasonable expenses related to such activities, whether or not
such activities arise from their city roles or positions.
(H) Receipt of money by city employees. When a city employee performs or
provides services for persons or entities other than the city, which
services arise from their city employment or from the employee's
holding his or her position, and the employee's compensation and
expenses related thereto are paid for or reimbursed by the city, all
monies received by the employee therefor shall be paid promptly to the
city treasurer.
(I) Receipt of money by city officials other than city employees. If a city
official, other than a city employee, receives anything of value not
authorized by this chapter the city official shall not retain it but shall
deposit the money or the equivalent cash value or anything of value
with the city treasurer or return the payment or thing to the payer or
giver.
§ 1-15-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-15-6
1-1:37
or other action is indicated to promote the best interests of the city. If the
ethics board determines that any person has violated any provision of this
chapter, the board may, as part of its report, make any of the following
recommendations:
§ 1-15-7. Severability. [3-5-2002; 2016 Code]
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this chapter
is held to be invalid or unconstitutional or if the application of any provision
of this chapter to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the other provisions or
applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid or
unconstitutional provisions or applications. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the council that this chapter would have been adopted had any
invalid or unconstitutional provisions or applications not been included.
Chapter 1-16
PUBLIC RECORDS
§ 1-16-1. Purpose. [1-7-2019]
A representative government is dependent upon an informed electorate and
therefore it is declared to be the public policy of the City that all persons
are entitled to the greatest possible information regarding the affairs of
their government and the official acts of those officers and employees who
represent them. Further, providing persons with such information is an
essential function of a representative government and an integral part of
the routine duties of officers and employees whose responsibility it is to
provide such information. To that end, this chapter shall be construed in
every instance with a presumption of complete public access, consistent
with the conduct of governmental business. The denial of public access
(A) In the case of an elected city official, that the council consider
sanctioning, censuring or expelling the elected city official;
(B) In the case of a city official who is a member of a board, committee or
commission, that the mayor or other appointing authority consider
removing the member from the board, committee or commission;
(C) In the case of a city official who is an employee of the city, that the
employee's appointing authority consider disciplining or discharging
the employee;
(D) As an alternative, or an addition to, the sanctions authorized by this
section, any person who violates any provision of the ethics code shall
upon conviction be subject to a Class 2 forfeiture. Each violation of the
ethics code shall be a separate offense. No citation shall be issued for a
violation of any provision of this chapter unless authorized by the ethics
board.
§ 1-15-6 MONROE CODE § 1-16-1
1-1:38
generally is contrary to the public interest and only in an exceptional case
may access be denied.
§ 1-16-2. Adoption of Wisconsin's Public Records Laws. [1-7-2019]
The City does hereby adopt and incorporate, as though fully set forth
herein, the provisions of Wisconsin's Public Records laws, Wis. Stats.
§§ 19.31 through 19.39, inclusive of all future amendments and revisions
to such sections of the Wisconsin Statutes. The following provisions in this
chapter are intended to supplement, not to replace or to supplant, the
Wisconsin Public Records Laws.
§ 1-16-3. Duty to maintain records. [1-7-2019]
§ 1-16-4. Legal custodian. [1-7-2019]
§ 1-16-5. Public access to records. [1-7-2019]
(A) Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, each officer and employee
of the City shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his
or her predecessor or other persons as required by law to be kept in his
or her office or which are in the lawful possession or control of the
officer or employee or his or her deputies.
(B) Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office or an employee's term
of employment, or whenever the office or position of employment
becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his or
her successor all records then in his or her custody and the successor
shall receipt therefore to the officer or employee, who shall file said
receipt with the City Clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is
selected or qualifies, such records shall be delivered to and receipted
for by the officer's or employee's supervisor, on behalf of the successor,
to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt.
(A) The City Clerk shall act as the legal custodian of the records of the
Council and for any committees, commissions, boards, or other
authorities created by ordinance or resolution of the Council.
(B) Each elected official shall be the custodian of their individual official
records, such as their correspondence, memorandums and e-mail. Any
elected official may designate, in writing, the City Clerk to act as the
official custodian of the elected official's records.
(C) For every department, the department head is the custodian of records
for their department.
(D) Every custodian of records shall designate, in writing, one or more
employees to act in his or her absence as an alternate custodian of such
records.
§ 1-16-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-16-5
1-1:39
(A) Except as provided in § 1-16-7, any person has a right to inspect a
record and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in Wis.
Stats. § 19.35(1).
(B) Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular
office hours.
(C) A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those
available to City employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record.
(D) The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may
impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an
original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged.
(E) A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and
copying records as follows:
(1) The reasonable cost of photocopying charged to and paid by
requesters shall be established and may be adjusted, from time to
time, by resolution of Council.
(2) If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual
and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing
shall be charged.
(3) The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in
printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts CDs and
audio or videotapes, shall be charged to the requester.
(4) If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also
be charged to the requester.
(5) There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost
therefor exceeds $50, in which case the actual cost shall be
determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester.
(6) The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and
may require payment in advance, if the estimate exceeds $5.
(7) Elected and appointed officials of the City shall not be required to
pay for public records they may reasonably require for the proper
performance of their official duties.
(8) The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge
or at a reduced charged where he or she determines that waiver or
reduction of the fee is in the public interest.
(F) Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 19.34, the City shall adopt and prominently
display and make available for inspection and copying at its offices, for
the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its
organization and the established times and places at which, the legal
custodian from whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain
§ 1-16-5 MONROE CODE § 1-16-5
1-1:40
§ 1-16-6. Access procedures. [1-7-2019]
§ 1-16-7. Limitations on right to access. [1-7-2019]
information and access to records in its custody, make requests for
records, or obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof.
(A) A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal
custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably
describes the requested record or the information requested. However,
a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject
matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a
sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a request must be
in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under
Wis. Stats. § 19.37. Except as provided below, no request may be
refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be
identified or to state the purpose of the request. No request may be
refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a
fee is required under § 1-16-5(E)(6). A requester may be required to
show acceptable identification whenever the requested record is kept
at a private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or
regulations so require.
(B) Each legal custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as
practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the
requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole
or in part and the reason therefor. If the legal custodian, after
conferring with the City Attorney, determines that a written request is
so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making the
request may first be required to itemize his or her request if a manner
which would permit reasonable compliance.
(C) A request for a record may be denied as provided in § 1-16-7. If a
request is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a
demand for a written statement of the reasons denying the request is
made by the requester within five business days of the oral denial. If a
written request is denied, in whole or in part, the requester shall
receive a written statement of the reasons for denying the request.
Every written denial of a request shall inform the requester that if the
request for the record was made in writing, then the determination is
subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under Wis.
Stats. § 19.37(1), or upon application to the attorney general or the
district attorney.
(A) Any record which is specifically exempted from disclosure by state or
federal law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law,
including those records identified in Wis. Stats. § 19.36, is exempt from
disclosure except that any portion of that record which contains public
information is open to public inspection.
§ 1-16-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-16-7
1-1:41
§ 1-16-8. Preservation of records through electronic formatting.
[1-7-2019]
Any legal custodian may keep and preserve a record in his or her possession
by means of microfilm or another reproductive device, optical imaging
or electronic formatting. Any photographic reproduction of a record shall
be deemed an original record for all purposes if it meets the applicable
standards established in Wis. Stats. §§ 16.61(7) and 16.612, and shall be
considered preserved, shall be open to public inspection and copying
according to the provision of state law and of this chapter, and may be
legally destroyed.
§ 1-16-9. Retention of records. [1-7-2019]
The City hereby adopts and incorporates, as though fully set forth herein,
the records retention schedule as stated in the General Records Schedule
for Wisconsin Municipal and Related Records approved by the Public
Records Board on August 27, 2018, inclusive of all future amendments
and revisions to such retention schedule. A copy of the General Records
Schedule shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 1-16-10. Destruction of records. [1-7-2019]
(B) In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is
not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after
conferring with the City Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in
part, if he or she determines that the harm to the public interest
resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full
access to the requested record.
(C) If a record contains information that may be made public and
information that may not be made public, the legal custodian of the
record shall provide the information that may be made public and
delete the information that may not be made public from the record
before release. The legal custodian shall confer with the City Attorney
prior to releasing any such record. If in the judgment of the legal
custodian and the City Attorney there is no feasible way to separate the
exempt material from the nonexempt material without unreasonable
jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record
shall be withheld from disclosure.
(D) There is no right to access to any record which has been legally
destroyed.
(A) No legal custodian may destroy any record prior to the expiration of the
period of time that such record is required to be retained under
§ 1-16-9.
(B) No legal custodian may destroy any obsolete record until such record
has first been offered to the State Historical Society in accordance with
Wis. Stats. § 19.21(4)(a). Any legal custodian may apply to the State
§ 1-16-7 MONROE CODE § 1-16-10
1-1:42
§ 1-16-11. Release of closed meeting records. [1-7-2019]
§ 1-16-12. Severability. [1-7-2019]
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If a section, subsection,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase shall be adjudged by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the validity
of this chapter.
Title 2, Boards and Commissions
Chapter 2-1
Historical Society for a waiver of this requirement as to certain
categories of records under such person's authority that they
reasonably believe have little or no significant historical value.
(C) No legal custodian may destroy any record at any time after the receipt
of a request for inspection or copying of the record until after the
request is granted or until at least 60 days after the date that the
request is denied. If any legal action is pending regarding or related to
the record, the record may not be destroyed without the express
authorization of the City Attorney. No record that is the object of or
which has been produced pursuant to a discovery order or a subpoena
may be destroyed without the express consent of the City Attorney.
(D) No legal custodian may destroy any record that has been identified as,
or that may have value as, evidence in any civil or criminal legal
proceeding, labor arbitration or disciplinary action. No record may be
destroyed at any time within 60 days of the denial of a request to review
the record or any part thereof.
(E) No legal custodian may destroy any record where any contract, grant,
funding conditions, state or federal statute require that such records be
maintained for a longer period of time than specified in the retention
schedule under § 1-16-9.
(A) The Council, upon majority vote, may release any record, or part
thereof, except for those records that are required by state or federal
law to be kept confidential, for any record of the Council or for any
record for any committees, commissions, boards, or other authorities
created by ordinance or resolution of the Council. In lieu or releasing
the record or part thereof, the Council may direct that a summary of the
information may be disclosed.
(B) Any elected official of the City shall be allowed to inspect any record
from any closed meeting of the Council or for any record for any
committees, commissions, boards, or other authorities created by
ordinance or resolution of the Council that they may reasonably require
for the proper performance of their official duties.
§ 1-16-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 1-16-12
1-1:43
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS
§ 2-1-1. Composition of Board. [1-5-2016; 2016 Code; 2-22-2017;
5-16-2017]
A Board of Public Works is hereby established. The word "Board" when
used in this chapter shall be construed to mean the Board of Public Works.
The Board shall be composed of four alderpersons, all of whom shall be
designated voting members. Members of the Board shall be appointed by
the Mayor annually and shall serve for a term from their appointment
through the Monday preceding the third Tuesday in April of the succeeding
year. The members of the Board shall, on the first Tuesday in May of
each year, choose a president and a vice-president of the Board from their
number.
§ 2-1-2. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the president and at such
other times as the board may determine.
§ 2-1-3. Rules for, by council. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The council may make such rules, not contravening any of the provisions of
law, for the government of the board and when the business of said board
shall be conducted.
§ 2-1-4. Quorum; record; report. [1-5-2016; 2016 Code; 2-22-2017]
Two members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for doing business.
The secretary shall keep a record of all the proceedings, subject to the
inspection of any elector of the city.
§ 2-1-5. Duties and powers. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
(A) In general. It shall be the duty of the board, subject to the direction of
the council, to superintend all public works and keep the streets, alleys,
parking facilities, sewers and public works and places in repair.
(B) Use of streets. No building shall be moved through the streets without a
written permit therefor, granted by the board. The board shall
determine the time and manner of using the streets for laying or
changing water or gas pipes, or placing and maintaining electric light
and telephone poles; provided, that its decision in this regard may be
reviewed by the council.
(C) Restoring streets. If any individual or entity shall neglect to repair or
restore to its former condition any street, alley or sidewalk excavated,
altered or taken up, within the time and in the manner directed by the
board, said board shall cause the same to be done at the expense of said
individual or entity. The expense thereof when chargeable to a lot
§ 1-16-12 MONROE CODE § 2-1-5
1-1:44
Chapter 2-2
BOARD OF REVIEW
§ 2-2-1. Members. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The board of review shall consist of the mayor, city clerk, and any three
alderpersons to be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the
council. The word "board" when used in this chapter means the board
of review. Members of the board who are appointed by the mayor shall
serve for a term from their appointment through the Monday preceding the
third Tuesday in April of the succeeding year. Members of the board shall
receive no salary for their service, provided however, if proceedings require
a member's attendance on more than one day, the council may by resolution
establish a per diem salary payable to such member for attendance on the
second and each succeeding day.
§ 2-2-2. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 1-7-2019]
The board shall meet in the council chambers, or at such other location
as the council may direct, annually at any time during the 45-day period
beginning on the 4 Monday of April, but no sooner than 7 days after the last
day on which the assessment roll is open for examination. The board may
adjourn from day to day or from time to time until its business is completed;
provided however, if an adjournment is for more than one day, a written
notice shall be posted on the outer door of the place of meeting stating to
what time said meeting is adjourned.
§ 2-2-3. Duties. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The duties and powers of the board shall be the same as set forth in section
70.47 of the Wisconsin statutes, and acts amendatory and supplementary
thereto.
§ 2-2-4. Taxpayer's duty to provide information. [4-8-2015; 2016
Code]
No person may appear before the board, testify to the board by telephone
or object to a valuation if that valuation was made by the assessor or
the objector using the income method, unless the person supplies to the
assessor all of the information about income and expenses that the assessor
lawfully requests.
owner shall be certified to the city clerk by the board and if not paid,
shall be carried into the tax roll as a special tax against the lot.
(D) City forester. To supervise the work of a city forester who shall have the
responsibility to maintain a long term forestry program for the
propagation and preservation of trees and shrubs within the city.
§ 2-1-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 2-2-5
1-1:45
§ 2-2-5. Confidentiality of information provided to Assessor.
[4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
Any information about income and expenses supplied to the assessor at the
request of the assessor under section 2-2-4 of this chapter shall remain
strictly confidential and shall not be subject to inspection or copying under
any public records law. This section shall not apply to disclosure to any
person using the information in the discharge of duties imposed by law or
the duties of their office or by order of a court.
Chapter 2-3
BOARD OF POLICE AND FIRE COMMISSIONERS
§ 2-3-1. Commission members, appointment. [1-5-2016; 2016 Code]
The board of police and fire commissioners shall consist of five citizens,
three of whom shall constitute a quorum. The word "board" when used in
this chapter means the board of police and fire commissioners. The mayor
shall annually, between the last Monday of April and the first Monday of
May, appoint in writing, to be filed with the secretary of the board, one
member for a term of five years. No appointment shall be made which will
result in more than three members of the board belonging to the same
political party. The members of the board shall receive no compensation.
The board shall keep a record of all its proceedings.
Chapter 2-4
CITY PLAN COMMISSION
§ 2-4-1. Members and appointment. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The city plan commission shall consist of the mayor who shall be the
presiding officer, one alderperson appointed by the mayor and five citizens
appointed by the mayor. The word "commission" when used in this chapter
means the city plan commission. Citizen members shall be persons of
recognized experience and qualifications and may be employees or officers
of the city, provided however, at all times not less than three members of
the commission shall be citizens who are not also employees or officers of
the city. They shall receive no compensation for service on the commission.
Each member of the commission shall serve for a term from his or her
appointment through the Monday preceding the third Tuesday in April of
the third succeeding year, except for the alderperson member who shall
serve for a term from his or her appointment through the Monday preceding
the third Tuesday in April of the succeeding year.
§ 2-2-5 MONROE CODE § 2-4-2
1-1:46
§ 2-4-2. Organization of commission. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code;
5-16-2017
Each year at its first meeting following the third Tuesday in April, the
commission shall organize by the election of a vice-chairperson and such
other officers as may in their judgment be necessary.
§ 2-4-3. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
Meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the presiding officer
and at such other times as the commission may determine. A quorum shall
consist of four members of the commission.
§ 2-4-4. Duties. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The duties and powers of the commission shall be the same as set forth
in section 62.23 of the Wisconsin statutes, and acts amendatory and
supplementary thereto. In addition thereto, the commission shall have
responsibility to analyze demographic and economic trends in the city and
to recommend to the council policies or programs designed to promote
the orderly development of infrastructure, housing or other improvements
needed to accommodate demographic and economic trends in the city.
§ 2-4-5. Powers. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The commission may employ expert advice, upon the authority of the
council if any appropriation is necessary, and may have made maps showing
proposed additions to or changes of the comprehensive plan. The
commission may request assistance from any official, department, board or
agency of the city.
§ 2-4-6. Records. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The commission shall keep written records of its proceedings which shall be
open to inspection at all reasonable times.
§ 2-4-7. Specifications. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
(A) Specifications to commission. Any plat, survey, abstract, annexation
petition or other description brought before the commission shall
conform to the following specifications:
(1) Lengths shall be specified to the nearest 1/100 of a foot.
(2) Bearings shall be specified to the nearest one second of a degree
(00°00'00").
(3) Interior angles of all closed traverse surveys shall close absolutely.
(B) Failure to conform. The commission may refuse to accept or act on any
plat, survey, abstract, annexation petition or other description brought
§ 2-4-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 2-4-7
1-1:47
Chapter 2-5
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 2-5-1. Members. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 5-16-2017]
A zoning board of appeals is hereby established. The word "board" when
used in this chapter means the zoning board of appeals. The board shall
consist of five regular members and two alternate members who shall be
appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the council. Each regular
member and each alternate member shall serve for a term from his or her
appointment through the Monday preceding the third Tuesday in April of
the third succeeding year. Terms of members and alternate members shall
be staggered such that not more than one alternate member and not more
than two regular members are appointed each year. Annually, the mayor
shall designate one of the alternate members as first alternate and the
other as second alternate. The first alternate shall act, with full power, only
when a member of the board refuses to vote because of interest or when
a member is absent. The second alternate shall so act only when the first
alternate so refuses or is absent or when more than one member of the
board so refuses or is absent. The members of the board shall serve without
compensation. The mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as
chairperson.
§ 2-5-2. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
All meetings of the board shall be held at the city hall unless a different
meeting place is announced in a public notice of the meeting, and shall
be open to the public. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call
of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine.
The chairperson, or in his or her absence, the acting chairperson may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. A quorum shall
consist of four members of the board and if necessary alternate members
shall be counted to determine such quorum.
§ 2-5-3. Rules of board. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The board shall adopt from time to time such rules and regulations as it
may consider necessary to carry into effect the provisions of the zoning
regulations of this code and of subsection (7) of section 62.23 of the
Wisconsin statutes. The board shall make its decisions in writing with such
findings and conclusions as the law requires and the city attorney shall
provide to the board a decision form that is suitable for use by the board
in making its decisions. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing
to vote, showing such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office
before the commission which fails to conform to the specifications
provided in subsection (A) of this section.
§ 2-4-7 MONROE CODE § 2-5-3
1-1:48
of the city clerk and shall be a public record. The concurring vote of a
majority of the members present shall be necessary to reverse any order
or determination of the building inspector or other official whose order
or determination is challenged, or to decide in favor of the applicant any
matter upon which they are required to pass or to effect any variation of the
zoning regulations of this code.
§ 2-5-4. Appeals to board. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved by an order
that pursuant to this code may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals.
An appeal shall be initiated by filing a notice of appeal with the officer who
made the order and the board, within a reasonable time after the issuance
of the order, and tendering a filing fee in an amount set by resolution of the
council. The notice of appeal shall state all the grounds for the appeal. The
officer making the order appealed from shall immediately transmit to the
board all the documents in his or her possession relating to the order. The
board shall fix a time for the hearing of the appeal, and give public notice of
the time and place, as well as due notice to any person in interest. Upon the
hearing, a party must appear in person, and may appear with counsel. The
city may file an appeal without paying the filing fee, but shall comply with
all other requirements of this section.
§ 2-5-5. Powers. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The board shall have the following powers:
(A) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by a city officer
that pursuant to this code may be appealed to the zoning board of
appeals.
(B) To permit the reasonable extension of a district where the boundary line
of a district divides a lot in a single ownership when the zoning
regulations of this code were first adopted.
(C) If recommended by the public service commission of Wisconsin, to
permit in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and
safeguards in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the
zoning regulations of this code, a building or premises to be erected or
used by a public service corporation or for public utility purposes in any
location and for any purpose which is reasonably necessary for the
public convenience and welfare.
(D) To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms
of the zoning regulations of this code as will not be contrary to the
public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of the zoning regulations of this code will
result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship so that the spirit of
the zoning regulations of this code shall be observed, public safety and
welfare secured, and substantial justice done.
§ 2-5-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 2-5-5
1-1:49
Chapter 2-6
BOARD OF PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSIONERS
§ 2-6-1. Board created. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
A board of park and recreation commissioners of the city is hereby created
which shall consist of nine persons who are residents and qualified voters
of the city. The word "board" when used in this chapter means the board of
park and recreation commissioners.
§ 2-6-2. Members and appointment. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The members of said board shall be appointed by the mayor subject to
confirmation by the council. One member thereof shall be an alderperson
who shall serve for a term from his or her appointment through the Monday
preceding the third Tuesday in April of the succeeding year. The term of
each of the other eight members of said board shall be from appointment
through the Monday preceding the third Tuesday in April of the third
succeeding year from appointment. Terms of members shall be staggered
such that not more than three members are appointed each year. Each
member shall take and file the official oath. Members and officers of the
board shall serve without salary or other compensation.
§ 2-6-3. Organization of board. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
At the first meeting following appointment of a new member the board shall
organize by electing from its members a president who shall hold office until
his or her successor shall be elected and qualified. Five members of the
board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
§ 2-6-4. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the president and at such
other times as the board may determine.
(E) The board may, in conformity with the provisions of the law, reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision
or determination appealed from, and shall make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as may be appropriate.
(F) Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by the board, or
any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city
may, within 30 days after the filing of the decision of the board, present
to a court of competent jurisdiction a verified petition setting forth that
such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of
the illegality whereupon such decision shall be subject to review by
certiorari as provided by law.
§ 2-5-5 MONROE CODE § 2-6-5
1-1:50
§ 2-6-5. Powers and duties. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The board is empowered and directed:
Chapter 2-7
SENIOR CITIZENS BOARD
§ 2-7-1. Board created. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
There is hereby created a senior citizens board of the city which shall
consist of nine persons, the word "board" when used in this chapter means
the senior citizens board.
(A) To secure the quiet and suitable use and enjoyment of all public parks,
parkways, and buildings used for recreational activities by the people
and to adopt rules and regulations to promote these purposes.
(B) To oversee parks and recreation programs and activities in the city.
(C) To promote recreational activities within the city as it may consider
advisable and its budget may permit.
(D) To administer funds deposited in the city's municipal park fund
originally created by special ordinance number 11 adopted on April 20,
1971 and the city's non-lapsing fund for park land development
originally created by special ordinance number 90 adopted on March 6,
1990. Such funds shall be consolidated into a single fund to be known
as the municipal park fund and administered as follows:
(1) Funds shall be used to encourage and assist with the purchase,
acquisition, and development of personal property and land in the
city for park and recreation purposes, including development of
playgrounds.
(2) The board may accept and deposit in the municipal park fund gifts,
devises and bequests to the city for the purposes set forth in
subsection (1) of this paragraph. A gift, devise or bequest that is
subject to any condition, limitation or restriction shall be accepted
only if approved by the council. Subject to any condition, limitation
or restriction accepted by the city, the board shall have full right,
power and authority to invest and reinvest funds or property given,
devised or bequeathed to the city for the purposes set forth in
subsection (1) of this paragraph in securities or other forms of
investment which may be lawful under the laws of Wisconsin.
(3) Funds may be disbursed from municipal park fund as follows:
A) Income may be disbursed upon approval of the board.
B) Principal may be disbursed upon approval by the council.
§ 2-6-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 2-7-1
1-1:51
§ 2-7-2. Organization of board. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 5-16-2017]
The board shall annually elect a chairperson who shall hold office until his
or her successor shall be elected and qualified. Five members of the board
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
§ 2-7-3. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at
such other times as the board may determine.
§ 2-7-4. Powers and duties. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The board is empowered and directed:
(A) Members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor subject to
confirmation by the council.
(1) Not less than six members shall be residents and qualified electors
of the city.
(2) One member shall be an alderperson who shall serve for a term
from his or her appointment through the Monday preceding the
third Tuesday in April of the succeeding year.
(3) Each remaining member shall serve for a term from his or her
appointment through the Monday preceding the third Tuesday in
April of the third succeeding year. Terms shall be staggered so that
the term of not more than three members ends in any single year.
(4) Each member shall take and file the official oath.
(B) Members and officers of the board shall serve without salary or other
compensation.
(A) To govern, manage, control, improve and care for all land, buildings or
other facilities owned or leased by the city for senior citizen purposes
and secure the suitable use and enjoyment thereof by senior citizens.
(B) To oversee senior citizen programs and activities.
(C) To adopt rules and regulations to promote the purposes for which the
board has been created.
(D) To acquire in the name of the city for senior citizen purposes by gift,
devise, bequest or condemnation, either absolutely or in trust, money,
real or personal property, or any right or privilege. Gifts to the city of
money or other property, real or personal, either absolutely or in trust
for senior citizen purposes shall be accepted only after they shall have
been recommended by the board to the council and approved by the
council by resolution. Subject to the approval of the council, the board
may carry out every trust imposed upon the use of property or property
§ 2-7-1 MONROE CODE § 2-7-4
1-1:52
§ 2-7-5. Restriction on board's actions. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The board shall not contract any liability of the city that exceeds the sums
set apart for senior citizen funds, unless the same has been expressly
authorized by the council.
Chapter 2-8
FINANCE AND TAXATION COMMITTEE
§ 2-8-1. Members and appointment. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code;
2-22-2017]
The Finance and Taxation Committee shall be composed of four
alderpersons, all of whom shall be designated voting members. The word
"committee" when used in this chapter shall be construed to mean the
Finance and Taxation Committee. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor
annually and shall serve for a term from their appointment through the
Monday preceding the third Tuesday in April of the succeeding year. The
Mayor shall designate one of the members as chairperson.
§ 2-8-2. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 2-22-2017]
The meetings of the committee shall be on call of the chairperson.
§ 2-8-3. Quorum; record; report. [2-22-2017]
Two members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for doing
business. The secretary shall keep a record of all the proceedings, subject
to the inspection of any elector of the city.
§ 2-8-4. Duties. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 2-22-2017]
The committee shall have the following duties:
rights by deed, testament or other conveyance transferring the title of
such property to the city for senior citizen purposes.
(E) To recommend to the council the acquisition or disposition of senior
citizen facilities within the city.
(F) To acquire and maintain such equipment as may be necessary to
properly carry out its purposes and as its budget may permit.
(G) To promote senior citizen activities within the city as it may consider
advisable and as its budget may permit.
(A) To annually submit the city budget for public hearing and council
approval in the manner set forth in section 65.90 of the Wisconsin
statutes.
(B) To annually establish the tax rate for tax collection purposes.
§ 2-7-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 2-8-4
1-1:53
Chapter 2-9
PUBLIC SAFETY COMMITTEE
§ 2-9-1. Members and appointment. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code;
2-22-2017]
The public safety committee shall be composed of four alderpersons, all of
whom shall be designated voting members. The word "committee" when
used in this chapter means the public safety committee. Members shall
be appointed by the mayor annually and shall serve for a term from their
appointment through the Monday preceding the third Tuesday in April of
the succeeding year. The mayor shall designate one of the members as
chairperson.
§ 2-9-2. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 2-22-2017]
Meetings of the committee shall be on call of the chairperson.
§ 2-9-3. Quorum; record; report. [2-22-2017]
Two members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for doing
business. The secretary shall keep a record of all the proceedings, subject
to the inspection of any elector of the city.
§ 2-9-4. Duties. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 2-22-2017]
The committee shall have the following duties:
(C) To give preliminary approval and make recommendations to the council
in matters concerning transfers of funds, investments, continuing
appropriations, reserve accounts and any other financial matter.
(D) To audit all claims against the city and to make recommendations to the
council.
(E) To oversee and make recommendations to the council regarding
liability risk management programs and property and liability
insurance coverage.
(F) To recommend to the council the purchase of land or buildings, or the
improvement of land or buildings, as may be required for the effective
operation of city departments, utilities or other enterprises.
(G) To recommend to the council the sale or other disposition of surplus or
otherwise unneeded land or buildings previously used in the operation
of city departments, utilities or other enterprises.
(H) To adopt policies and procedures for the expenditure of public funds.
(A) To make recommendations to the city administrator or other pertinent
committees or boards regarding matters of public safety.
§ 2-8-4 MONROE CODE § 2-9-4
1-1:54
Chapter 2-10
JUDICIARY AND ORDINANCE REVIEW COMMITTEE
§ 2-10-1. Members and appointment. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code;
2-22-2017]
The Judiciary and Ordinance Review Committee shall be composed of four
alderpersons, all of whom shall be designated voting members. The word
"committee" when used in this chapter shall be construed to mean the
Judiciary and Ordinance Review Committee. Members shall be appointed
by the Mayor annually and shall serve for a term from their appointment
through the Monday preceding the third Tuesday in April of the succeeding
year. The Mayor shall designate one of the members as chairperson.
(B) To periodically review provisions of this code that are concerned with
overall public safety, and make recommendations for appropriate
additions or changes.
(C) To supervise the regulation of traffic and parking.
(D) To recommend to council the approval of certain purchases relative to
police and fire matters.
(E) To recommend to council the approval of special event permits.
(F) To oversee the affairs and activities of the auxiliary police reserve
appointed by the police chief.
(G) To oversee the management of parking facilities in the city, including,
but not limited to, the following:
(1) The management of all city parking control devices and systems.
(2) Make recommendations to the council on the management,
location and placement of all public parking stalls within the city.
(3) The coordination and control of other public parking within the city
in conjunction with other committees, boards or commissions
having authority over the same.
(4) Recommend to the council the establishment of such fees and
charges for parking privileges in city parking lots or other parking
facilities as it shall determine reasonable.
(5) Recommend to the council the adoption of such ordinances as will
promote and assure the proper use of such parking facilities.
(6) Recommend to the council the number, size and location of parking
lots throughout the city.
§ 2-9-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 2-10-2
1-1:55
§ 2-10-2. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 2-22-2017]
Meetings of the committee shall be on call of the chairperson.
§ 2-10-3. Quorum; record; report. [2-22-2017]
Two members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for doing
business. The secretary shall keep a record of all the proceedings, subject
to the inspection of any elector of the city.
§ 2-10-4. Duties. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 2-22-2017]
The committee shall have the following duties:
Chapter 2-11
LICENSE COMMITTEE
§ 2-11-1. Members and appointment. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code;
2-22-2017]
The license committee shall be composed of four alderpersons, all of whom
shall be designated voting members. The word "committee" when used in
this chapter means the license committee. Members shall be appointed
by the mayor annually and shall serve for a term from their appointment
through the Monday preceding the third Tuesday in April of the succeeding
year. The mayor shall designate one of the members as chairperson.
§ 2-11-2. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 2-22-2017]
Meetings of the committee shall be on call of the chairperson.
§ 2-11-3. Quorum; record; report. [2-22-2017]
Two members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for doing
business. The secretary shall keep a record of all the proceedings, subject
to the inspection of any elector of the city.
§ 2-11-4. Duties. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 2-22-2017]
The committee shall have the following duties:
(A) To work with the city staff and the city attorney to continuously review,
organize, amend and update this code.
(B) To review, analyze and recommend to the council appropriate means to
effectively administer and enforce this code.
(A) To review all applications for licenses or permits required to be
approved by the council, except for licenses or permits relating to
operations on the Monroe municipal airport, and to make
§ 2-10-2 MONROE CODE § 2-11-4
1-1:56
Chapter 2-12
SALARY AND PERSONNEL COMMITTEE
§ 2-12-1. Members and appointment. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code;
2-22-2017]
The Salary and Personnel Committee shall be composed of four
alderpersons, all of whom shall be designated voting members. The word
"committee" when used in this chapter shall be construed to mean the
Salary and Personnel Committee. Three members shall be appointed by the
Mayor annually and one member shall be the chairperson of the finance
and taxation committee and shall serve for a term from their appointment
through the Monday preceding the third Tuesday in April of the succeeding
year. The Mayor shall designate one of the members as chairperson.
§ 2-12-2. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 2-22-2017]
Meetings of the committee shall be held on call of the chairperson.
§ 2-12-3. Quorum; record; report. [2-22-2017]
Two members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for doing
business. The secretary shall keep a record of all the proceedings, subject
to the inspection of any elector of the city.
§ 2-12-4. Duties. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 2-22-2017]
recommendations to the council regarding the issuance of such licenses
and permits.
(B) To make recommendations to the council regarding general policies
and procedures related to issuance of licenses and permits.
(A) The committee shall have the following duties:
(1) To annually establish and recommend to the council the salaries
and wages for all employees of the city except employees under
union contract.
(2) To establish work rules and personnel policies that govern those
under their jurisdiction.
(3) To act as the bargaining unit on behalf of the city when negotiating
all union contracts.
(4) To oversee and make recommendations to the council regarding
insurance programs that are related to employee benefits and
safety.
(B) The chairperson shall annually facilitate and coordinate each
alderperson's performance review of the city administrator and to
§ 2-11-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 2-12-4
1-1:57
Chapter 2-13
AIRPORT BOARD OF MANAGEMENT
§ 2-13-1. Creation. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 1-3-2017]
There is hereby established an airport board of management, under section
114.14(l) of the Wisconsin statutes. When used in this chapter the word
"board" means the airport board of management and the word "airport"
means the Monroe municipal airport.
§ 2-13-2. Members and appointment. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code;
1-3-2017; 5-16-2017]
The board shall be composed of seven voting members, which shall be
appointed by the mayor and subject to confirmation by the council and
subject to the following:
§ 2-13-3. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 1-3-2017; 5-16-2017]
Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at
such other times as the board may determine. A quorum shall consist of four
members of the board.
comprise one performance evaluation report to be sent to council for
final approval.
(A) Two members shall be alderpersons with one of such alderpersons
serving as chairperson of the board.
(B) Two members shall be citizens.
(C) Three members that meet any of the following qualifications: hangar
owner or hangar tenant at the Monroe Municipal Airport or an
authorized representative of such owner or tenant; an owner or
authorized representative of an airport business operating at the
Monroe Municipal Airport; or a person with aviation expertise or
knowledge that owns real property located in the City of Monroe. If no
qualified person can be found, then the mayor may appoint any citizen.
(D) The terms for each alderperson shall be from the time of his or her
appointment through the Monday preceding the third Tuesday in April
of the succeeding year. The initial terms of the remaining members
shall be two members for one year, two members for two years, and one
member for three years ending on the Monday preceding the third
Tuesday in April of the succeeding year or years as applicable.
Thereafter, all non-alderperson terms shall be for three years.
(E) Each member shall take and file the official oath.
§ 2-12-4 MONROE CODE § 2-13-4
1-1:58
§ 2-13-4. Duties. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 1-3-2017]
The board is hereby vested with responsibility for the construction,
improvement, equipment, maintenance and operation of the airport. The
board shall have the following powers:
Chapter 2-14
VISITORS AND PROMOTION COMMISSION
§ 2-14-1. Members and appointment. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code;
5-16-2017]
(A) To make policy related to the maintenance, operation and control of the
airport.
(B) To manage, maintain, operate and control the airport.
(C) To enforce the provisions of this code on the airport.
(D) To establish fees and charges for the use of airport facilities, subject to
approval by the council.
(E) To recommend to the council the adoption of ordinances and
resolutions to further the purpose for which the airport is established.
(F) To adopt rules and regulations for the normal, ongoing operation of the
airport.
(G) To recommend to the council the employment of persons to administer,
supervise and control the construction, operation, maintenance and use
of the airport within the scope of the authority delegated to them by the
board, and the compensation of such employees.
(H) To contract, subject to council approval, for a supervisor to service the
airport.
(I) To enter into contracts or other arrangements as are considered
necessary for the construction, improvement, maintenance or operation
of the airport.
(J) To command the services and advice of the city engineer and the city
attorney to the extent considered necessary.
(K) To enter into leases regarding airport land and improvements.
(L) To approve airport fixed base operator licenses.
(M) To approve leases and contract for the operations of concessions on the
airport.
(N) All other powers needed to adequately fulfill the delegation of this
chapter.
§ 2-13-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 2-14-1
1-1:59
§ 2-14-2. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
Meetings of the commission shall be on call of the chairperson.
§ 2-14-3. Duties. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The commission shall have the following duties:
(A) The visitors and promotion commission [the "commission"] shall be
composed of 5 members.
(1) One member shall be an alderperson.
(2) Two members shall be persons actively engaged in the
management of a hotel or motel in the city.
(3) One member shall be a resident of the city who is qualified by
experience or training to pass on matters pertaining to
development of the tourism industry in the city.
(4) One member shall be a resident of the city selected at large.
(B) Each member shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation
by the council and shall serve a term from his or her appointment
through the Monday preceding the third Tuesday in April of the
succeeding year. Any member may be reappointed. The mayor may be
appointed as a member under any category for which he or she meets
the qualification requirements of subsection (A) of this section.
(C) The chairperson and one vice-chairperson of the commission shall be
elected by a majority of the members on the commission, and shall
serve in this capacity for a term from the date of election through the
Monday preceding the third Tuesday in April of the succeeding year or
until his or her successor is elected and qualified.
(D) Members of the commission shall serve without salary or other
compensation.
(A) Establish procedures for granting funds collected as a result of the
room tax established under title 3, chapter 14 of this code. Such
procedures shall be subject to approval by the council and shall
provide, at a minimum, for:
(1) Submittal of proposals for the expenditure of funds by any person
or entity requesting such funds.
(2) Inclusion in each proposal of a statement of how the proposed
grant of funds will benefit the city.
(3) Obtaining an accounting of funds granted.
(B) Administer the fund created by title 3, chapter 14 of this code;
allocating monies from such fund for the advancement of the tourism
§ 2-14-1 MONROE CODE § 2-14-3
1-1:60
Chapter 2-15
ETHICS BOARD
§ 2-15-1. Creation. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
There is hereby created an ethics board the purpose of which shall be to
administer and enforce title 1, chapter 16, of this code. When used in this
chapter the word "board" means the ethics board.
§ 2-15-2. Members. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code; 5-16-2017]
§ 2-15-3. Meetings. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
Meetings of the board shall be on call of the chairperson.
§ 2-15-4. Duties. [4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
The board shall have the following duties:
industry in the city, and retaining such reserves as the commission
considers necessary.
(A) The board shall be composed of three regular members and one
alternate member.
(1) All members shall be residents of the city or owners of real
property located in the city. The members shall not be elected
officials, full-time appointed officials or city employees, nor shall a
member be simultaneously serving on any other city board,
commission, or committee.
(2) Each member of the board shall be appointed by the mayor, subject
to confirmation by the council.
(3) Each member and alternate member of the board shall serve a
staggered three year term expiring on the Monday preceding the
third Tuesday in April of the third succeeding year following his or
her appointment. The alternate member shall serve when one of
the regular members is unavailable.
(4) The board shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson who shall
each serve until his or her successor is elected.
(B) Two members of the board shall constitute a quorum.
(C) The city attorney shall provide legal advice and assistance to the board.
(A) Develop, publish and distribute such written opinions and policies as
the board may consider appropriate to properly administer the ethics
code.
§ 2-14-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 2-15-4
1-1:61
Chapter 2-16
(RESERVED)
Title 3, Business Regulations
Chapter 3-1
AMUSEMENTS
§ 3-1-1. License required. [9-21-1982; 2016 Code]
No person shall conduct, exhibit, operate or maintain within the city any
circus, menagerie, concert, either vocal or instrumental, or exhibit any
natural or artificial curiosity or conduct any game or athletic event or any
(B) Investigate all alleged violations of the ethics code and recommend
appropriate sanctions to the proper authority.
(C) Give advisory opinions as to the applicability of a provision of the ethics
code to a particular situation in which a city official is or may become
involved or to the meaning of one or more definitions of terms used in
the ethics code. When a city official has doubt as to the applicability of a
provision of the ethics code to a particular situation in which he or she
is or may become involved or to the meaning of one or more definitions
of terms used in the ethics code, he or she should apply to the board for
an advisory opinion and be guided by that opinion when given.
(1) The applicant shall have the opportunity to present his or her
interpretation of the facts at issue and of the applicable provision
or provisions of the ethics code before such advisory decision is
made. It is prima facie evidence of intent to comply with the ethics
code when a city official refers a matter to the board and abides by
the advisory opinion, if the material facts are as stated in the
opinion request.
(2) When a request for an advisory opinion is made, the name of the
requester and the nature of the request may, at the requester's
choice, be kept confidential. When confidentiality is requested, the
board shall hear and determine the request in closed session. The
agenda for the meeting shall identify the session as a closed session
to hear a request for a confidential opinion pursuant to this
subsection (C)(2) When confidentiality is requested, the report of
the board shall also be kept confidential, but the board shall
prepare a redacted summary of the report as a public document;
however, if the requester requests in writing that the full report be
made public, it shall become a part of the public record. If the
requester makes public any portion of the opinion or report, all
confidentiality is waived by the requester and the board may
release the unredacted report.
§ 2-15-4 MONROE CODE § 3-1-1
1-1:62
other amusement open to the public for which an admission fee is charged,
whether directly or indirectly, without a license issued under this chapter.
§ 3-1-2. Application for license. [1969 Code; 9-21-1982; 2016 Code]
Any person desiring to procure a license under this chapter shall file with
the city clerk a written application upon a form furnished by the city. Such
application shall contain the name, residence and age of the applicant, if the
applicant is an individual. If the applicant is an association or legal entity
such application shall contain the names of the principal officers, managers
or agents and their residences and the name or names of one or more
persons whom such association or legal entity shall designate as a manager
or person in charge with the address or addresses of such manager or
person in charge. Such application shall further state the following:
§ 3-1-3. Issuance of license. [11-6-2002; 2016 Code]
Upon filing of the application and the information as provided in this
chapter, the city clerk shall refer such application to the council. The council
(A) Length of time such applicant, if an individual, or the manager or
person in charge if the applicant is an association or legal entity, has or
have resided in the city, his, her or their places of previous employment,
whether a citizen of the United States and a resident of the city,
whether he, she or they or any of them have been convicted of violating
any law regulating the conduct of any public amusement and, if so,
when and in what court.
(B) The premises where such amusement is to be located or conducted,
giving street and number of all entrances, the location of the room or
rooms or space to be occupied and the total amount of space to be used
for said purposes.
(C) Whether the applicant or applicants or managers or agents had, either
alone or with someone else, previously engaged as owner or employee
in conducting any public amusement, when and where and for how
long.
(D) The name and address of the person owning the premises for which a
license is sought.
(E) The specific nature of the amusement for which a license is sought.
(F) The city clerk shall review such application and may command the
assistance of the chief of police, chief of the fire department and
building inspector who shall inspect or cause to be inspected each
application to determine whether the place sought to be licensed
complies with the laws applicable thereto and is a proper place for the
purpose for which it is to be used. These officials shall furnish to the city
clerk in writing the information derived from such investigation,
accompanied by a recommendation as to whether a license should be
granted or refused.
§ 3-1-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-1-3
1-1:63
may, upon payment to the city of the required license fee, authorize the
issuance to the applicant of a license to conduct and maintain a public
amusement. Such license fees shall be paid to the city treasurer. No license
shall be refused except for the protection of the public safety, health, morals
or general welfare.
§ 3-1-4. License term and fees. [9-21-1982; 2016 Code]
Licenses shall expire on June 30 succeeding the issuing thereof and the
license fee shall be set by resolution of the council.
(A) License criteria. No license shall be issued unless the principal officers,
managers, agents and persons in charge named in the application are of
good moral character, that the proposed location complies with and
conforms to all codes, health and fire regulations applicable thereto,
and that it is a safe and proper place for the purposes for which it shall
be used. No license shall be granted any public amusement place unless
adequate modern toilet facilities are provided, including wash basins
with running water, soap and individual towels (and unless an adequate
supply of drinking water is available, either at a sanitary drinking
fountain, or with individual drinking cups). The applicant (or applicants
or manager or person in charge) for a license shall establish by affidavit
or otherwise that they are of good moral character and capable of
maintaining good order at all public performances. A license shall be
refused by the council to any applicant, or to any association or legal
entity of which a member or members, shall have been convicted within
two years of the date of application of a second offense against any of
the provisions of this chapter, also to any person who has within five
years of the date of application been convicted of a felony and to any
association or legal entity of which any member has been so convicted
of a felony. No license shall be issued for any public amusement place if
three or more buildings used exclusively for residence purposes are
located within 500 feet except such places as were used for that
purpose as of and before March 3, 1931.
(B) License procedure. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which
they are issued and shall state clearly the location, the exact nature of
the amusement, and dates of issuance and expiration of the license, the
fee paid and the name of the licensee. No applicant to whom a license
has been refused shall make further application until a period of at least
six months shall have elapsed since the last previous rejection, unless
he or she can show that the reason for the objection no longer exists.
No license shall be granted to a person under 18 years of age or
renewed without a re-inspection of the premises.
(C) Due process protection. Any person who is denied the issuance of an
initial or renewal license under this chapter shall be notified of the right
to request a hearing before the council, at which the person may show
cause, if there be any, why the issuance of the license should not be
denied.
§ 3-1-3 MONROE CODE § 3-1-5
1-1:64
§ 3-1-5. Transfer of license. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
No transfer of license as to location or licensee shall be granted without
approval by the council. If the transfer is approved, this action shall be
endorsed upon the license by the city clerk.
§ 3-1-6. Posting of license. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
Every person licensed under this chapter shall post such license and keep
the same posted while in force in a conspicuous place on the premises
subject to such license. It shall be unlawful for any person to post such
license or permit such license to be posted upon premises other than the
premises subject to such license, or knowingly to destroy or deface any such
license. Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed without fault of the
holder or his or her agent or employees, a duplicate license in lieu thereof
under the original application may be issued by the city clerk.
§ 3-1-7. Premises restrictions and regulations. [1969 Code; 2016
Code; 9-21-1982]
§ 3-1-8. Revocation of license. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
The council may, at any time after giving notice to the licensee of an
opportunity to be heard, revoke any license granted under this chapter
for disorderly or immoral conduct on the premises, or for the violation of
any of the laws governing or applying to public amusements, or for the
protection of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Whenever
any license shall be revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the fee
paid shall be made. Notice of such hearing and the reason therefor shall be
in writing shall be served by the chief of police upon the person named in
the application and by filing a copy of such with the city clerk.
§ 3-1-9. Penalties. [12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
A person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who violates any
provision of a license issued under this chapter, shall upon conviction be
(A) Conduct of licensed premises. No recipient of a license under this
chapter shall permit any disorderly conduct, or permit the sale, giving
away, delivering, drinking or use in or upon the licensed premises of
any drugs or alcohol beverages, or prostitution, or gambling, or for any
other unlawful purposes.
(B) Noise. No loud or unusual noises shall be permitted upon the licensed
premises, nor shall any music be played so as to constitute a nuisance.
(C) Sanitary and lighting requirements. All public amusement places and
facilities appertaining thereto shall be kept at all times in a clean,
healthful and sanitary condition, and all stairways and other passages
and all rooms connected with a public amusement place shall be kept
open and well lighted during the public use.
§ 3-1-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-1-9
1-1:65
subject to a Class 3 forfeiture. A separate offense exists each calendar day
during which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 3-2
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 3-2-1. Definitions. [2016 Code]
In this chapter:
AMUSEMENT DEVICES — Means billiard or pool tables, coin or token
operated machines commonly referred to as pin games, shovel or digger
games, put and take machines, electronic and video games, and similar
devices which invoke a skill feature, which they operate by coins and which
do not deliver, pay to or emit coins, tokens, coupons, tickets, receipts,
chips or other things which may be redeemed or exchanged for money or
merchandise or other things of value, or which do not deliver, pay out or
emit merchandise or anything of value, or entitle the player of said device
to the same.
POSSESS — Means to own, manage, occupy or control a premises on or
within which a nonregistered amusement device is located.
§ 3-2-2. Registration required. [2016 Code]
A person owning or providing any amusement device, or a person
maintaining, operating or permitting the maintenance of any such
amusement device on premises owned, occupied by or under the control
or management, or operated by any such person, shall register such
amusement device with the city. On each July 1, every such amusement
device shall be re-registered. This section shall not be construed to
authorize the registration of any slot machine or gambling device.
§ 3-2-3. Fee. [2016 Code]
The registration fee for each amusement device shall be set by resolution of
the council. The re-registration fee for each year shall be in an amount equal
to the registration fee in effect at the time of re-registration. Such fee shall
be paid to the city treasurer upon registration or re-registration of each
amusement device. The city treasurer shall require the registrant to submit
such information as may be necessary to identify the amusement device
so registered and shall issue to the registrant any appropriate registration
tag. All registrants shall keep proof of registration at the same premises
as the amusement device. A separate tag is required for each amusement
device. Every registrant, or his or her agent, shall show to any person, upon
request, the registration tag for each amusement device on the premises.
§ 3-1-9 MONROE CODE § 3-2-4
1-1:66
§ 3-2-4. Nonregistered amusement devices prohibited. [8-4-1987;
2016 Code]
It shall be unlawful to own or possess a nonregistered amusement device.
§ 3-2-5. Penalty. [12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be
subject to a Class 4 forfeiture.
Chapter 3-3
PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
§ 3-3-1. Definitions. [9-3-2002; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
DISRUPT — Means any planned activity, verbal or nonverbal, with the intent
to disturb or interrupt the orderly course of the public assembly, or any
activity, verbal or nonverbal, with knowledge that the natural consequences
of the person's actions would be to disturb or interrupt the orderly course
of the public assembly.
ORGANIZER — Means a person planning to lead or initiate any type of
public assembly, including a march or procession on a public way.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — Means a) A company of persons which is reasonably
anticipated to obstruct the normal flow of traffic upon a public way and that
is collected together in one place, or b) any organized march or procession
of persons upon any public way that is reasonably anticipated to obstruct
the normal flow of pedestrian traffic on the public way. A public assembly
does not include any event, gathering, or activity for which a special events
permit is required.
PUBLIC WAY — Means all public property open to the public, including,
sidewalks, alleys, streets, parks, rights of way, and public buildings.
§ 3-3-2. Notice of public assembly. [9-3-2002; 2016 Code]
Any organizer planning to lead or initiate any type of public assembly,
including a march or procession upon a public sidewalk, shall notify the
police chief, at least five business days in advance, or as soon as practicable
if the event is of a spontaneous or urgent nature, and shall inform him
or her of the date, time, location, route and estimated number of persons
participating, so that the city can make any preparations necessary to
provide personnel or other city services to minimize the obstruction to
pedestrian and other traffic and to otherwise protect the participants and
the public.
§ 3-2-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-3-3
1-1:67
§ 3-3-3. Public assembly permitted. [9-3-2002; 2016 Code]
Public assemblies shall be allowed unless the police chief informs the
organizer giving the notice, within two days or as soon as practicable
before the scheduled event, that there would be a direct interference with
a previously planned permitted activity, special event or public assembly, or
that there is a significant public safety issue, as set forth in section 3-3-4 of
this chapter. If the police chief does this, he or she must state the reasons
in writing and give an alternative date, time, location or route, as provided
for in section 3-3-5 of this chapter. If the organizer desires to appeal such
decision, then the appeal shall be governed by the procedures set forth in
section 3-3-6 of this chapter, if the notification was received in sufficient
time that the appeals process could be completed before the planned date;
if not, the decision by the police chief shall be final subject to judicial
review as provided by law. Upon request, the police chief shall provide the
organizer with a stamped copy of the notice given under this section.
§ 3-3-4. Significant public safety issues. [9-3-2002; 2016 Code]
§ 3-3-5. Denial of public assembly. [9-3-2002; 2016 Code]
(A) The following are significant public safety issues:
(1) The proposed activity will substantially or unnecessarily interfere
with traffic in the area next to the activity and there are not
available sufficient city resources to mitigate the disruption.
(2) There are not enough peace officers and traffic control aides to
police and protect lawful participants in the activity and
nonparticipants from traffic related hazards in light of the other
demands for police protection.
(3) The concentration of persons, animals, vehicles or things at the
assembly and disbanding areas will prevent proper fire and police
protection or ambulance service.
(4) Such other public safety issues as determined by resolution of the
council.
(A) Notice to organizer.
(1) The police chief, or designee, shall provide notice of the denial to
the organizer within five business days after receipt of the notice
for a public assembly, except that where the purpose of such event
is a spontaneous response to a current event, or where other good
and compelling cause is shown, the police chief, or designee, shall
act within two business days. If the police chief, or designee, fails to
act within five business days after the date upon which the
application was filed, said notice of public assembly shall be
considered approved.
§ 3-3-3 MONROE CODE § 3-3-5
1-1:68
§ 3-3-6. Appeal. [9-3-2002; 2016 Code]
Any organizer who believes that his or her request for a public assembly
is wrongfully disapproved may appeal to the council by notifying the city
clerk of the intent to appeal. If no appeal is filed within five business days
of the date notice of the police chief's decision is given, that decision shall
be considered final. Upon the filing of such appeal, the council shall cause a
hearing to be held and based upon the evidence contained in the record of
such hearing, either affirm or reverse the decision of the police chief. Any
final decision of the police chief or the council shall be subject to judicial
review as provided by law. If the council fails to act within two business
days of the conclusion of a hearing held under this section, said request for
public assembly shall be considered approved.
§ 3-3-7. Administration and enforcement. [9-3-2002; 2016 Code]
The council may, from time to time, pass such resolutions to help clarify the
administration or enforcement of this chapter.
(2) The notice must state the facts and conclusions, which are the basis
for any denial of the public assembly and, if the action taken is
offering an alternate time, date, location or route, then describing
the conflict among application requests. If the police chief, or
designee, denies an application for failure to provide sufficient
information about the proposed route or estimated number of
persons participating, he or she shall specify what additional
information must be provided in a new or amended application.
(3) Notice may be by facsimile transmission or telephone, but then
must be followed up by regular mail directed to the organizer.
(B) Alternate date, time, location or route.
(1) When the police chief denies an application for a public assembly,
he or she shall authorize the conduct of a public assembly on a
date, at a time, at a location, or over a route different from that
named by the organizer. This alternate shall to the extent
practicable authorize a public assembly that will have comparable
public visibility and a similar route, location and date to that of the
proposed event. An organizer desiring to accept an alternate public
assembly date, time or location shall, within five business days
after notice of the action by the police chief, file a written notice of
acceptance with the police chief.
(2) The police chief may limit the public assembly to the public way
where it is determined that such limited area is capable of
accommodating the number of people anticipated based upon the
information submitted by the applicant and the experience of
previous comparable events, and such limitation shall not be
considered a denial.
§ 3-3-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-3-8
1-1:69
§ 3-3-8. Disrupting a public assembly. [9-3-2002; 2016 Code]
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a law enforcement officer
acting in the course of his or her official peace keeping duties, to knowingly
disrupt a public assembly.
§ 3-3-9. Penalty. [9-3-2002; 2016 Code]
A person who violates section 3-3-2 or section 3-3-8 of this chapter shall
upon conviction be subject to a class 1 forfeiture. A separate offense exists
each calendar day during which a violation of section 3-3-8 of this chapter
occurs or continues.
Chapter 3-4
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES
§ 3-4-1. Wisconsin statutes adopted. [10-16-2012; 2016 Code;
8-16-2016]
The provisions of chapter 125 of the Wisconsin statutes, existing as of the
adoption of this chapter and as amended or renumbered from time to time,
are hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set forth herein. References to
a specific section of the Wisconsin statutes, wherever used in this chapter,
shall mean the Wisconsin statutes of 2013-2014.
§ 3-4-2. Definitions. [10-16-2012; 2016 Code; 8-16-2016]
When used in this chapter the following terms shall have the following
meaning:
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES LICENSE — Means an authorization to sell alcohol
beverages issued by the city under this chapter or chapter 125 of the
Wisconsin statutes.
LICENSED PREMISES — Means the area described in an alcohol beverages
license or permit.
MONROE ALCOHOL BEVERAGES LICENSE APPLICATION SUPPLEMENT
— Means a form, approved by the license committee, containing questions
to be answered by the person who submits an application for an alcohol
beverages license.
NUDE EXHIBITIONISM — Means a live act, demonstration, dance or
exhibition, or any combination thereof, that: 1) Shows a person's genitals,
pubic area, vulva, anus, anal clef or cleavage with less than a fully opaque
covering; or 2) Shows any portion of the female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or 3) Shows the covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
§ 3-4-3. General licensing requirements. [10-16-2012; 5-5-2015;
2016 Code; 8-16-2016]
§ 3-3-8 MONROE CODE § 3-4-3
1-1:70
(A) Unpaid claims, assessments or forfeitures. No alcohol beverages
license or renewal thereof shall be granted to any person who is
delinquent in the payment of any tax, assessment, or other claim owed
to the city, or delinquent in the payment of any forfeiture resulting from
a violation of any ordinance of the city.
(B) Licensed premises closed due to damage. Where any licensed premises
has been partially or totally destroyed by wind, storm, fire, or any act of
God, a reasonable length of time may be granted by the council for the
alcohol beverages license holder to restore the licensed premises. The
decision of the council as to what constitutes a reasonable time, or any
extensions thereof, shall be final. If the licensed premises are not
restored, the council may revoke the alcohol beverages license, as
provided in the Wisconsin statutes.
(C) Posting of alcohol beverages license. It shall be unlawful for any person
to post an alcohol beverages license issued under this chapter, or
permit the alcohol beverages license to be posted, upon a premises
other than a licensed premises. It shall also be unlawful to deface or
destroy an alcohol beverages license, or to remove an alcohol
beverages license without the consent of the person holding the alcohol
beverages license, except in the exercise of lawful authority.
(D) Disorderly conduct. Each licensed premises shall, at all times, be
conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or indecent
conduct shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises.
(E) Dancing. No dancing shall be permitted in any licensed premises, and
no entertainment other than music shall be permitted on a licensed
premises unless an appropriate permit has first been obtained.
(F) Limitation on number of alcohol beverages licenses.
(1) "Class A" intoxicating liquor licenses. The total number of "Class A"
intoxicating liquor licenses issued in the City shall not exceed 24.
(2) Class "A" fermented malt beverages licenses. The total number of
Class "A" fermented malt beverages licenses issued in the City shall
not exceed 24.
(3) "Class B" intoxicating liquor licenses. The combined total number
of "Class B" intoxicating liquor licenses and reserve "Class B"
intoxicating liquor licenses issued in the City shall not exceed 25.
(4) Class "B" fermented malt beverages licenses. The total number of
Class "B" fermented malt beverages licenses issued in the City shall
not exceed 37.
(5) "Class C" wine licenses. The total number of "Class C" wine licenses
issued in the City shall not exceed 12.
(G) Limitation on number of licensed premises.
§ 3-4-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-4-3
1-1:71
(1) The combined total number of licensed premises issued a "Class A"
intoxicating liquor license or a Class "A" fermented malt beverages
license, or both, shall not exceed 24.
(2) The total number of licensed premises issued a "Class B"
intoxicating liquor license, including any reserve "Class B"
intoxicating liquor license, shall not exceed 25.
(3) The combined total number of licensed premises issued a Class "B"
fermented malt beverages license or a "Class C" wine license, or
both, shall not exceed 12.
(H) Alcohol beverages license holders to be open for business.
(1) Continuity of business. No holder of an alcohol beverages license
shall be closed for business for more than 120 consecutive days in
any license year or for more than 120 consecutive days spanning
two consecutive license years.
(2) Minimum operation. The holder of an alcohol beverages license
shall serve alcohol beverages pursuant to such alcohol beverages
license not less than 25 percent of the days in any license year, or
partial year if the alcohol beverages license has been issued for a
period less than a full year. For the purpose of this subparagraph,
the license year or partial license year shall be equal to the total
number of days in the license year or partial year, less 120 days, but
not less than zero days.
(3) Initial use of alcohol beverages license. A person to whom an
alcohol beverages license has been granted, who had not been
issued the same kind of alcohol beverages license in the preceding
license year, may elect to defer issuance of such alcohol beverages
license for a period not exceeding 6 months following the granting
of such alcohol beverages license.
(4) Non-renewal, suspension or revocation. A violation of this
subsection shall be prima facie grounds for non-renewal,
suspension or revocation of the applicable alcohol beverages
license.
(5) Variance. If any one or more of the following conditions exist, the
council may grant a variance from the requirements of this
subsection:
A) Substantial damage or destruction of the licensed premises by
fire, wind or other calamity.
B) Death of the alcohol beverages licensee or a principal officer of
the alcohol beverages licensee.
C) Physical or mental disability of the alcohol beverages licensee
or a principal officer of the alcohol beverages licensee such
that the alcohol beverages licensee or such principal officer is
§ 3-4-3 MONROE CODE § 3-4-3
1-1:72
unable to carry on the business of the alcohol beverages
licensee.
D) Substantial remodeling or rebuilding of the licensed premises
in such a manner as to make it impossible to serve the public.
E) A unique circumstance, not shared by other holders of the
same kind of alcohol beverages license, where in the judgment
of the council the grant of a variance from the requirements of
this subsection advances a significant public interest.
(I) Provisional licenses. The city clerk shall have the authority to issue
provisional alcohol beverage licenses or provisional operator's licenses.
Provisional licenses shall expire 60 days after its date of issuance, or
when a regular license is issued, whichever is sooner. No provisional
license may be renewed. The city clerk may revoke any provisional
license if it is discovered that the applicant made a false statement on
the application. No provisional license may be issued if any of the
following are determined:
(1) Provisional licenses shall not be issued to any person who, in the 12
months prior to such application, has been previously denied or
had a previous license revoked or suspended by any municipality.
(2) Provisional licenses shall not be issued when in the determination
of the city clerk, upon recommendation of the police chief, that the
applicant has been charged with or convicted of any felony,
misdemeanor or other offense of which substantially relate to the
circumstances of the licensed activity.
(J) Provisional alcohol beverage licenses. The city clerk shall have the
authority to issue provisional alcohol beverage licenses to persons who
have applied for a "Class A," Class "A," "Class B," Class "B," or "Class C"
license as follows:
(1) The city clerk may not issue a provisional alcohol beverage license
if there are no remaining licenses available for the type of license
applied for.
(2) The city clerk determines that the applicant qualifies for the type of
license applied for and the applicant makes payment of both the fee
for the provisional license and the cost of publication for the type of
license applied for.
(3) Only one provisional license may be issued to an applicant per year
for each type of alcohol beverage license.
(K) Provisional operator's licenses. The city clerk shall have the authority to
issue provisional operator's licenses as follows:
(1) A provisional operator's license may be issued only to a person who
has applied for a regular operator's license.
§ 3-4-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-4-3
1-1:73
§ 3-4-4. Intoxicating liquors. [10-16-2012; 2016 Code; 8-16-2016]
Persons holding a "Class B" intoxicating liquor license may:
§ 3-4-5. Sidewalk cafes. [10-16-2012; 2016 Code; 8-16-2016]
No alcohol beverages licensee may operate under said license in a sidewalk
cafe unless the licensed premises includes the area designated for operation
of such sidewalk cafe and the alcohol beverages licensee also holds a permit
authorizing the operation of the sidewalk cafe at all times during which
alcohol beverages are served.
(2) A provisional operator's license may not be issued to any person
unless within 2 years of the date of application for the provisional
license that person has completed the Alcohol Awareness Training
Program or has held an operator's license valid in Wisconsin.
(A) Sell intoxicating liquor by the glass for consumption on the licensed
premises, and in the original package or container, in multiples not to
exceed 4 liters at any one time, to be consumed off the licensed
premises where sold.
(B) Sell wine for consumption off the licensed premises in the original
container or otherwise in any quantity.
(A) Definition. When used in this chapter, sidewalk cafe has the meaning
set forth in section 3-9-2 of this title.
(B) Application. A request for expansion of the licensed premises to include
a sidewalk cafe shall be made in writing to the city clerk.
(C) Requirements. Sidewalk cafes are authorized to serve alcohol
beverages under this section only as follows:
(1) The service and consumption of alcohol beverages in the sidewalk
cafe shall be limited to the hours of operation authorized for the
sidewalk cafe. All alcohol beverages shall be cleared from tables
during all times when the sidewalk cafe is not permitted to operate.
(2) Alcohol beverages shall only be served to patrons of the
establishment to which the sidewalk cafe permit has been issued
who are seated at a table in the sidewalk cafe by a server working
under the direction and supervision of the management of such
establishment and only at times when food service is also available
from such establishment. No person may consume alcohol
beverages in a sidewalk cafe unless such person is seated at a table
in the sidewalk cafe.
(3) There shall be no carry-in of alcohol beverages by the patron to the
sidewalk cafe. Patrons of the sidewalk cafe shall remain seated at
the table within the sidewalk cafe when consuming alcohol
beverages.
§ 3-4-3 MONROE CODE § 3-4-5
1-1:74
§ 3-4-6. Nude exhibitionism. [10-16-2012; 2016 Code; 8-16-2016]
(4) The alcohol beverages licensee shall be in compliance with all city
and state laws, rules, and regulations relating to alcohol beverages.
(5) A valid sidewalk cafe permit issued under chapter 9 of this title has
been issued and remains in effect for the sidewalk cafe.
(6) The alcohol beverages licensee shall be in compliance with such
additional requirements as the council may establish.
(D) Responsibility of alcohol beverages licensee. The alcohol beverages
licensee shall take reasonable steps to ensure that alcohol beverages
are consumed only by patrons of the licensed premises who are of legal
drinking age, and not by passersby or persons who are not of age or
who are obviously intoxicated. Reasonable steps may include, but not
be limited to, the use of portable barriers or fences, supervision of the
outside area by security and staff personnel, or electronic surveillance
monitors. Failure to take such reasonable steps in the sidewalk cafe is
grounds for removal of the sidewalk cafe from the description of the
licensed premises or revocation or suspension of the alcohol beverages
license for the licensed premises.
(E) Responsibility of patrons. No person shall leave the area delineated as a
sidewalk cafe with an open alcohol beverage.
(A) Findings. The council finds that bars and taverns featuring non-obscene
nude exhibitionism have in other communities tended to further the
increase of criminal and other offensive activity, to disrupt the peace
and order of the communities, to depreciate the value of real property,
to harm the economic welfare of the communities and to negatively
affect the quality of life in such communities; for these reasons such
secondary effects are hereby found to be detrimental to the public
health, safety and general welfare of citizens of the communities where
such activities are allowed to occur in bars and taverns, including the
following detrimental effects:
(1) The potential increase in prostitution and other sex-related
offenses, as well as other crimes and offenses.
(2) The potential depreciation of property values in neighborhoods
where bars and taverns featuring nude dancing exist.
(3) Health risks associated with the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases.
(4) The potential for infiltration by organized crime.
(B) Purpose. The council recognizes that the United States Supreme Court
has held that nude dancing is expressive conduct within the outer
perimeters of the first amendment to the United States Constitution
and is therefore entitled to some limited protection under the first
§ 3-4-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-4-6
1-1:75
§ 3-4-7. General provisions. [10-16-2012; 2016 Code; 8-16-2016]
§ 3-4-8. License fees. [10-16-2012; 2016 Code; 8-16-2016]
amendment, and the council further recognizes that freedom of speech
is among our most precious and highly protected rights. The purpose
of this section is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of
the citizens of the city by prohibiting nude exhibitionism in licensed
premises, and thereby minimizing the risk of adverse secondary effects
of non-obscene nude exhibitionism encountered in other communities.
(C) Nude exhibitionism prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to perform
or engage in nude exhibitionism on a licensed premises, or outside a
licensed premises at a location in close proximity and plain view of a
licensed premises. It is unlawful for a person holding an alcohol
beverages license, or for the manager or agent for such person, to
permit any person, employee, entertainer or patron to perform or
engage in nude exhibitionism on the licensed premises, or outside the
licensed premises at a location in close proximity and plain view of the
licensed premises.
(D) Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to licensed
premises that are theaters, performing arts centers, civic centers, and
dinner theaters, where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic
performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular basis and
where the predominant business or attraction is not the offering of
nude exhibitionism and where the establishment to which the licensed
premises is associated is not distinguished by an emphasis on, or the
advertising or promotion of, persons engaging in nude exhibitionism.
(A) Monroe alcohol beverages license application supplement. The
applicant for an alcohol beverages license under this chapter, other
than an applicant submitting a renewal alcohol beverages license
application, shall in addition to the forms otherwise required to be
submitted, complete and submit with the application for such alcohol
beverages license the Monroe alcohol beverages license application
supplement. The Monroe alcohol beverages license application
supplement shall be available from the city clerk.
(B) Right to hearing on non-renewal. Any person who is denied the issuance
of a renewal alcohol beverages license shall be notified of the right to
request a hearing before the council, at which the person may show
cause, if there be any, why the issuance of the alcohol beverages license
should not be denied. There shall be no right to a hearing before the
council for any person who is denied the initial issuance of an alcohol
beverages license under this chapter or chapter 125 of the Wisconsin
statutes.
(A) Fees set by resolution. Except as expressly set forth in this section, all
alcohol beverages license fees and operator's license fees shall be an
amount established from time to time by resolution of the council.
§ 3-4-6 MONROE CODE § 3-4-8
1-1:76
§ 3-4-9. Penalty. [10-16-2012; 2016 Code; 8-16-2016]
(B) Partial year. The fee for an alcohol beverages license issued for less
than 12 months shall be prorated according to the number of months or
fraction thereof for which the license is issued.
(C) Reserve "Class B" intoxicating liquor license fee. A fee of $10,000.00
shall be paid for the initial issuance of any license designated a reserve
"Class B" intoxicating liquor license, which fee shall be in addition to
the fee otherwise payable for a "Class B" intoxicating liquor license.
(A) In this section, "juvenile" shall have the meaning set forth in section
938.02(10m) of the Wisconsin statutes.
(B) Any person, other than a juvenile, who violates a provision of this
chapter, including those adopted by reference, except the provisions of
sections 125.07 and 125.09 of the Wisconsin statutes, shall be guilty of
a class 3 forfeiture. Each day that a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense. A violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be sufficient grounds to revoke, suspend or refuse to
renew an alcohol beverages license issued to the person who owned or
controlled the licensed premises at the time of such violation. In
addition, any alcohol beverages license issued to any person under this
chapter may be revoked by the court upon conviction.
(C) Any juvenile who violates a provision of this chapter shall be punished
in accordance with section 938.344 of the Wisconsin statutes, including
community service work under any available court-approved
community service program.
(D) Any person, other than a juvenile, who violates a provision of section
125.07 of the Wisconsin statutes, which is adopted by reference as a
part of this chapter, shall be punished in accordance with the penalties
imposed by section 125.07 of the Wisconsin statutes. In addition to or in
lieu of the penalties provided in section 125.07 of the Wisconsin
statutes, any person, other than a juvenile, who violates a provision of
section 125.07 of the Wisconsin statutes may be sentenced to perform
community service work under any available court-approved
community service program.
(E) Any person who violates a provision of section 125.09 of the Wisconsin
statutes, which is adopted by reference as part of this chapter, shall be
punished in accordance with the penalties imposed by section 125.09 of
the Wisconsin statutes.
(F) All provisions of sections 125.07(1), (3), (4) and 125.09(2) of the
Wisconsin statutes describing and defining regulations with respect to
alcohol beverages, for which the penalty is a forfeiture only, including
penalties to be imposed and procedures for prosecution, are hereby
adopted by reference and made part of this section as if they were fully
set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or prohibited in any
§ 3-4-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-4-9
1-1:77
Chapter 3-5
LICENSE AND PERMIT REVOCATIONS, SUSPENSIONS AND
REFUSALS
§ 3-5-1. Definitions. [1-7-1992; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
COMMITTEE — Means any committee or board of the city.
LICENSE — Means any license or permit authorized to be issued by the city.
LICENSEE — Means any person that has been issued any type of permit or
license by the city, or that has applied for any license or permit from the
city, or both.
PERSON AGGRIEVED — Means any person whose rights, duties or
privileges are adversely affected by a determination of a municipal
authority.
RENEW — Means to either renew or reissue.
§ 3-5-2. Scope. [1-7-1992; 2016 Code]
§ 3-5-3. Grounds for revocation, suspension, and refusal to issue or
renew license. [1-7-1992; 2-2-1993; 2016 Code]
The city may suspend, revoke, or refuse to issue or renew any license when
the city finds that the licensee:
statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited by
this section.
(A) The city may suspend, revoke, or refuse to issue or renew any license. If
procedures for such action are not set out in the section under which
the license was or would be issued, such action shall be taken in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(B) The grounds set forth under section 3-5-3 for revocation, suspension,
and refusal to issue or renew any license are in addition to all other
grounds for such action set forth in this code, and shall provide a basis
for revocation, suspension, and refusal to issue or renew any license,
regardless of the chapter under which such license is authorized.
(C) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the temporary
suspension, modification, or conditioning of any license issued pursuant
to chapter 13 of title 3 this code.
(A) Has violated the conditions of the license.
(B) Has violated state law or this code.
(C) Has refused to allow the city to inspect the licensed premises.
§ 3-4-9 MONROE CODE § 3-5-3
1-1:78
§ 3-5-4. Procedure for revocation or suspension. [1-7-1992; 2016
Code; 7-5-2017]
(D) Does not possess the requirements to hold the license.
(E) Is, or would be, subject to suspension or revocation of the license under
this code.
(F) Has not paid any overdue forfeiture resulting from a violation of this
code.
(1) The city may enter into written agreements providing for reciprocal
enforcement of forfeitures with other cities, villages, or towns
within Green County. The city may suspend, revoke, or refuse to
issue or renew any license to a person who has not paid an overdue
forfeiture resulting from a violation of the code of any city, village
or town that is a party to such agreement.
(2) The city may not suspend, revoke or refuse to issue or renew a
license to any person who is appealing the imposition of the
forfeiture, unless the refusal is based upon grounds other than the
failure to pay the forfeiture. However, if the appeal is unsuccessful,
the city may then revoke, suspend, or refuse to issue or renew a
license based upon the failure to pay the overdue forfeiture.
(G) Is delinquent in the payment of personal property taxes due the city.
(A) Any person may file a sworn, written complaint with the city clerk
setting forth facts that, if true, would show that a particular licensee
has committed one of the acts set forth in § 3-5-3 of this chapter. Any
member of a committee may file such a complaint, but shall not sit as a
member of the council or committee during any hearing on the
complaint or deliberation following a hearing on the complaint.
(B) Except as provided in § 11-3-3, upon the filing of the complaint, the
committee responsible for overseeing licensing issues shall issue a
summons, directing the licensee to appear before the committee at a
specific place and at a specific date and time to show cause why the
committee should not recommend that the council revoke or suspend
the license. The summons shall be signed by the city clerk.
(C) The committee may require the complainant to provide security for the
costs of the action before issuing a summons under this section.
(D) The date and time noted on the summons for the appearance of the
licensee shall be not less than three days nor more than 14 days from
the date of issuance of the summons.
(E) The summons and a copy of the complaint shall be served on the
licensee at least three days before the date of the hearing.
(F) The complainant shall have the burden of proving the allegations of the
complaint by a preponderance of the evidence.
§ 3-5-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-5-4
1-1:79
§ 3-5-5. Procedure for refusal to issue or renew license. [1-7-1992;
11-6-2002; 2016 Code; 7-5-2017]
(G) If the committee finds the allegations of the complaint have not been
proven, the proceeding shall be dismissed without cost to the licensee.
(H) If the licensee does not appear as required by the summons, or if the
licensee appears and admits the allegations of the complaint, the
allegations of the complaint shall be taken as proven and the committee
shall suspend or revoke the license. The city clerk shall give the
licensee notice of such action within five days following the hearing.
(I) If the licensee appears as required by the summons and denies the
complaint, the committee shall hold a hearing. At the hearing, the
complainant and the licensee may be represented by counsel. The
complainant and the licensee may present evidence, call and examine
witnesses, and cross examine witnesses of the other party. The
testimony of all witnesses shall be given under oath.
(1) The city shall arrange for having the hearing tape recorded. The
licensee shall be provided a written transcript of the hearing at his
or her expense.
(2) The committee shall make findings of fact, conclusions of law, and
any determinations with respect to the license. The city clerk shall
give written notice of all action taken by the committee to the
licensee. Upon seven calendar days of receipt of the notice from the
city clerk of the committee's determination, the licensee may
submit a written request to the city clerk for a review by the
council. The council shall be provided with the written findings of
fact, conclusions of law and determinations made by the committee
and any written transcripts or evidence presented before the
committee. The council may affirm or modify the committee's
determination without a hearing or may set the matter over for a
new hearing. The city clerk shall give notice of all action taken by
the council to the licensee.
(J) If the licensee does not appear at the requested hearing, all
determinations of fact shall be resolved in favor as stated in the
complaint, and the requested license shall be suspended or revoked as
requested in the complaint. The city clerk shall give the licensee notice
of such action within five days following the hearing. The licensee shall
not have the right to seek review to the council.
(A) Before the time to issue or renew a license, the city clerk shall notify the
licensee in writing of its intention not to approve the issuance or
renewal of the license and shall provide the licensee the opportunity for
a hearing. The notice shall state the reasons for the intended action.
(B) The licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the committee
responsible for overseeing licensing issues with regard to the intended
§ 3-5-4 MONROE CODE § 3-5-5
1-1:80
§ 3-5-6. (Reserved)2
action. To obtain a hearing, the licensee shall file a written request for
hearing with the city clerk. Such request must be filed within seven
calendar days of the date notice is given under Subsection (A) of this
section.
(C) If a hearing is requested, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing
before the committee. Such hearing shall be held not less than three
days nor more than 14 days from the date the request for hearing is
filed with the city clerk. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to the
licensee by regular mail not less than three days before the date of
hearing.
(D) If the licensee appears at the time scheduled for the hearing, the
committee shall hold a hearing. At the hearing, the licensee may be
represented by counsel, may present evidence, call and examine
witnesses, and cross examine witnesses of the other party. The
testimony of all witnesses shall be given under oath.
(1) The city shall arrange for having the hearing tape recorded. The
licensee shall be provided a written transcript of the hearing at his
or her expense.
(2) The committee shall make findings of fact, conclusions of law, and
any determinations with respect to the license. The city clerk shall
give written notice of all action taken by the committee to the
licensee. Upon seven calendar days of receipt of the notice from the
city clerk of the committee's determination, the licensee may
submit a written request to the city clerk for a review by the
council. The council shall be provided with the written findings of
fact, conclusions of law and determinations made by the committee
and any written transcripts or evidence presented before the
committee. The council may affirm or modify the committee's
determination without a hearing or may set the matter over for a
new hearing. The city clerk shall give notice of all action taken by
the council to the licensee.
(E) If the licensee does not appear at the requested hearing, all
determinations of fact shall be resolved in favor of the initially proposed
action, and the requested license shall not be issued or renewed. The
city clerk shall give the licensee notice of such action within five days
following the hearing. The licensee shall not have the right to seek
review to the council.
2. Editor's Note: Former § 3-5-6, Review of determination, as amended, was repealed
7-5-2017.
§ 3-5-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-5-7
1-1:81
§ 3-5-7. Election. [1-7-1992; 2016 Code]
The city elects not to be governed by chapter 68 of the Wisconsin statutes in
the area of licensing by virtue of the enactment of this chapter. This election
is made pursuant to that authority granted to the city under section 68.16
of the Wisconsin statutes.
Chapter 3-6
AUCTIONS
§ 3-6-1. Definition. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
SALE AT AUCTION or TO THE HIGHEST BIDDER — Shall include all sales
by auction, whether the property is put up to the highest bidder in fact or
whether it is sold by what is usually called "Dutch Auction," or by bidding
down the sale thereof or by adding to the quantity of goods first offered for
sale at a fixed price, or any other way if made to evade the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 3-6-2. License required. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
No auction sale shall be held in the city without a license issued under this
chapter.
§ 3-6-3. Application. [9-17-1974; 6-3-1986; 2016 Code]
Any person desiring to hold an auction sale shall obtain a license application
form from the city clerk. He or she shall fill out the form stating the nature
of the sale, the place where the same will be held, the number of days upon
which said sale will be held, the general description of the things intended
to be sold, the name and permanent address of the applicant and the name
and address of the person he or she represents.
§ 3-6-4. Fee. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
The fee for a license under this chapter shall be set by resolution of the
council.
§ 3-6-5. Approval and issuance of license. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
(A) Approval. Upon filing of application properly filled out and presentation
of the receipt from the city treasurer showing the proper license fee has
been paid, the license may be granted to the applicant by the council.
Such license shall be for the number of days indicated in the license
application. A license shall not be transferable and shall be posted in a
prominent place where the auction is to be held.
(B) Refusal to issue.
§ 3-5-7 MONROE CODE § 3-6-5
1-1:82
§ 3-6-6. Exceptions. [12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
There are hereby excepted from the terms of this chapter all sales made
by auction of household furniture which the person selling the same has
used as such. Also any sale of livestock by a recognized association, by the
owner thereof or by any agent of the owner, or where a sale is made by
virtue of a chattel mortgage or of a rule, order or judgment of court, or
of some law of the state or the United States respecting the collection of
some tax or duty; or in consequence of a general assignment of property
or effects for the benefit of creditors; or when of property belonging to the
state or of the United States; or when made by or on behalf of any executor
or administrator or guardian authorized by the court to conduct such sale
personally, or when made by an officer of any court in person, or by an
officer of the city, or the United States in person; provided, that no auction
sale conducted by virtue of an order or judgment of any state court shall be
held without license; or to any sale by any trustee in bankruptcy; or when
made of his or her farm property by or on behalf of a resident farmer who
has paid the taxes lawfully levied on his or her property; or when made to
close up his or her business, or when made to reduce his or her stock, but
not to exceed two such sales per year, by or on behalf of any merchant who
shall reside and trade in any town, city or village and who shall have paid
the taxes lawfully levied on his or her stock in trade; provided, that in the
last case such sale shall be made in the town, city or village in which such
taxes are paid. Whenever the auctioneer or the owner of the property sold
or any person employed by them or either of them shall buy anything at any
such sale, the same duty shall be paid as if any other person were purchaser
thereof, and sales on credit shall be liable to duty as if made for cash.
§ 3-6-7. Penalty. [2016 Code]
A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be
subject to a Class 3 forfeiture. A separate offense exists each calendar day
during which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 3-7
VENDORS
(1) The council may refuse to grant such license in the event it is
shown that the applicant's business and moral character would be
contrary to the best interests of the public good.
(2) No license shall be issued to any person who is delinquent in
payment of any taxes, assessments, claims or forfeitures to the city.
(3) Due process protection. Any person who is denied the issuance of
an initial or renewal license under this chapter shall be notified of
the right to request a hearing before the council, at which the
person may show cause, if there be any, why the issuance of the
license should not be denied.
§ 3-6-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-7-1
1-1:83
§ 3-7-1. Definitions. [10-4-2005; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
CANVASSER — Means any transient merchant who goes from house to
house or from place to place to solicit orders for sales of merchandise for
future delivery or for services to be performed in the future.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Means any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic, or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation.
FARM PRODUCTS VENDOR — Means a transient merchant who
distributes, sells or offers for sale perishable agricultural products.
PEDDLER — Means any transient merchant who goes from house to house
or from place to place transporting merchandise or offering merchandise
for sale.
PERMANENT MERCHANT — Means any person who, for at least one
year before the consideration of the application of this chapter to said
person, a) has continuously operated an established place of business in
the local trade area among the communities bordering the place of sale, or
b) has continuously resided in the local trade area among the communities
bordering the place of sale and does business from his or her residence.
STREET VENDOR — Means a transient merchant who on public property
offers merchandise for sale from a vehicle, temporary booth, or other
temporary location or by stopping any vehicle or pedestrian.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Means any individual who engages in the retail
sale of merchandise at any place in this state and who does not intend to
become and does not become a permanent merchant of such place. For
purposes of this section, sale of merchandise includes a sale in which the
personal services provided upon or with the merchandise constitutes the
greatest part of value for the price received, but does not include a farm
auction sale conducted by or for a resident farmer of personal property used
on the farm.
§ 3-7-2. Exemptions. [10-4-2005; 2016 Code]
(A) This chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1) Any person delivering newspaper, fuel, dairy products or bakery
goods to regular customers on established routes.
(2) Any person selling merchandise at wholesale to dealers in such
merchandise.
(3) Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders at
the home of the buyer for merchandise regularly offered for sale by
such merchant within the city and who delivers such merchandise
in his or her regular course of business.
(4) Any person who has an established place of business where the
merchandise being sold is offered for sale on a regular basis, and in
§ 3-7-1 MONROE CODE § 3-7-2
1-1:84
§ 3-7-3. Permit required. [10-4-2005; 2016 Code]
No transient merchant shall engage in sales within the city without having
first obtained a permit under this chapter.
which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically
requested, a home visit by said person.
(5) Any veteran who holds a special state license issued under section
440.51 of the Wisconsin statutes.
(6) Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with
the sale or offering for sale of merchandise.
(7) Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any
court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant
to law.
(8) Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against
whom a complaint has been made to the city clerk that such person
is a transient merchant; provided, that there is submitted to the
city clerk proof that such person has leased for at least one year, or
purchased, the premises from which he or she has conducted
business in the market area for at least one year before the date the
complaint was made.
(9) Any person licensed by an examining board as defined in section
15.01(7) of the Wisconsin statutes.
(10) Any transient merchant operating within the area designated for a
special event with authority of the sponsor of such special event.
(B) Sections 3-7-3, 3-7-4, 3-7-5, 3-7-6 and 3-7-7 of this code shall not apply
to the following:
(1) Any farm products vendor.
(2) Any person operating solely on private property who has obtained
the consent of the owner of such property before commencing
operations.
(3) Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who
engages in direct sales for or on behalf of said organization, so long
as:
A) There is submitted to the city clerk proof that such charitable
organization is registered under section 440.42 of the
Wisconsin statutes or that such charitable organization is
exempt from that statute's registration requirements, and
B) Such charitable organization does not operate as a street
vendor.
§ 3-7-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-7-4
1-1:85
§ 3-7-4. Application for permit. [10-4-2005; 2016 Code]
(A) Every transient merchant shall complete and file a written, sworn
application for a permit on forms provided by the city clerk. The
application shall be filed with the city clerk.
(B) The permit fee set by the council shall be paid to the city clerk when the
application is submitted.
(C) The application shall contain the following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary
address, if any of the applicant.
(2) Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes of the applicant.
(3) A statement as to whether any individual for which information is
provided has been convicted of any crime or code violation related
to applicant's transient merchant business within the last five
years, and the nature of the offense and the place of conviction.
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association, or corporation that the applicant represents or is
employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold.
(5) The temporary address and telephone number from which business
will be conducted, if any.
(6) The nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of
the merchandise, and any services offered.
(7) The proposed methods of delivery of merchandise, if applicable.
(8) The make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by
applicant in the conduct of his or her business.
(9) The three most recent cities, villages, towns, where applicant
conducted his or her business.
(10) The place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving this city.
(D) Applicants shall present to the clerk for examination:
(1) A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required.
(2) A State certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of
weights and measures where applicant's business requires use of
weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities.
(3) Where applicant's business involves the handling of food or
clothing and the applicant shall be certified under state law, a
proper certificate from the state agency having authority to issue
such certificates. A certificate that does not purport to cover the
§ 3-7-4 MONROE CODE § 3-7-4
1-1:86
§ 3-7-5. Insurance requirements. [10-4-2005; 2016 Code]
applicant's proposed operations within the city shall not be
considered by the clerk.
(E) The applicant shall sign a statement agreeing to indemnify and save
harmless the city against all liabilities, claims, demands, and losses,
including costs, expenses, and reasonable attorney fees, for injury or
death of any individual or loss or damages to the property of any person
arising from any activity undertaken pursuant to a permit issued under
this chapter.
(F) The applicant shall sign a statement acknowledging that he or she has
read subsection 3-7-6(J), and that he or she understands the permit
issued under this section is suspended during the term of all special
events in the area designated for such special events.
(G) The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the city clerk or his or
her agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought
against the applicant arising out of any sale or service performed by the
applicant in connection with the direct sales activities of the applicant,
in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served
personally.
(A) All applicants for permits under this section, except peddlers and
canvassers, shall provide the city clerk with a certificate of insurance
showing the applicant has insurance coverage for all liabilities and
obligations that may result from the activities undertaken pursuant to
the permit. Such coverage shall include:
(1) Coverage for operations by the applicant's employees, agents,
contractors and subcontractors.
(2) Coverage of the city as an additional named insured.
(3) Worker's compensation coverage under chapter 102 of the
Wisconsin statutes.
(B) The certificate of insurance shall provide that the insurance company
shall furnish the city with a 10 day written notice of cancellation,
nonrenewal or material change.
(C) The insurance company issuing the certificate of insurance shall be
licensed in Wisconsin and shall be approved by the city.
(D) The insurance shall be written in comprehensive form and shall protect
the applicant and city against all claims arising from injuries to
members of the public or damages to property of others arising out of
any act or omission of the applicant, its employees, agents, contractors
or subcontractors.
§ 3-7-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-7-5
1-1:87
§ 3-7-6. Investigation and issuance. [10-4-2005; 2016 Code]
(E) The policy of insurance shall provide minimum combined single limits
for bodily injury and property damages of $1,000,000.00, and such
other coverage as is required by the city clerk.
(A) An application that fulfills the requirements of sections 3-7-4 and 3-7-5
shall be considered complete.
(B) Upon receipt of a complete application, the city clerk shall refer such
application to the chief of police for investigation, such referral shall
take place within 72 hours after the city clerk receives the application.
(C) The chief of police shall immediately investigate the statements made in
the application and such investigation of the applicant's background as
he or she considers necessary for the protection of the public good.
(D) If the chief of police determines from the investigation that the
applicant's background demonstrates no danger to the safety of the
public, the chief of police shall endorse his or her approval on the
application and return the application to the city clerk. The city clerk
shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, deliver a permit to the
applicant.
(E) If the chief of police determines from the investigation that the
applicant's background demonstrates potential danger to the public,
the chief of police shall endorse his or her disapproval on the
application and his or her reasons for such disapproval. The chief of
police shall then return the application to the city clerk. The city clerk
shall notify the applicant that his or her application is disapproved and
that no permit will be issued.
(F) In determining whether the applicant's background demonstrates
potential danger to the public, the chief of police shall consider the
following:
(1) The application contains any material omission or materially
inaccurate statement.
(2) Complaints of a material nature have been received against the
applicant by authorities in one or more of the three most recent
cities, villages and towns in which the applicant conducted similar
business.
(3) The applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or
municipal code violation within the last five years, the nature of
which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in the
activities for which the permit is sought.
(4) Any other factor which the chief of police determines is relevant to
the proposed activities of the applicant.
§ 3-7-5 MONROE CODE § 3-7-6
1-1:88
§ 3-7-7. Permit fees. [10-4-2005; 2016 Code]
(G) The chief of police shall return the approved or disapproved application
to the city clerk within a reasonable time from the receipt of the
application by the chief of police.
(H) After approval by the chief of police, and upon payment of all fees and
the signing of all statements required under this chapter, the city clerk
shall issue a permit to the applicant as a transient merchant and note
the effective dates of the permit.
(I) Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following:
(1) The signature of the city clerk.
(2) The name and address of each individual authorized to operate
pursuant to the permit.
(3) The type of permit issued.
(4) The kind of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale.
(5) The amount of fee paid.
(6) The effective dates of the permit.
(7) The permit number.
(8) An identifying description of any vehicle to be used in such
business, including the license number of such vehicle.
(9) A notice that the permit is suspended during a special event in the
area allocated to such special event.
(J) No permit shall be issued, assigned, or otherwise transferred to any
person other than the original applicant. No permit shall be used at any
time by any person other than the one to whom it is issued. The city
clerk shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued.
(K) All permits issued pursuant to this chapter are suspended during a
special event in the area designated for such special event.
(L) All permits issued under this chapter shall expire not more than one
year after date of issuance.
(M) All permits issued pursuant to this chapter are subject to suspension or
revocation under this chapter and chapter 5 of this title. Chapter 5 of
this title shall not apply to the temporary suspension of permits during
special events.
(A) The fee for issuance of permits under this chapter shall be established
from time to time by resolution of the council.
§ 3-7-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-7-7
1-1:89
§ 3-7-8. Regulation of transient merchants. [10-4-2005; 2016 Code]
(B) No permit fee shall be required of any person who operates for a
charitable organization or a religious youth school, or other related
purpose, unless such person operates as a street vendor.
(1) Each organization desiring exemption pursuant to this section shall
file a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the
city clerk, which shall include the following information:
A) Name and purpose of the cause for which permit is sought.
B) Name and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization.
C) Period during which solicitation will be carried on.
D) Whether or not any commission, fees, wages or emoluments
are to be expended in connection with such solicitations, and
the amount thereof.
(2) Upon being satisfied that such organization meets the
requirements of this section, the city clerk shall issue a permit
pursuant to this chapter without charge. Such organization shall
furnish all of its members, agents or representatives conducting
solicitation with written credentials stating the name of the
organization, name of agent and purpose of solicitation.
(A) No transient merchant shall:
(1) Call at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 9:00 PM
and 8:00 AM except by appointment.
(2) Call at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed
bearing the words "no peddlers," "no solicitors" or words of similar
meaning.
(3) Call at the rear door of any dwelling place.
(4) Remain on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner,
occupant or other person having authority over such premises.
(5) Misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements
concerning the quality, quantity, or characteristics of his or her
merchandise offered for sale, the purpose of his or her visit, his or
her identity or the identity of the organization he or she represents.
(6) Impede or interfere with the free use of sidewalks and streets by
pedestrians and vehicles.
(7) Make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract
customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard
outside a 100 foot radius of the source, except in compliance with a
permit issued under section 9-4-20 of this code.
§ 3-7-7 MONROE CODE § 3-7-8
1-1:90
(8) Allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which
he or she is conducting business.
(9) Permit equipment or displays to be located in the following areas:
A) Within a 10 foot radius of a fire hydrant.
B) Within a five foot radius of a standpipe.
C) Within five feet of a bus or taxi stop.
D) Within 10 feet of a marked crosswalk.
E) Within four feet of any building unless permission has first
been obtained from the person having legal control of such
building.
F) Within 2 1/2 feet of a parking meter.
G) Within five feet of any handicapped parking space.
H) Within the vision triangle described in section 5-13-1 of this
code.
(10) Permit ropes or other equipment to be attached to any bench,
flower planter, tree, light pole, utility pole or trash receptacle for
display of merchandise.
(11) Permit any bench, flower planter, tree, light pole, utility pole or
trash receptacle to be used for the display of goods or advertising
materials.
(12) Permit any part of the operations of the transient merchant to
interfere with the free flow of pedestrian, or vehicle traffic.
(13) Permit merchandise, or by-products thereof, sold by the transient
merchant to be deposited on any street, sidewalk or other place
within the city.
(14) Operate in violation of any condition or restriction placed upon any
permit issued pursuant to this chapter, including conditions or
restrictions established during a special event.
(B) Street vendors shall be entitled to sell from or conduct business on
public streets, sidewalks, and other public property to the extent set
forth in the street vendor's permit. No other transient merchant shall
sell from or conduct business on public sidewalks, streets, or other
property.
(C) Every transient merchant shall observe all traffic and parking
regulations.
(D) Each transient merchant shall exhibit any permit required by this
chapter at the request of any police officer or citizen.
§ 3-7-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-7-8
1-1:91
(E) No street vendor shall:
(1) Operate within 200 feet from any other street vendor. In the event
of conflict between two or more street vendors wishing to locate in
the same vicinity, the city clerk is hereby authorized to establish a
procedure for allocating locations by means which assure fair and
equitable access to such locations by competing street vendors.
(2) Operate within 20 feet of any portion of the front of any building in
which a permanent merchant sells merchandise of the same or
similar nature, unless the street vendor has obtained the prior
written consent of the permanent merchant for such operation.
(3) Permit equipment, goods or advertising materials to be stored on
any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place when no individual
is present on behalf of the transient merchant or when vending is
not permitted.
(4) Operate without at least one individual listed on the permit issued
under this chapter present at all times.
(5) Operate in any city park without the written permission of the
board of park and recreation commissioners. Any street vendor
operating in any city park shall comply with all conditions of
operation established by the board of park and recreation
commissioners.
(F) Except pursuant to a special event permit issued by the city, it shall be
unlawful for a farm products vendor to operate at any place or location
within the city except those corners of the intersection of 15th Street
and 16th Avenue owned and controlled by the city and designated for
sale of agricultural products, or in such areas as otherwise set by
resolution of the council.
(G) Every street vendor shall:
(1) Maintain a minimum pedestrian walkway of five feet on any
sidewalk.
(2) Remove all equipment, including carts, tables, apparatus and
goods, from the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places
during times when the vendor is not operating.
(3) Comply with all licensing and inspection requirements of the state
of Wisconsin.
(H) Any transient merchant required to provide a certificate under section
3-7-4(D) of this chapter shall carry and display such certificate at all
times while operating in the city, and shall keep such certificate current
at all such times.
(I) Except pursuant to a special event permit issued by the city, no farm
products vendor shall operate at any location within the city except
§ 3-7-8 MONROE CODE § 3-7-8
1-1:92
§ 3-7-9. Duty of police to report. [10-4-2005; 2016 Code]
§ 3-7-10. Appeal. [10-4-2005; 2016 Code]
Any person refused or denied a permit under this chapter may appeal the
denial through the appeal procedure provided in chapter 5 of title 3 of this
code.
§ 3-7-11. Penalty. [10-4-2005; 2016 Code]
Upon conviction for a violation of this chapter the following penalties shall
apply:
those corners of the intersection of 15th Street and 16th Avenue owned
and controlled by the city and designated for sale of agricultural
products, or in such areas as otherwise set by resolution of the council.
(A) The city police may require any transient merchant to produce his or
her permit for inspection.
(B) If any transient merchant does not have a permit, the police may direct
the transient merchant to stop operations, and may issue a citation to
the violator or violators.
(C) If any transient merchant has a permit, but is in violation of the terms of
his or her permit, the police may require the transient merchant to
correct the violation. The police may issue a citation to the violator. If
the transient merchant is unwilling or unable to immediately correct
the violation, the police may direct the transient merchant to stop
operations, and may issue a citation to the violator.
(D) The chief of police shall report all convictions resulting from violations
of this section to the city clerk. The city clerk shall maintain a record of
each permit issued and each report of violation.
(A) Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to
a Class 1 forfeiture. Each day's or partial day's violation of any provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) In addition to other penalties provided in this section, a transient
merchant may have his or her permit suspended or revoked.
(C) Grounds for revocation or suspension. The following shall be grounds
for revocation or suspension of a permit:
(1) The applicant made any material omission or materially inaccurate
statements in the application for permit.
(2) The transient merchant made any fraudulent, false, deceptive or
misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging
in transient sales.
§ 3-7-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-7-11
1-1:93
§ 3-7-12. Severance clause. [10-4-2005; 2016 Code]
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any section,
sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or effect of the
remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter. It is
the intent of the council that this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the
invalidity of any part.
Chapter 3-8
TAXICABS
§ 3-8-1. License required. [4-15-1980; 2016 Code]
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any taxicab within the
limits of the city without having first secured a taxicab business license.
§ 3-8-2. Definitions. [4-15-1980; 2016 Code; 2-22-2017]
In this chapter:
TAXICAB — Means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire, not operated on a fixed route. Taxicab does
not include transportation network company as defined by § 440.40 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
TAXICAB DRIVER — Means a person who operates a taxicab.
§ 3-8-3. Exceptions. [4-15-1980; 2016 Code]
Any person licensed by any other municipality as a chauffeur or operator
shall not be required to procure a taxicab business license in the city, to
carry taxicab passengers for hire from another municipality into the city,
(3) The transient merchant violated any provision of this chapter or
was convicted of any crime, municipal code or statutory violation
which is directly related to the transient merchant's fitness to
engage in selling.
(4) Failure to hold a required license or permit from the state of
Wisconsin.
(5) Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as
to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
(D) No part of the permit fee for a permit which has been revoked or
suspended under this section shall be refunded.
(E) Suspension and revocation of permits issued under this chapter shall
take place under the provisions of chapter 5 of title 3 of this code.
§ 3-7-11 MONROE CODE § 3-8-3
1-1:94
but this exception does not permit such chauffeur or operator to operate a
taxicab wholly within the limits of the city.
§ 3-8-4. Taxicab business license. [4-15-1980; 6-3-1986; 2016 Code;
10-15-2018]
§ 3-8-5. License fees. [2-18-2004; 2016 Code]
The annual taxicab business license fee shall be set by resolution of the
council. The fee for a license issued for less than one year shall be prorated
accordingly. The license year shall be from July 1 through June 30 of the
following year.
§ 3-8-6. Taxicab indemnity bond. [2-18-2004; 2016 Code]
No person shall operate a taxicab business within the city unless there shall
be on file with the city clerk a good and sufficient indemnity bond, policy
or insurance or other contract in writing in such form and containing such
conditions and terms as may be approved by the city attorney issued by a
surety, indemnity or insurance company lawfully qualified to do business in
this state under which such indemnitor shall assume the liability prescribed
by this chapter with respect to such vehicle. Said undertaking shall be
(A) Application: Application for a taxicab business license or an annual
renewal thereof, accompanied by the appropriate fees as prescribed by
§ 3-8-5 of this chapter, shall be made in writing to the City Clerk upon
forms provided by said Clerk not less than 15 days before any license
year, or not less than 15 days before commencing any taxicab business
within the City.
(B) License denied: No license shall be issued to any person who is
delinquent in payment of any taxes, assessments, claims or forfeitures
to the City.
(C) Issuance of license: The City Clerk or its designee shall review each
complete application to determine whether the applicant has
adequately demonstrated that the applicant has complied with those
items set forth in this chapter and may conduct such investigation into
the content of the application as considered necessary. If the City Clerk
or its designee determines that the application should be approved,
then the license application shall be placed on the Council’s consent
agenda for final approval. If the City Clerk or its designee determines
that the application should not be approved, the City Clerk or designee
may administratively deny such application or refer the application to
the appropriate committee to consider such application. Failure by the
City Clerk or its designee to approve or deny an application within 30
days of submission shall be considered a denial, unless such action has
already been referred to the appropriate committee. Any denial by the
City Clerk or its designee may be appealed to the appropriate
committee for review as long as such appeal has been made in writing
to the City Clerk within 30 days of the notice of denial.
§ 3-8-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-8-6
1-1:95
subject to the approval of the city attorney and shall provide that the
indemnity be directly liable for and shall pay all damages for injuries to
persons or property that may be recovered against the owner or operator
of vehicles owned by the taxicab business by reason of negligent use or
operation thereof in a combined property damage and personal injury
coverage amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 for each accident.
§ 3-8-7. Provisions, cancellation of undertaking. [4-15-1980; 2016
Code]
No such undertaking shall be terminated at any time before its expiration
under the terms thereof, nor canceled for any reason whatsoever, unless
there shall have been filed with the city clerk by the indemnitor a notice
thereof at least 10 days before the date of such termination or cancellation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be a part of every such undertaking
and no other provision thereof or agreement between parties thereto shall
operate the same.
§ 3-8-8. Vehicles and equipment. [4-15-1980; 2016 Code]
§ 3-8-9. General regulations. [4-15-1980; 2016 Code]
(A) Equipment. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all
provisions of chapter 347 of the Wisconsin statutes and Trans 305 of the
Wisconsin administrative code describing and defining regulations with
respect to equipment on motor vehicles shall apply to all taxicabs.
References to specific statute sections and administrative codes
wherever used in this chapter, shall mean Wisconsin statutes 2013-14
and Wisconsin administrative code of 2015, and acts supplementary
and amendatory thereto.
(B) Police inspection. The police department shall inspect the mechanical
condition of each vehicle for which an application for a license is made
and shall make annual inspections of all licensed vehicles before the
license year. No vehicle shall be operated, whether licensed or not, as a
taxicab if the police department shall find that the mechanical condition
thereof makes it unsafe for the carrying of passengers. Unannounced
inspections shall be made by the police department upon a valid citizen
complaint. A written inspection report shall be completed for each
vehicle inspected. One copy of the inspection report shall be retained
on file at the city clerk's office.
(A) Identification. All taxicabs shall be suitably marked or identified as
such.
(B) Subject to traffic regulations. The state traffic code and the city traffic
regulations shall apply to the use and operation of taxicabs.
(C) Operator not to drink or use drugs. No person driving or operating a
taxicab shall drink any intoxicating beverage or be under the influence
§ 3-8-6 MONROE CODE § 3-8-9
1-1:96
§ 3-8-10. Revocation. [2-18-2004; 2016 Code]
A taxicab business license may be revoked by the council for a violation
of any provision of this chapter. The city clerk shall notify the licensee,
in writing, of such intent to revoke. The licensee shall have 10 days from
the date of the notice to submit a written request for a hearing before the
council regarding the revocation.
Chapter 3-9
SIDEWALK CAFES
§ 3-9-1. Purpose. [4-5-2006; 2016 Code]
To further encourage the revitalization of the downtown of the city,
including the development of social and economic activity, the council finds
and determines:
§ 3-9-2. Definitions. [4-5-2006; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
DOWNTOWN — Means all territory lying within the business improvement
district.
SIDEWALK CAFE — Means an outdoor dining area that is located on part
of the public right-of-way and is designed and used for the consumption of
food or beverages prepared and served by a business establishment that
immediately adjoins such area in which such food and beverages are also
served.
thereof, nor shall any person drive or operate a taxicab while under the
influence of a controlled substance.
(A) That there exists a need for outdoor eating facilities in certain areas of
the downtown to provide a unique environment for relaxation, social
interaction, and food consumption.
(B) That sidewalk cafes will permit enhanced use of the available public
rights of way, will complement the restaurants operating from fixed
premises, and will promote economic activity in the downtown.
(C) That the existence of sidewalk cafes encourages additional pedestrian
traffic and their presence may impede the free and safe flow of
pedestrians. Therefore, a need exists for regulations and standards for
the existence and operation of sidewalk cafes to ensure a safe
environment.
(D) That the establishment of permit conditions and safety standards for
sidewalk cafes is necessary to protect and promote public health,
safety, and welfare.
§ 3-8-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-9-3
1-1:97
§ 3-9-3. Sidewalk cafe permit. [4-5-2006; 2-6-2007; 2016 Code]
The owner or lessee of real property located in the downtown may be issued
a permit allowing operation of a sidewalk cafe. Chapter 7 of this title shall
not apply to the holder of a sidewalk cafe permit operating within the
sidewalk cafe.
(A) Application. Before a permit may be issued, there shall be submitted to
the city clerk a fully completed application for sidewalk cafe permit on a
form provided by the city clerk. Included with such application shall be
the following:
(1) A copy of a current certificate of insurance in the amount and
categories required by this chapter.
(2) A site plan, drawn to a scale of approximately 1/8" = 1', on 8 1/2" x
11" paper, suitable for reproduction, which accurately depicts the
dimensions of the sidewalk area and adjacent private property, the
proposed location of the sidewalk cafe, size and number of tables,
chairs, steps, planters, and umbrellas, location of doorways, trees,
parking meters, sidewalk benches, trash receptacles, and any other
sidewalk obstructions, either existing or proposed, within the
sidewalk area. Included with the site plan shall be photographs,
drawings, or manufacturer's brochures fully describing the
appearance and dimensions of all proposed tables, chairs,
umbrellas or other objects related to the sidewalk cafe. The
unobstructed pedestrian pathway required by this code shall be
clearly shown on the site plan. If a sidewalk cafe permit is issued,
the site plan shall be attached to and made a part of such permit.
(3) A non-refundable application fee in an amount established from
time to time by resolution of the council.
(B) Approval of permit and term: The City Clerk or its designee shall review
each complete application to determine whether the applicant has
adequately demonstrated that the applicant has complied with those
items set forth in this chapter and may conduct such investigation into
the content of the application as considered necessary. If the City Clerk
or its designee determines that the application should be approved,
then the license application shall be placed on the Council’s consent
agenda for final approval. If the City Clerk or its designee determines
that the application should not be approved, the City Clerk or designee
may administratively deny such application or refer the application to
the appropriate committee to consider such application. Failure by the
City Clerk or its designee to approve or deny an application within 30
days of submission shall be considered a denial, unless such action has
already been referred to the appropriate committee. Any denial by the
City Clerk or its designee may be appealed to the appropriate
committee for review as long as such appeal has been made in writing
to the City Clerk within 30 days of the notice of denial. Each permit
§ 3-9-3 MONROE CODE § 3-9-3
1-1:98
shall be effective for one year, from July 1 through June 30. [Amended
10-15-2018]
(C) Transfer of permit. The permit issued may be transferred to a new
owner. The transferred permit shall be valid only for the remainder of
the period for which it was originally issued. A new certificate of
insurance must be filed with the city within 30 days of the permit
transfer.
(D) Permit fees. The application fee for an initial sidewalk cafe permit and
the annual renewal fee for such permit, with or without an alcohol
license expansion, shall be in an amount established from time to time
by resolution of the council.
(E) Sidewalk cafe standards. The following standards, criteria, conditions,
and restrictions shall apply to all sidewalk cafes, provided however, that
the city administrator or his or her designee may impose additional
conditions and restrictions to protect and promote the public health,
safety, or welfare, to prevent a nuisance from developing or continuing,
and to comply with this chapter, other provisions of the this code, and
applicable state and federal laws.
(1) Proximity to property of permit holder. Sidewalk cafes are
restricted to the public right-of-way immediately adjacent to and
extending perpendicular to the curb from the front facade of the
real property owned or leased by the person or entity to which the
permit is issued. With the express written consent of the owner of
property located next to the property owned or leased by the
sidewalk cafe permit holder the description of the sidewalk cafe
may be expanded to include all or part of the public right-of-way
immediately adjacent to and extending perpendicular to the curb
from the front facade of the real property of the person or entity
who has granted such permission.
(2) Placement of equipment. Tables, chairs, umbrellas, signs or other
fixtures in the sidewalk cafe:
A) Shall not be placed or allowed to remain within two feet of
parking meters, trash receptacles, taxi stands, fire hydrants,
alleys, bike racks, a pedestrian crosswalk or a corner curb cut.
B) Shall not be placed or allowed to remain closer than two feet
from the inner curb line.
C) Shall not be placed or allowed to remain within an area
extending in all directions from the center of any entry or exit
door a distance of two feet plus one-half of the width of the
entry or exit door.
D) Shall not block designated ingress, egress, or fire exits from or
to any structures, including the business establishment that
operates the sidewalk cafe.
§ 3-9-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-9-3
1-1:99
E) Shall be readily removable and shall not be physically
attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any structure,
tree, post sign, or other fixture, curb, or sidewalk.
F) Shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and safe manner.
(3) Pedestrian pathway required. Sidewalk cafes shall be located in
such a manner that a distance of not less than five feet is
maintained at all times as a clear and unobstructed pedestrian
path. For the minimum clear path, parking meters, traffic signs,
trees, trash receptacles and all similar obstacles shall be
considered obstructions.
(4) Maintenance of sidewalk cafe. The sidewalk cafe, along with the
sidewalk and roadway immediately adjacent to it, shall be
maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. Debris shall
be removed as required during the day and again at the close of
each business day. All debris and refuse generated by patrons of
the sidewalk cafe shall be disposed of in receptacles provided by
the holder of the sidewalk cafe permit and shall not be disposed of
in publicly maintained trash receptacles.
(5) Plant tubs. Plant tubs may be located in the sidewalk cafe with the
approval of the city administrator or his or her designee. Plant tubs
shall be maintained in a safe, neat, clean, and presentable manner.
(6) Umbrellas and decorative materials. Umbrellas and other
decorative materials shall be treated wood, canvas, cloth, or similar
material that is manufactured to be fire-resistant. Umbrellas shall
only be permitted if made an integral part of a table and no portion
of an umbrella framework shall extend beyond a vertical plane at
the boundary of the sidewalk cafe, at edges of the required
pedestrian path or at the outer edges of the minimum clearances
required from other structures or facilities, unless that portion that
extends beyond such vertical plane is at least 7 1/2 feet above the
sidewalk immediately beneath it. Umbrellas and other decorative
materials shall be placed in a manner that does not significantly
obstruct the view of any neighboring traffic control or business
signs.
(7) Signs. Signs used in conjunction with the sidewalk cafe shall be
placed within the sidewalk cafe and shall conform to the following:
A) Any non-temporary sign shall be designed, constructed,
erected, and maintained to withstand horizontal wind
pressures of not less than 30 pounds per square foot.
B) Any temporary sign shall be attached to supports so as to
withstand horizontal wind pressures of not less than 30 pounds
per square foot.
§ 3-9-3 MONROE CODE § 3-9-3
1-1:100
C) Each sign shall be constructed and placed so as to not
adversely affect or inhibit the safe and efficient movement of
pedestrians and motorists.
D) Signs shall not create or add to sign clutter due to the display
of an inordinate number of signs which overwhelms those
viewing an area.
E) Signs shall be compatible with the street setting and
neighborhood character and enhance the appearance of the
streetscape.
F) Signs shall be compatible with surrounding ground signs in
terms of height, location, copy area and type of illumination
and shall not obstruct the view of any surrounding signs.
(8) Food preparation or storage prohibited. No food preparation, food
storage, refrigeration apparatus, or equipment shall be allowed in
the sidewalk cafe.
(9) Amplified sound prohibited. No amplified sound shall be allowed in
the sidewalk cafe unless authorized as part of a special event.
(10) Site plan to be available at all times. A copy of the site plan, as
approved in conjunction with the current sidewalk cafe permit,
shall be maintained on the permittee's premises and shall be
available for inspection by city personnel at all times.
(11) Applicable only to public right-of-way. The sidewalk cafe permit
covers only the public right-of-way described in the permit.
(12) Hours of operation. Sidewalk cafes shall not operate after 12:01
AM or before 6:00 AM.
(F) Non-exclusive use of public right-of-way within sidewalk cafe. Except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, use of a portion of the public rightof-
way as a sidewalk cafe shall not be exclusive.
(1) Public improvements. All public improvements, including, but not
limited to trees, light poles, parking meters, traffic signals, pull
boxes, or manholes, or any public initiated maintenance
procedures, shall take precedence over use of the public right-ofway
as a sidewalk cafe.
(2) Private improvements. All private improvements within a sidewalk
cafe, including but not limited to tables, chairs, benches and signs,
shall remain private property under control of the holder of the
sidewalk cafe permit and no person shall occupy or use such
improvements without the consent of the holder of such permit, or
his or her designee.
(3) Use by general public limited. Upon issuance of a permit
authorizing a sidewalk cafe every provision of the this code
§ 3-9-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-9-3
1-1:101
Chapter 3-10
DANCE LICENSES
§ 3-10-1. License required. [3-5-1985; 2016 Code]
governing use of a sidewalk, other than this chapter, shall apply
only to the unobstructed pedestrian pathway portion of the
sidewalk cafe shown on the site plan. Pedestrians may walk
between tables, chairs benches or other private improvements in
a sidewalk cafe for the temporary and momentary purpose of
entering and exiting a vehicle parked on the adjoining street or
gaining access to public improvements such as parking meters,
trash receptacles or similar facilities, provided however, if a
pathway has been designated for this purpose pedestrians shall use
such pathway.
(4) Authority of chief of police. The chief of police or his or her
designee may order the removal of the sidewalk cafe for public
health and safety purposes. The city, its officers and employees,
shall not be responsible for sidewalk cafe fixtures that are
relocated or damaged.
(5) Special event. A permit issued under this chapter shall be
suspended during a special event if the permit issued for such
special event so states.
(G) Liability and insurance. As a condition of issuance of a sidewalk cafe
permit, the permittee shall agree to indemnify, defend, save, and hold
harmless the city, its officers and employees, from claims, liability,
lawsuits, damages, and causes of action, which may arise out of the
permit or the permittee's activity on the sidewalk cafe. In addition, the
permittee shall:
(1) Obtain commercial liability insurance for at least $1,000,000 per
occurrence for bodily injury and property damage, with the city
named as an additional insured, with coverage including the area
and operations of the sidewalk cafe.
(2) Provide the city with an original certificate of insurance as
evidence that the requirements set forth in this section have been
met before commencing operations of a sidewalk cafe.
(H) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall
upon conviction be subject to a Class 2 forfeiture. A separate offense
exists each calendar day during which a violation occurs or continues.
(A) All persons licensed to sell alcohol beverages at retail must obtain a
dance license under this chapter before permitting any public or private
dancing in any place for which the city has granted an alcohol beverage
license.
§ 3-9-3 MONROE CODE § 3-10-1
1-1:102
§ 3-10-2. Application, issuance of license; fees. [2016 Code;
10-15-2018]
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be for a period terminating June
30 next following the issuance of the license.
(B) All persons must obtain a dance license under this chapter to allow
dancing in any room, place, or space they own or control in the city,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(C) The location or holder of a dance license is not transferable.
(D) This chapter does not apply to dances held by an owner or tenant in
premises or part of any premises occupied as a dwelling, neither does
this chapter apply to any dance given by permanently organized clubs,
societies, or corporations when admission is restricted to members of
the club, society, or corporation, when the members' guests are
admitted only by invitation, and when the guests do not at any time give
any fee or payment for attending the dance.
(A) Any person desiring such license shall file with the City Clerk his or her
application in writing, giving the location of the premises to be licensed
by legal description, and the street and numbers of all entrances of
such premises; the name of the owner and lessee, if any, of said
premises, the name of the person proposing to operate such premises,
the name of the manager in charge, a description of any other business
conducted on the licensed premises, a statement of the nature of
entertainment to be furnished, a statement of whether or not an
additional charge or special charge shall be made for such
entertainment; and a statement of the residence and occupations of the
owners and managers of such licensed premises during the two years
before date of the application.
(B) The City Clerk or its designee shall review each complete application to
determine whether the applicant has adequately demonstrated that the
applicant has complied with those items set forth in this chapter and
may conduct such investigation into the content of the application as
considered necessary. If the City Clerk or its designee determines that
the application should be approved, then the license application shall
be placed on the Council’s consent agenda for final approval. If the City
Clerk or its designee determines that the application should not be
approved, the City Clerk or designee may administratively deny such
application or refer the application to the appropriate committee to
consider such application. Failure by the City Clerk or its designee to
approve or deny an application within 30 days of submission shall be
considered a denial, unless such action has already been referred to the
appropriate committee. Any denial by the City Clerk or its designee may
be appealed to the appropriate committee for review as long as such
appeal has been made in writing to the City Clerk within 30 days of the
notice of denial.
§ 3-10-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-10-2
1-1:103
§ 3-10-3. Investigation of applicant and premises. [1969 Code;
5-20-1975; 2016 Code; 10-15-2018]
Application for a dance license shall immediately be transmitted by the City
Clerk to the Chief of Police, Fire Chief for investigation and such officers
shall, within five days, report in writing to the City Clerk the results of
investigations which they shall conduct as to compliance by such proposed
licensed premises with this Code and all applicable federal and state laws,
and their recommendations shall accompany such report. No license shall
be issued unless all of the persons named in the application are of good
moral character, that the proposed public dance hall complies with and
conforms to all requirements of this Code, health and fire regulations
applicable thereto, and that it is a safe and proper place for the purposes for
which it shall be used. No license shall be granted for any dance hall unless
adequate modern toilet facilities are provided within the building, including
wash basins with running water, soap and individual towels, and unless an
adequate supply of drinking water is available, either at a sanitary drinking
fountain or with individual drinking cups.
§ 3-10-4. Regulations imposed. [1969 Code; 5-20-1975; 5-20-2014;
2016 Code]
No premises shall be licensed, maintained or operated except in conformity
with the following regulations:
(C) No transfer of a license or permit as to location or ownership shall be
granted except after application therefor and all procedures applicable
to issuance of a new license shall apply to an application to transfer a
license, except if the application to transfer is approved, the approval
may be endorsed upon the original license.
(D) The fee for a license required by this chapter for the whole or any part
of a year shall be set by resolution of the Council.
(A) Any person conducting a public dance or renting a public dance hall
shall have a floor manager in control of the premises continuously from
a one-half hour before the dancing begins until the dance hall is closed.
It shall be the duty of the floor manager to ensure compliance with all
requirements of this code.
(B) The premises shall comply with all applicable laws relating to the
operation of such premises, including without limitation section 9-4-20
of this code.
(C) The premises shall be adequately lighted when the same is open to the
public.
(D) The premises shall be open only during the hours as those permitted to
places of business holding a "Class B" intoxicating liquor license.
(E) No person under the age of 21 years shall be permitted in the premises
unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian if such premises
§ 3-10-2 MONROE CODE § 3-10-4
1-1:104
holds a license for the sale of intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverages.
(F) It shall be unlawful after 9:00 PM to permit any person to attend or take
part in any public dance who has not reached the age of 16 years,
unless such person is accompanied by a parent or natural guardian. It
shall be unlawful for any person to represent himself or herself to have
reached the age of 16 years to obtain admission to a public dance hall
or a public dance or to be permitted to remain therein when such
person in fact is under 16 years of age. It shall also be unlawful for any
person to represent himself or herself to be a parent or natural
guardian of any person under 16 years of age in order that such person
under 16 years of age may obtain admission to a public dance hall or
public dance or for such person under 16 years of age to remain therein
when the accompanying person is not in fact either a parent or natural
guardian of the person under 16 years of age.
(G) No prostitute, procurer, intoxicated person or vagrant shall be
permitted in the licensed premises.
(H) No entertainment or dancing shall be permitted which shall be vulgar,
suggestive, licentious or offensive to public morals and decency.
(I) All public dance halls and facilities appertaining thereto shall be kept at
all times in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition, and all stairways
and other passages and all rooms connected with a public dance hall
shall be kept open and well lighted during the public use. Proper
ventilation must be maintained at all times.
(J) It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a public dance or public
dance hall, or any manager or other agent of such person:
(1) To permit on the public dance hall premises any person under the
influence of any intoxicating liquors or drugs.
(2) To permit any persons who idle, loiter or hang-out to be on or about
the dance hall premises.
(3) To permit gambling in any form on the premises.
(4) To permit persons to indulge in dancing that may be construed as
unrefined, vulgar, suggestive or offensive to public morals and
decency.
(5) To permit any undue familiarity between persons on the dance
floor.
(6) To permit indecent, boisterous or disorderly conduct or the use of
profane or obscene language.
§ 3-10-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-10-5
1-1:105
§ 3-10-5. Posting license. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
Every person licensed under this chapter shall immediately post such
license and keep the same posted while in force in a conspicuous place
in the premises mentioned in the application for such license. It shall be
unlawful for any person to post such license or to be permitted to post it
upon premises other than those mentioned in the application, or knowingly
to deface or destroy any such license. Whenever a license shall be lost or
destroyed without fault of the holder or his or her agent or employee, a
duplicate license in lieu thereof under the original application may be issued
by the city clerk at his or her discretion.
§ 3-10-6. Power to supervise, close. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
The members of the police department shall have access at all times to
all public dance halls and public dances. Officers and patrolmen of such
department shall investigate all complaints and shall visit such halls and
dances and report any violation. The chief of police shall have power and
duty to cause the place, hall or room where any public dance is held to be
vacated whenever any rule or regulation or any provision of any law with
regard to public dance halls or public dances is being violated or whenever
an indecent act shall be committed or whenever any disorder or conduct of
a gross, violent and vulgar character shall take place therein, or any known
prostitute, procurer or vagrant be found to be present in such place.
§ 3-10-7. Revocation of license. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
The council may, at any time after giving notice to the licensee of an
opportunity to be heard, revoke any license granted under this chapter for
disorderly or immoral conduct on the premises or upon proof that the public
dance hall, or a public dance given under the same auspices was frequented
by disorderly or immoral persons, or for the violation of any of the rules,
regulations, or laws governing or applying to public dance halls or public
dances or for the protection of the public health, safety, morals or general
welfare. Whenever any license or permit shall be revoked, no refund of any
unearned portion of the fee paid shall be made, and at least six months from
the time of such revocation shall elapse before another license or permit
shall be given to conduct a public dance in the same premises. Notice of
such hearing and the reason therefor shall be in writing shall be served by
the chief of police upon the person named in the application and by filing a
copy of such with the city clerk.
§ 3-10-8. Penalty. [12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be
subject to a Class 3 forfeiture.
Chapter 3-11
CIGARETTE LICENSES
§ 3-10-5 MONROE CODE § 3-11-1
1-1:106
§ 3-11-1. License required. [2016 Code]
It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, upon any pretense
or by any device, to sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or give away, or keep
for sale any cigarettes, cigarette paper or cigarette wrappers or any paper
made or prepared to be filled with tobacco, without first obtaining a license
therefor. All premises where cigarettes are sold shall have a license.
§ 3-11-2. Application for license. [2016 Code]
Every person desiring a cigarette license shall file with the city clerk a
written application therefor, stating the name of the person and the place
for which such license is desired. Every license shall be signed by the
city clerk and shall name the licensee and the place where he or she
may conduct such business and the same shall not be delivered until the
applicant shall produce and file with such clerk a receipt showing the
payment of the required license fee to the treasurer of the city.
§ 3-11-3. Approval of license and term. [2016 Code]
Each license shall be approved by the council or a standing committee of
the council, if authorized by the council, and shall be effective for one year,
from July 1 through June 30.
§ 3-11-4. Planned event license. [2016 Code]
A person may be issued a cigarette license for a planned event. No person
shall hold more than one planned event license at any time and not more
than two planned event licenses shall be issued to the same person in any
year. In this subsection a "planned event" means a special event or a family,
social, civic, community or business event which is expected to continue for
not more than 10 days.
§ 3-11-5. Fees. [2016 Code]
The fee for an annual license or a license issued upon a change of ownership
shall be set by resolution of the council.
§ 3-11-6. Penalty. [6-5-2001; 2016 Code]
A person who violates any provision of this section shall upon conviction be
subject to a Class 3 forfeiture.
Chapter 3-12
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
§ 3-12-1. Applicable law. [8-27-2012; 2016 Code]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of chapter 98
of the Wisconsin statutes and ATCP 92 of the Wisconsin administrative
§ 3-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-12-1
1-1:107
code are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter.
Any act required or prohibited by any statute or code incorporated in
this chapter by reference is required or prohibited by this chapter. Any
future amendments, revisions or modifications of the sections of statutes or
administrative code incorporated in this chapter by reference are intended
to be made a part of this chapter.
§ 3-12-2. Appointment of inspectors. [8-27-2012; 2016 Code]
The city hereby grants the authority and duties of sealers and inspectors
required by this chapter to the department.
§ 3-12-3. Definitions. [8-27-2012; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
COMMERCIAL WEIGHING AND MEASURING DEVICE — Means an
electronic scanner used to record the price of a commodity or thing and a
device used in establishing the size, quantity, extent, area or measurement
of quantities, things, produce or articles for sale, hire or award, or in
computing any basic charge or payment for goods or services provided on
the basis of weight or measure.
DEPARTMENT — Means the Wisconsin department of agriculture, trade
and consumer protection.
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES — Means weights and measures of every kind,
commercial weighing and measuring devices, and any appliances and
accessories used with any or all such commercial weighing and measuring
devices, except meters for the measurement of electricity, natural and
manufactured gas, and water when operated in a public utility system.
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES LICENSE — Means a license issued pursuant
to this chapter for the operation and maintenance of commercial weighing
and measuring devices.
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES PROGRAM — Means the program for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter and applicable law.
§ 3-12-4. Weights and measures license required. [8-27-2012; 2016
Code]
(A) License requirements. Except as provided in subsection (B), no person
shall operate for commercial purposes any commercial weighing and
measuring device within the city unless a weights and measures license
is issued pursuant to this chapter.
(B) Exemptions. The following commercial weighing and measuring
devices are exempt from licensing under this chapter.
(1) Devices used by transient merchants, street vendors and farm
products vendors as defined in chapter 7 of title 3 of the this code;
and
§ 3-12-1 MONROE CODE § 3-12-4
1-1:108
§ 3-12-5. Weights and measures license application. [8-27-2012;
2016 Code]
An application for a weights and measures license shall be made in writing
on a form provided for such purpose by the city clerk and shall be signed
by the applicant. Such application shall state the type and number of
commercial weighing and measuring devices to be licensed, the location
of such devices, the applicant's full name and address, and whether such
applicant is an individual, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation or other entity. If the applicant is not an individual, the
application shall state the names and addresses of all principals, partners,
officers and agents, including the registered agent thereof.
§ 3-12-6. Issuance of weights and measures license. [8-27-2012;
2016 Code]
Upon receipt of a weights and measures license application and upon
payment of an annual license fee in an amount set from time to time by
resolution of the council, the city clerk shall issue a weights and measures
license to the applicant. Each business location shall be required to obtain
a separate weights and measures license.
§ 3-12-7. Weights and measures license term. [8-27-2012; 2016
Code]
The weights and measures license shall be for a term not exceeding one
year, commencing on the date of issuance and ending on the next June 30.
If a weights and measures license is issued for a term of less than one year,
the license fee shall not be prorated.
§ 3-12-8. Enforcement for license non-renewal. [8-27-2012; 2016
Code]
It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain a commercial weighing and
measuring device until a valid weights and measures license has been
issued under this chapter.
§ 3-12-9. Fee assessment. [8-27-2012; 2016 Code]
(2) Devices tested under the jurisdiction of another municipality or the
state of Wisconsin if used in the city for no more than five days per
year.
(A) Annual assessment. The council shall annually assess fees to each
licensee based upon the number and types of commercial weighing and
measuring devices authorized by the license issued to such licensee.
The total fees assessed and collected shall not exceed the actual costs
of the weights and measures program and administrative costs.
(B) Clerk to prepare assessment. The city clerk shall annually prepare a
proposed schedule of assessments to be submitted to the council. Each
§ 3-12-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-12-9
1-1:109
§ 3-12-10. Penalty. [8-27-2012; 2016 Code]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction
be subject to a Class 1 forfeiture. Each day a violation exists or continues to
exist shall be a separate violation.
Chapter 3-13
SPECIAL EVENTS
assessment shall be based upon the weights and measures license
application, inspection fee from the Department, annual reports from
the department detailing inspection hours, and the number of
commercial weighing and measuring devices licensed in the city;
(C) Class 1 notice. The city clerk shall publish notice of meeting of council
to determine weights and measures assessments as a Class 1 notice and
such notice shall specify that a copy of schedule of assessments for
weights and measures licensees is available in the office of the city
clerk upon request.
(D) Council determines assessment. The council shall consider the city
clerk's proposed schedule of assessments and determine the
assessments on a reasonable basis. The city clerk shall mail to each
weights and measures licensee an invoice for the amount of the fee
assessed as determined by the council and each licensee shall pay the
assessed fee within thirty days after the date the invoice is mailed.
(E) Failure to pay fee assessment. If the assessed fee is not paid within
thirty days after the date the invoice is mailed, an additional
administrative collection charge of 10 percent of the total fee shall be
added to the amount due, plus interest shall accrue thereon at 1.5
percent per month or fraction thereof until paid. To the extent
permitted by law, if the licensee is the owner of the real estate where
the licensed commercial weighing and measuring devices are located,
any delinquent fee assessment shall be extended upon the current or
the next tax roll as a special charge against the real estate. No license
shall be issued or renewed under this chapter if the licensee is
delinquent in the payment of a fee assessed under this chapter.
(F) Mailing of notices. Schedules, notices and invoices shall be considered
mailed to a licensee when mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at the licensee's address as stated on the weights and
measures application.
(G) Change of ownership. If ownership of a business with commercial
weighing and measuring devices licensed under this chapter is
transferred during a license year, the owner of the business as of July 1
of the license year shall be liable and responsible for the payment of the
fees assessed under this chapter.
§ 3-12-9 MONROE CODE § 3-13-1
1-1:110
§ 3-13-1. Declaration of purpose. [11-6-1991; 2016 Code]
The council finds that the interests of the city and its citizens are promoted
by a carefully drawn set of rules designed to facilitate community festivals,
parades, runs, and other wholesome events that bring people together while
maintaining public safety and welfare.
§ 3-13-2. Definitions. [11-6-1991; 9-3-2002; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
DISRUPT — Means any planned activity, verbal or nonverbal, with the
intent to disturb or interrupt the orderly course of the special event, or any
activity, verbal or nonverbal, with knowledge that the natural consequences
of the person's actions would be to disturb or interrupt the orderly course
of the special event.
INDIVIDUAL — Means a man or woman.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Means real property owned or controlled by the city,
including, but not limited to, sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks, rights of way,
and public buildings.
SPECIAL EVENT — Has the meaning set forth in section 1-3-2 of this code.
SPONSOR — Means a person that has applied for, or that has received, a
permit to conduct a special event pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
VENDOR — Means a person who in any manner engages in or attempts to
engage in the sale of merchandise, and includes a person that engages or
attempts to engage in transactions in which donations are required by the
seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.
§ 3-13-3. Permit required. [11-6-1991; 2016 Code]
No person shall organize, control or conduct a special event unless such
person has obtained a permit authorizing such special event pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 3-13-4. Duties of public safety committee. [11-6-1991; 2016 Code]
(A) The public safety committee shall review all applications for special
events permits.
(B) The public safety committee shall make recommendations to the
council regarding the granting or denial of the requested permit. As a
part of such recommendations, the committee shall recommend the
taking of such action or the imposition of such conditions as are
considered necessary. The recommendations shall include, but shall not
be limited to:
(1) Whether the council should grant the special events permit.
(2) What conditions should be imposed on a permit to be issued.
§ 3-13-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-13-4
1-1:111
§ 3-13-5. Authority of council. [11-6-1991; 2016 Code]
The council may grant any person the right to use public property for
special events. The council may close streets, rezone parking areas,
suspend parking regulations, and take such other action as is considered
necessary or desirable for the proper function of a special event.
§ 3-13-6. Authority of chief of police. [11-6-1991; 2016 Code]
The chief of police may restrict, direct, and regulate motor vehicle traffic,
motor vehicle parking, and movement of pedestrians during a special event,
as necessary for the safety of the public. All directives of the chief of police
under this section shall control over contradictory provisions of the special
event permit.
§ 3-13-7. Determination of substantial impact. [11-6-1991;
9-3-2002; 2016 Code]
§ 3-13-8. Exemptions. [11-6-1991; 2016 Code]
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
(3) Whether the city should grant the sponsor the right to use public
property for the proposed special event.
(4) Whether the city should close streets within the city for the special
event, and if so, a designation of the streets and the periods during
which such streets should be closed.
(5) Whether the city should rezone parking areas or suspend parking
regulations within designated areas within the city for the special
event.
(A) The chief of police shall determine whether a proposed event will have
a substantial impact upon public property.
(B) In determining whether a proposed event will have a substantial impact
upon public property, the following factors shall be considered:
(1) The extent to which streets will need to be closed for the special
event.
(2) The amount of traffic control services required for the safety of the
public and participants at the special event.
(3) The extent to which the special event will impact upon normal
parking patterns within the area affected by the special event.
(4) Such other factors as passed from time to time by resolution of the
council, upon recommendation of the public safety committee.
(A) Any auction for which a license or permit has been granted by the city.
§ 3-13-4 MONROE CODE § 3-13-8
1-1:112
§ 3-13-9. Application for permit. [11-6-1991; 2016 Code]
(B) Special events required by statute or by order of any court.
(A) Each person desiring to become a sponsor shall file a written, sworn
application for a permit on forms supplied by the city clerk. The
application shall be filed with the city clerk.
(B) The application shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and address. A list of the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of the sponsor, and not less than three individuals who will
hold positions of responsibility with respect to the special event.
(2) Convictions. A statement of any conviction of the sponsor, any
officer or director of the sponsor, and the three individuals listed
under subsection (B)(1) of this section, for any violation of any
criminal law or municipal code, other than traffic and parking
violations. Such statement shall include a statement of the nature
of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
(3) Description of special event. A description of the nature of the
special event, the dates and times during which it is proposed to
operate, and the locations in which it is proposed to operate.
(4) Other permits. A description of all other permits which the sponsor
anticipates will be required for the conduct of the special event,
such as commercial carnival permits, circus permits, and noise
amplification permits.
(5) Term of permit. A statement of the length of time for which a permit
is desired.
(6) Prior suspensions or revocations. A statement of any prior
suspension or revocation of a special event permit of the sponsor or
any individual who will hold a position of responsibility with respect
to the special event.
(7) Mapped routes. When the proposed special event will feature foot
or bicycle races, runs, rides or parades, the sponsor shall submit
the proposed route with the application.
(C) In the application, the sponsor shall agree to indemnify and save
harmless the city against all liabilities, claims, demands, and losses,
including costs, expenses, and reasonable attorney fees, for injury or
death of any individual or loss or damages to the property of any person
arising from any activity undertaken pursuant to a permit issued under
this chapter. No permit shall be issued unless this signed statement is
included in the application.
(D) The sponsor must submit the application for a special event permit a
reasonable time before the commencement of the proposed special
event. Submittal less than 30 days before the commencement of the
§ 3-13-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-13-9
1-1:113
§ 3-13-10. Insurance requirements. [11-2-1999; 6-16-2015; 2016
Code]
§ 3-13-11. Investigation and issuance. [11-6-1991; 2016 Code]
proposed special event shall be presumed unreasonable. If the public
safety committee, chief of police, or city clerk has inadequate time
to properly consider whether a permit should be granted under this
chapter, the permit shall not be granted.
(A) Each sponsor shall provide the city clerk with an insurance binder or
certificate of insurance showing that the sponsor has insurance
coverage for all liabilities and obligations that may result from the
activities undertaken pursuant to the permit. If a binder is provided, a
certificate of insurance shall be provided before the issuance of a
permit. Such coverage shall include:
(1) Coverage for operations by the sponsor's employees, agents,
contractors and subcontractors.
(2) Coverage of the city as an additional named insured.
(3) Coverage for personal injury to participants in the special event.
(4) Coverage for property damage occurring as a result of the special
event.
(B) The certificate of insurance shall provide that the insurance company
shall furnish the city with a 10 day written notice of cancellation,
nonrenewal or material change.
(C) The insurance company issuing the certificate of insurance shall be
licensed in the state of Wisconsin and shall be approved by the city.
(D) The insurance shall be written in comprehensive form and shall protect
the sponsor and city against all claims arising from injuries to members
of the public or damages to property of others arising out of any act or
omission of the sponsor, its employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors.
(E) The policy of insurance shall provide coverage in such amounts as are
set, from time to time, by resolution of the council.
(A) An application that fulfills the requirements of sections 3-13-9 and
3-13-10 of this chapter shall be submitted by the city clerk to the chief
of police for processing. An application that does not fulfill such
requirements shall be returned to the sponsor without action.
(B) The chief of police may require such additional information from the
sponsor as he or she considers necessary.
(C) The chief of police shall investigate the sponsor's background and other
matters regarding the special event. The chief of police shall submit the
§ 3-13-9 MONROE CODE § 3-13-11
1-1:114
application and his or her recommendations to the public safety
committee within a reasonable time after his or her receipt of the
application.
(D) In determining whether to recommend granting of a permit under this
chapter, the public safety committee shall consider:
(1) The impact that the special event will have upon public property.
(2) The public inconvenience or disruption of affairs of the public that
will be caused by the special event.
(3) The effect of the special event on public safety.
(4) All costs which will be incurred by the city as a result of the special
event.
(5) The capacity of the city to provide support services for the special
event.
(6) All detrimental effects on the community from the holding of the
special event.
(7) All benefits which will inure to the community from the holding of
the special event.
(8) The risk of liability to the city from the holding of the special event.
(9) The number of people expected to be involved in the special event.
(10) The area of the city affected by or to be used by the special event.
(11) The recommendations of the chief of police.
(E) The public safety committee may condition the issuance of any permit
under this chapter upon the provision of specific services and payment
of specific costs by the sponsor, and may impose such other conditions
of operation as are deemed necessary by the committee after
consideration of the factors enumerated in this section.
(F) All applications for a special event permit shall be submitted for
approval to the council with a recommendation by the public safety
committee as to any conditions or restrictions which should be placed
upon such special event. Approval shall be by resolution of the council.
(G) All permits approved by resolution of the council shall be issued by the
city clerk.
(H) Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following:
(1) The signature of the issuing officer.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the sponsor and not
less than three individuals who hold positions of responsibility with
respect to the special event.
§ 3-13-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-13-11
1-1:115
§ 3-13-12. Permit fees. [11-6-1991; 4-18-2016; 2016 Code]
The fee for issuance of a special event permit shall be established from time
to time by resolution of the council.
§ 3-13-13. Special events regulations. [11-6-1991; 2016 Code]
(3) A statement of the general nature of activities authorized pursuant
to the permit.
(4) The amount of fee paid.
(5) The date of issuance.
(6) The effective dates of the permit.
(7) The permit number.
(I) No permit shall be issued, assigned, or otherwise transferred to any
person other than the person that filed the original application. The city
clerk shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued.
(A) Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, the council may grant a
sponsor:
(1) The exclusive right to select and control vendors who shall be
authorized to operate within the area designated for such special
event;
(2) The right to designate sites within such area where such vendors
shall be permitted to operate during the special event;
(3) The right to charge such vendors a fee or commission for the
privilege of operating within the area designated for the special
event.
(B) Any sponsor that is granted any of the rights set forth in subsection
3-13-13(A) shall be liable for all acts of such vendors, including all
violations of this chapter by such vendors.
(1) This subsection shall not prevent the sponsor from requiring
subrogation agreements from such vendors, or from requiring such
vendors to provide insurance coverage for their actions at the
special event.
(2) The city shall not be bound by any subrogation agreement or
insurance agreement between a vendor and a sponsor.
(C) Each sponsor shall exhibit its permit at the request of any police officer
or citizen.
(D) It shall be unlawful for a sponsor to do any of the following:
§ 3-13-11 MONROE CODE § 3-13-13
1-1:116
§ 3-13-14. Duty of police to report and enforce. [11-6-1991; 2016
Code]
(1) Operate in violation of a condition or restriction placed upon its
permit.
(2) Fail to comply with any licensing or inspection requirement of the
state of Wisconsin.
(E) Unless authorized by the special event permit issued by the city, it shall
be unlawful for a sponsor to do any of the following:
(1) Permit vending activities associated with such special event to be
operated within 20 feet of any portion of the front of any store
which sells merchandise or services of the same or similar nature.
(2) Permit ropes or other equipment to be attached to any bench,
flower planter, tree, light pole, utility pole or trash receptacle for
display of merchandise or cause or permit any of the foregoing to
be used for display of merchandise or advertising materials.
(3) Permit equipment, goods or advertising materials to be stored on
any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place when no individual
is present on behalf of the sponsor or when special event activities
are not permitted.
(4) Permit any part of the operations of the sponsor to interfere with
the free flow of pedestrian or vehicle traffic.
(F) Except pursuant to a special event permit issued by the city, each
sponsor shall:
(1) Keep all areas in and around any stationary location or display used
during the special event clean and hazard free.
(2) Remove all equipment, including carts, tables, apparatus and
merchandise from the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public
places during times when the sponsor is not operating a special
event.
(A) Any police officer or citizen may require any person operating a special
event to produce its permit for inspection.
(B) If such person does not have a permit, any police officer may
immediately close the special event, and may issue a citation to the
violator or violators.
(C) If such person has a permit, but is in violation of the terms of its permit,
any police officer may require the person to immediately correct the
violation. The police officer may issue a citation to the violator. If the
person is unwilling or unable to immediately correct the violation, the
police officer may immediately close the special event, and may issue a
citation to the violator.
§ 3-13-13 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-13-14
1-1:117
§ 3-13-15. Appeal. [11-6-1991; 2016 Code]
Any person aggrieved by any action of the chief of police, the city clerk, or
the public safety committee with regard to the provisions of this chapter
shall have the right to appeal to the council. Such appeal shall be taken by
filing with the council, within 14 days after notice of the action complained
of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The
council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of
such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided
in section 3-5-5 of this code.
§ 3-13-16. Permit suspension or revocation. [11-6-1991; 2016 Code]
(D) The chief of police shall report all convictions resulting from violations
of this section to the city clerk. The city clerk shall maintain a record of
each permit issued and each conviction of violation of such permit.
(A) The city may suspend or revoke a special event permit. Any such
suspension or revocation shall apply to the sponsor and every officer
and director of the sponsor.
(B) The following shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of a special
event permit:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement contained in the
application.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the
course of carrying on a special event.
(3) Conviction of a sponsor or an officer or director of a sponsor of any
crime.
(4) Any violation of any municipal code or state or federal law
pertaining to the special event.
(5) Failure to hold a required license or permit from the state of
Wisconsin.
(6) Conducting business in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
(7) Any other ground for suspension, revocation, or failure to issue or
reissue a license under chapter 5 of this title.
(C) No part of the permit fee for a special event permit which has been
revoked or suspended shall be refunded.
(D) No sponsor that has had a special event permit revoked or suspended
shall be issued a subsequent special event permit until at least six
months has elapsed since the date of the latest revocation or
suspension.
§ 3-13-14 MONROE CODE § 3-13-17
1-1:118
§ 3-13-17. Disrupting a special event. [11-6-1991; 9-3-2002; 2016
Code]
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a law enforcement officer
acting in the course of their official peace keeping duties to knowingly
disrupt a special event.
§ 3-13-18. Penalty. [11-6-1991; 9-3-2002; 2016 Code]
The penalty for violating any provisions of this chapter shall be a class
1 forfeiture. A separate offense exists each calendar day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 3-14
ROOM TAX
§ 3-14-1. Definitions. [6-4-1991; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
GROSS RECEIPTS — Means the total amount received from the furnishing,
at retail, of rooms or lodging to transients, valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise. "Gross receipts" includes all cash, credits
and property received, including all fees and service charges, labor charges,
and other charges received in addition to the price charged a customer by
the hotelkeeper that represent or are in lieu of a tip or gratuity.
HOTEL or MOTEL — Means a building or group of buildings in which the
public may obtain accommodations for a consideration, including, without
limitation, inns, motels, tourist homes, tourist houses or courts, lodging
houses, rooming houses, summer camps, apartment hotels, resort lodges
and cabins, and any other building or group of buildings in which
accommodations are available to the public. The terms "hotel" and "motel"
do not include accommodations, including mobile homes as defined in
section 5-6-2 of this code, rented for a continuous period of more than
one month or accommodations furnished by any hospital, sanitorium, or
nursing home, or by corporations or associations organized and operated
exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes provided that
no part of the net earnings of such corporations and associations inures to
the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
HOTELKEEPER — Means any person who operates a hotel or motel.
TRANSIENT — Means any person residing for a continuous period of less
than one month in a hotel, a motel, or other furnished accommodations
available to the public.
§ 3-14-2. Imposition of tax. [6-4-1991; 2016 Code]
A tax is hereby imposed on the privilege and service of furnishing, at retail,
of rooms or lodging to transients by hotelkeepers, irrespective of whether
§ 3-13-17 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-14-2
1-1:119
membership is required for the use of the accommodations. Such tax shall
be at the rate of four percent of the gross receipts. Such tax shall not be
subject to the selective tax imposed by section 77.52(2)(a)1 of the Wisconsin
statutes.
§ 3-14-3. Collection of tax and reporting requirements. [6-4-1991;
2016 Code]
§ 3-14-4. Allocation of tax. [6-4-1991; 6-16-2015; 2016 Code]
(A) The tax imposed for each calendar quarter, is due and payable on the
last day of the month following the end of the calendar quarter for
which the tax is imposed.
(B) The tax imposed by this chapter shall become delinquent if not paid by
the due date of the return.
(C) All hotelkeepers shall file a room tax return on or before the date on
which such tax is due and payable. Such return shall be on forms
prescribed by the city treasurer. Such return shall show the gross
receipts of the applicable calendar quarter and such other information
as the city treasurer requires.
(D) Every hotelkeeper shall file an annual calendar year return. Such
annual return shall be filed within 90 days of the close of each calendar
year. The annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns,
reconcile and adjust for errors in the quarterly returns, and shall
contain such additional information as the city treasurer requires. Such
annual return shall be made on forms prescribed by the city treasurer.
All such returns shall be signed by the hotelkeeper or an authorized
agent of the hotelkeeper, but need not be verified by oath.
(E) No quarterly return shall be required from any hotelkeeper who has an
estimated annual tax due of $200.00 or less when a written exemption
is provided by the city treasurer. For purposes of this subsection, the
estimated annual tax due shall be calculated by the city treasurer from
records supplied by the hotelkeeper.
(F) For proper administration of this chapter and to prevent evasion of the
room tax, it shall be presumed that all receipts of a hotelkeeper are
subject to the tax. The burden of proving that a receipt is not taxable is
upon the person who makes the sale unless he or she takes from the
purchaser a certificate showing that the service purchased is exempt.
(A) For collecting and reporting the room tax, and for the accounting
connected with it, hotelkeeper may retain two percent of the room tax
payable with each return due under this chapter, if the payment of the
taxes is not delinquent.
(B) The city shall retain 10 percent of the total tax collected to defray
administrative expenses incurred in the collection of the tax and the
administration of the fund.
§ 3-14-2 MONROE CODE § 3-14-4
1-1:120
§ 3-14-5. Permit. [6-4-1991; 6-5-2001; 2016 Code]
§ 3-14-6. Liability for tax. [6-4-1991; 2016 Code]
(C) The remainder of the tax collected shall be deposited into a segregated
fund of the city, to be administered by the Visitors and Promotion
Commission.
(A) Every hotelkeeper shall file an application for a permit allowing such
hotelkeeper the privilege of operating a hotel or motel within the city. A
separate permit must be obtained for each hotel or motel. Applications
for permits shall be filed with the city clerk.
(B) Every application for a permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by
the city clerk. Every application for permit shall set forth the name
under which the applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the
location of the place of business, and such other information as the city
clerk requires.
(C) The application shall be signed by the hotelkeeper or by an agent
authorized to act on behalf of the hotelkeeper. If an agent signs on
behalf of the hotelkeeper, such agent shall also file written proof of the
authority claimed. (6-4-1991)
(D) The fee for issuance of each permit shall be set by resolution of the
council, which amount shall be tendered by the applicant when
application is tendered to the city clerk.
(E) No permit shall be issued to any person who is delinquent in the
payment of any tax, assessment or other claim owed to the city, or
delinquent in the payment of any forfeiture resulting from a violation
this code.
(F) Upon filing of a complete application and payment of the permit fee, the
city clerk shall issue each applicant a separate permit for each hotel or
motel within the city. Such permit is not assignable and is valid only for
the person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of
business at the place designated in the permit. It shall at all times be
conspicuously displayed at the place for which it was issued.
(G) Each permit issued under this section shall be valid until June 30
following the issuance of the permit, unless suspended or revoked
pursuant to this chapter and chapter 5 of this title.
(A) Upon the termination of business by any person liable for any amount of
tax under this section, the full amount of the tax liability shall become
immediately due and payable.
(B) If any hotelkeeper sells or otherwise terminates his or her business, his
or her purchasers, successors, and assigns shall withhold enough of the
purchase price of the business or any asset of the business to cover the
full amount of tax due under this chapter until the former owner
§ 3-14-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-14-6
1-1:121
§ 3-14-7. Audit. [6-4-1991; 2016 Code]
Whenever the city treasurer has probable cause to believe that the correct
amount of room tax has not been assessed or that the tax return of any
hotelkeeper is not correct, the city treasurer or his or her designee may
inspect and audit the financial records of such hotelkeeper. The financial
records to be inspected and audited shall include all records pertaining to
the furnishing of accommodations.
§ 3-14-8. Estimated assessment. [6-4-1991; 2016 Code]
§ 3-14-9. Interest. [6-4-1991; 2016 Code]
All delinquent taxes under this chapter shall bear interest at the rate of
one percent per month for every month or portion of a month in which
such taxes are delinquent. No interest shall be payable by the city on
overpayments of tax.
§ 3-14-10. Security required. [6-4-1991; 2016 Code]
produces a receipt from the city treasurer that he or she has been paid,
or a certificate stating that no amount is due.
(C) Any person that does not withhold a portion of the purchase price as
required by subsection (B) of this section shall be personally liable for
payment of the tax due to the extent of the price of the business or
assets purchased, as valued in money.
(A) If any hotelkeeper fails to file a return as required by this chapter, the
city treasurer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross
receipts received by such hotelkeeper. Such estimate shall be made for
the period for which such hotelkeeper failed to file a return and shall be
based upon any relevant information available to the city treasurer. On
the basis of this estimate, the city treasurer shall compute the amount
of tax required to be paid to the city.
(B) No refund or modification of the payment determined may be granted
until the hotelkeeper files a correct room tax return and permits the city
treasurer or his or her designee to inspect and audit his or her financial
records.
(A) No person who has been convicted of two or more violations of the
provisions of this chapter shall be issued a permit under section 3-14-5
unless such person deposits security with the city clerk. Such security
shall be to ensure the future payment of the tax imposed by this
chapter.
(B) The amount of security to be deposited shall be equal to the amount of
taxes due for the preceding calendar year, or $1,000.00, whichever is
greater.
§ 3-14-6 MONROE CODE § 3-14-10
1-1:122
§ 3-14-11. Records. [6-4-1991; 2016 Code]
Every person liable for the tax imposed by this chapter shall keep, or cause
to be kept:
§ 3-14-12. Confidentiality. [6-4-1991; 2016 Code]
§ 3-14-13. Late fees and penalties. [6-4-1991; 2016 Code]
(C) If the person becomes delinquent in the payment of the taxes imposed
by this chapter, the city treasurer may, upon 10 days' notice to such
person, recover the taxes, interest and penalties from the security
placed with the city clerk.
(D) No interest shall be paid by the city to any person for the deposit of
such security.
(E) If the city treasurer must recover the amount of taxes due from the
security, and the amount of security is inadequate to cover the amount
due, the person's permit may be revoked under the procedures set forth
in chapter 5 of title 3 of this code.
(A) Copies of all sales tax reports filed with the state of Wisconsin;
(B) All documentation necessary to substantiate the figures set forth in
such sales tax reports;
(C) All records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers necessary to
support the room tax return required under this chapter.
(A) All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to
such returns, on file with the city treasurer, shall be confidential. The
city treasurer may only disclose the contents of such documents to the
following:
(1) The person who filed the return, his or her authorized agents,
successors and assigns.
(2) Persons using the information in the discharge of the duties of their
office or in the discharge of duties imposed on them by law.
(3) Any person designated by order of court.
(B) No person designated under subsections (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this
section shall disclose any information received under such subsection,
other than to another person designated under one of such subsections.
(A) Any person who fails to comply with a request to inspect and audit the
person's financial records under section 3-14-7 of this chapter shall
forfeit five percent of the tax determined to be due under this chapter.
(B) Any hotelkeeper who fails to pay the tax due for the previous year shall
pay a forfeiture of 25 percent of the amount of room tax due, or
§ 3-14-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-14-13
1-1:123
Chapter 3-15
ELECTRONIC ALARMS
§ 3-15-1. Declaration of purpose. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the installation and use of
electronic fire, intrusion and holdup alarms. A primary goal to reduce
preventable or avoidable false alarms relayed to the police and fire
departments is needed to insure efficient use of the city resources and
effective response to requests for emergency aid. It is further intended
that persons who cause unnecessary false alarms should bear costs of
emergency services response. This chapter is further intended to encourage
the installation and maintenance of reliable alarm systems which are an
effective means of early detection of criminal activity or possible property
loss thereby increasing the present level of protection to persons and
property and to provide emergency services with specific information
before the alarm to provide a more safe and effective response to such
alarm.
§ 3-15-2. Definitions. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
ALARM BUSINESS — Means any person engaged in the activity of altering,
installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling or servicing
alarm systems with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either direct or
indirect.
ALARM SUBSCRIBER — Means any person who has an alarm system
installed or maintained on his or her premises, including but not limited
to any person who buys, leases or otherwise obtains an alarm system and
contracts or hires an alarm business to monitor, maintain or service the
alarm system.
ALARM SYSTEM — Means an assembly of equipment or devices which
receives electrical energy and is arranged to signal a hazard or intruder
requiring urgent attention and to which the police department or fire
$5,000.00, whichever is less. For purposes of this subsection, the
amount of tax due is that amount determined under section 3-14-3 or
3-14-8 of this chapter.
(C) In addition to those penalties set forth in subsections (A) and (B) of this
section, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a Class 3 forfeiture.
(D) In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter, any person
who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to suspension
or revocation of all permits held under this chapter. The procedure for
suspension or revocation of such permits shall be as set out in chapter 5
of title 3 of this code.
§ 3-14-13 MONROE CODE § 3-15-2
1-1:124
department is expected to respond, including but not limited to automatic
holdup alarm systems, burglar alarm systems, manual holdup alarm
systems, fire alarms, humidity alarms, temperature alarms and pressure
alarms.
ANNUNCIATOR — Means the instrumentation of an alarm console at the
receiving terminal of a signal line through which both visual or audible
signals may show when an alarm device at a location has been activated,
malfunctions or otherwise indicates line activity.
ANSWERING SERVICE — Means a telephone or direct line answering
service which receives emergency signals on a continuous basis from alarm
systems and immediately relays the message by like voice to the
appropriate emergency service.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — Means an alarm system which
automatically sends a signal over the telephone lines indicating an
emergency situation to which emergency police department or fire
department services are expected to respond.
AUTOMATIC HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM — Means an alarm system in which
the signal transmission is initiated by the alarm system upon detection of
certain actions or movements of a person robbing or attempting to rob the
premises.
BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM — Means an alarm system which signals the
entry into the area protected by the system.
CALENDAR YEAR — Means January 1 through December 31 inclusive.
CENTRAL STATION — Means an office to which remote alarm and
supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the
circuits.
FALSE ALARM — Means activation of an alarm system by mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, negligence of the owner or
lessee of the alarm system, or by an undetermined cause. A false alarm
includes the testing of the alarm system without prior notice to the police
department and fire department of the testing. A false alarm does not
include activation of the alarm system by tornado or severe weather storm.
FIRE ALARM — Means an alarm system designed to signal fire or smoke
in the protected area which transmits an emergency signal to the fire
department or police department for response.
HUMIDITY ALARM — Means an alarm system which activates the
emergency signal due to a change in humidity in the protected area.
INTERCONNECT — Means to connect an alarm system to a voice grade
telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that uses a
standard telephone and telephone line to transmit an emergency message
upon activation of the alarm system.
MANUAL HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM — Means an alarm system in which
the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the alarm user
indicating a crime is in progress.
§ 3-15-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-15-2
1-1:125
PERSON — Means any natural person, partnership, association and body
politic and corporate.
PRESSURE ALARM — Means an alarm system in which the emergency
signal is activated due to a change or drop in pressure, such as the drop in
water pressure in a sprinkler system when activated.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE — Means a telephone line leading directly into
the emergency services dispatch center for handling emergency calls on a
person-to-person basis and which is identified as such by a specific number
included among the emergency numbers listed in the telephone directory or
numbers in sequence therewith.
PROPRIETY ALARM SYSTEM — Means an alarm system which signals
to persons on the premises rather than to the police department, fire
department or other outside emergency services.
SUPERVISORY ALARM — Means an alarm which notifies the police
department or fire department of a mechanical problem on the premises
and which requires action from the police department or fire department in
addition to contacting a responsible person from a list of persons provided
by the alarm subscriber.
TEMPERATURE ALARM — Means an alarm system designed to send an
emergency signal activated by a change in temperature.
§ 3-15-3. Unregulated alarms. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
§ 3-15-4. Approved alarms. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
A central alarm which is received at a central station or answering service
which then relates a message by direct live voice contact to the appropriate
emergency service may be connected upon approval of an application and
issuance of a permit.
§ 3-15-5. Prohibited alarms. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
§ 3-15-6. Testing. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
(A) This chapter shall not apply to the use of propriety alarm systems.
(B) This chapter shall not apply to the use of motor vehicle alarms unless
connected to another alarm system other than a propriety alarm
system.
(A) No person shall interconnect any direct dialing alarm or automatic
dialing device to a police department or fire department primary trunk
line.
(B) Residential property alarms shall not interconnect to the police
department or fire department panel.
(A) No alarm business or alarm system designed to transmit emergency
messages to the police department or fire department shall be tested or
§ 3-15-2 MONROE CODE § 3-15-6
1-1:126
§ 3-15-7. Notification. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
When the service provided by an alarm business to its subscribers is
disrupted for any reason, the alarm business shall immediately notify each
of its subscribers by telephone that protection is no longer being provided
unless otherwise previously instructed in writing by a subscriber.
§ 3-15-8. Permits, fees, application. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
demonstrated without prior notification and approval of the police
dispatcher. The fire department and police department may advise
alarm users or subscribers on proper test procedure.
(B) No alarm system relayed through intermediate services to the police or
fire departments may be tested or demonstrated without prior
notification and approval of the police chief or fire chief as appropriate.
The police department or fire department may inspect or test on-site
alarm systems authorized under this chapter.
(C) Alarm systems shall be in compliance with all written response policies
of the police department and fire department.
(A) A permit is required before any person installs or maintains, or permits
to be installed or maintained, any regulated alarm device as defined in
this chapter on any property in the city.
(B) The city clerk shall be the permit issuing authority and may grant a
permit to any applicant complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(C) An application for a permit shall be approved by the fire chief, police
chief or both as may be appropriate under the circumstances. The fire
chief or police chief or both shall make their recommendation to the city
clerk which shall serve as the basis for approval or denial of the
application for the permit.
(D) Failure to obtain a permit before the installation of an alarm system
shall be a violation of this chapter and subjects the violator to the
forfeiture provisions of this chapter.
(E) Alarm permits shall be presented on demand to any police officer, fire
chief or assistant fire chief or fire inspector.
(F) A person who obtains a permit to install or maintain an alarm device or
system at a specified location and desires to move the devices to protect
a different location or changes the type of system, shall notify the fire
chief and police chief before relocating the system or installing new
equipment at an existing location. A new permit is not required for the
relocation or installation of new equipment at an existing location so
long as the fire chief and police chief have been notified before the
relocation of existing equipment or installation of new equipment on an
existing site.
§ 3-15-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-15-8
1-1:127
§ 3-15-9. Confidentiality and permit distribution. [3-1-1994; 2016
Code]
(G) Any person who installs or maintains multiple alarm systems to protect
multiple locations shall obtain a permit for each address. A separate
permit is not required for multiple alarm systems at one location even if
the multiple alarms protect multiple areas at that single address.
(H) A permit fee set by resolution of the council shall be paid by the
applicant before the issuance of a permit by the city clerk.
(I) The alarm user permit application shall contain the following
information:
(1) Name, address, phone number and date of birth of the applicant.
(2) Location of the alarm in the building or area protected where the
alarm is to be installed.
(3) The exact location where the alarm is to be installed. In the event of
alarms located outside the city limits, this would include the fire
number and the distance and direction from the nearest
intersecting roadway.
(4) A description of the use of the protected property.
(5) The type of alarm or alarms to be installed.
(6) The name, address and phone numbers of two persons in addition
to the user who can be reached in a reasonable amount of time and
who are authorized by the alarm user to respond upon request of
emergency services.
(7) The approximate date when the alarm device will be installed and
operational, and who will install and service the alarm.
(8) The name, mailing address, telephone number and a description of
the type of service provided by an answering service or alarm
business, if any, who will monitor the alarm and relay emergency
messages to the police department or fire department.
(J) The alarm user or subscriber shall notify the police department or fire
department in writing of any change in any of the information required
under subsection (J) of this section within five days of such change.
(A) All information provided on the permit application shall remain
confidential and shall be used solely by emergency services personnel,
and only in the performance of their duties.
(B) Permits shall be issued by the city clerk upon payment of fees and
approval of the permit application of the fire chief or police or both as
necessary.
§ 3-15-8 MONROE CODE § 3-15-9
1-1:128
§ 3-15-10. Responsibility and liability. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
§ 3-15-11. Fees for answering alarms. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
§ 3-15-12. Revocation of permits. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
(C) No person shall release information contained on the permit application
without the prior written consent of the fire chief or police chief and the
permit holder.
(A) For each alarm activation, the permit holder or his or her agent shall
respond to the scene of the alarm when requested by emergency
services personnel. Such response shall be prompt to reduce the time
emergency personnel are kept from other duties.
(B) Alarms shall be maintained by permit holders so as not to cause false
alarms.
(C) All other parts of each system are to be maintained by the alarm user,
and any malfunction of those parts causing a false alarm will be
included as a false alarm for the purposes of assessment or revocation.
(A) Each false alarm requires response of public safety personnel, involves
unnecessary expense to the city, increases the risk of injury to persons
or damage to property and dilutes the overall public safety protection to
the city. Such false alarms constitute a nuisance and must be abated.
(B) No person shall intentionally cause the activation of a burglar or fire
alarm knowing that no criminal activity, fire or other emergency exists
on or near the premises.
(C) Any person owning or maintaining an alarm at one or more addresses
shall pay a fee for false alarms to which the police department or fire
department respond pursuant to a fee schedule adopted by resolution
of the council. A separate account at each address shall be kept for false
alarms on criminal activity and false alarms for fires or other
emergencies.
(D) On default of fee payment for false alarms, the amount due may be
placed on the tax roll as a special charge under section 66.0627 of the
Wisconsin statutes. The fees imposed by this section are in addition to
any penalties or revocation proceedings which may be imposed under
the Wisconsin statutes or this code.
(A) A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked upon hearing
by the public safety committee of the city. Notice setting forth the time,
place and nature of the hearing shall be sent by mail or delivered to the
permittee at the address shown on the permit application not less than
seven days before the hearing.
(B) A permit may be revoked for any of the following reasons:
§ 3-15-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 3-15-12
1-1:129
§ 3-15-13. Penalty. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction
be subject to a Class 3 forfeiture.
Title 4, Building Regulations
Chapter 4-1
BUILDING CODE
(1) The application for a permit contains false statement of a material
fact;
(2) A licensee has repeatedly failed to comply with the provisions of
this chapter;
(3) An alarm system repeatedly actuates false alarms; or
(4) The actions of the permit holder constitute a hazard to public safety
personnel or the public.
(C) A permit holder may appeal the decision of the public safety committee
by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 10 days
after the public safety committee decision. Such appeal shall be heard
by the council within 30 days after the filing of the appeal. An appeal
timely taken suspends the revocation until the council gives its
decision. The city clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of
the hearing to the appellant by certified mail or personal delivery not
less than seven days before the hearing.
(D) Permit holders shall be notified in writing of any revocation and the
effective date of the revocation. If the permit holder subscribes through
an answering service or monitoring service, the service shall also be
notified in writing by the city of the revocation of the permit.
(E) An alarm shall not be disconnected until the alarm user or subscriber
has been served with written notice of his or her permit revocation. The
costs for the alarm disconnection shall be paid by the alarm user or
subscriber.
(F) Any alarm permit which has been revoked may be reinstated upon a
satisfactory showing that the cause of the revocation has been
eliminated and upon completion of a permit application and payment of
the permit fee.
(G) Any provision of this chapter for revocation of an alarm user's permit
that would conflict with the federal bank protection act of 1968 and any
subsequent amendment shall not apply to those permit holders.
§ 3-15-12 MONROE CODE § 4-1-1
1-1:130
§ 4-1-1. Title. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
This chapter shall be known as the BUILDING CODE OF THE CITY OF
MONROE and shall be cited as such.
§ 4-1-2. Purpose. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
This chapter provides certain minimum requirements for safe and stable
design methods and construction and uses of materials, for electrical
installations, for plumbing installations and for heating, ventilating and air
conditioning installations in buildings or structures constructed, enlarged,
altered, repaired, moved, converted to other uses or demolished, and to
regulate the equipment, maintenance, use and occupancy of all buildings or
structures. The provisions of this code shall supplement laws of the state of
Wisconsin and regulations of the Wisconsin administrative code.
§ 4-1-3. Scope. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
No building, structure or premises shall be constructed, enlarged, altered,
repaired, demolished or removed, nor shall the equipment of a building
or structure or premises be constructed, installed, altered, repaired or
removed except in conformity with this chapter.
§ 4-1-4. Wisconsin administrative code adopted. [2-17-2015; 2016
Code]
The following chapters of the Wisconsin administrative code are hereby
adopted by reference, including amendments, additions and recodifications
thereto:
SPS 305 (Licenses, certifications and registrations)
SPS 316 (Electrical code)
SPS 320-325 (Uniform dwelling code)
SPS 361-366 (Wisconsin commercial building codes)
SPS 381-387 (Plumbing code)
§ 4-1-5. Change of use, maintenance. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
When the use of a building or structure is changed and the requirements
for the new use are more stringent than those for the previous use, then the
building or structure shall be made to comply with the new use as provided
in this chapter.
§ 4-1-6. Prohibitions. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, occupy or use a building or
structure, or part thereof, that has been constructed, enlarged, altered or
repaired in violation of this chapter.
§ 4-1-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-1-7
1-1:131
§ 4-1-7. Permits required. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
No building or structure or any part thereof shall be constructed, enlarged,
altered, repaired, moved on to a site or demolished within the city, or
permanent building equipment installed unless a permit therefor shall first
be obtained from the building inspector by the owner or the owner's agent.
No building permit is required for work to be performed which is minor
repair or minor maintenance of a building or structure. Work consisting only
of maintenance or repair the cost of materials for which is less than $1,000
and which does not change the occupancy, area, structural strength, fire
protection, exits, lights, sanitation or ventilation of a building or structure
shall be presumed to be minor repair or minor maintenance. Any person
desiring a permit required by this chapter, shall file an application in writing
on a form to be furnished by the building inspector for that purpose. The
application shall be made by the owner, the owner's agent, or the architect,
engineer or builder employed in connection with the proposed work.
§ 4-1-8. Plan examination. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
The building inspector shall conduct plan examinations for buildings and
structures, except state owned buildings and structures, if the plans are for:
(A) Format of plans and specifications. Plans and specifications shall be
submitted both in printed form and electronically in portable document
format [PDF]. Three complete printed sets of identical plans and
specifications shall be submitted. The building inspector may waive the
requirement that plans and specifications be submitted electronically in
PDF if the applicant demonstrates that submission electronically is not
reasonably possible.
(B) Time limit for issuance of permit. Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, upon submission of all material required by this section, the
building inspector shall not be required to issue the requested permit
before the expiration of the following periods:
(1) Normal processing. Five days, exclusive of weekends and legal
holidays.
(2) Expedited processing. Two days, exclusive of weekends and legal
holidays, if the applicant has paid the required fee for expedited
processing. The fee for expedited processing shall be the normal
permit fee multiplied by 1.5.
(A) A new building or structure containing less than 50,000 cubic feet of
total volume;
(B) An addition to a building or structure where the area of the addition
results in the entire building or structure containing less than 50,000
cubic feet of total volume;
(C) An addition to a building or structure containing no more than 2,500
square feet of total floor area and no more than one floor level, provided
§ 4-1-7 MONROE CODE § 4-1-8
1-1:132
§ 4-1-9. Permits. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
After the application, plans and specifications filed by an applicant for
a permit have been checked by the building inspector and have been
found to be in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, the zoning
regulations of the city and all other applicable laws, the building inspector
shall upon payment of the required fee stamp or endorse in writing on
the plans and specifications his or her approval and issue a permit for the
construction.
§ 4-1-10. Term of permit. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
the largest roof span does not exceed 18 feet and the exterior wall
height does not exceed 12 feet; or
(D) An alteration of a space involving less than 100,000 cubic feet of total
volume;
(A) Approved plans and specifications. One set of approved plans and
specifications shall be retained by the building inspector and two sets of
approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant.
One of the applicant's sets of approved plans and specifications shall be
kept on the site of the work at all times during which the work is in
progress and shall be open to inspection by authorized inspectors.
(B) Posting of permit card. The building inspector shall issue a permit card
properly filled out with every permit issued. The applicant shall post the
permit card in a conspicuous place on the building, structure or
premises where the work is being done, unobstructed from the public
view.
(C) Written consent required for change. Approved plans and specifications
shall not be changed in any respect which may involve any provision of
this chapter except with the written consent of the building inspector.
(D) Validity. The issuance of a permit shall not prevent the building
inspector from requiring the correction of errors in the plans and
specifications nor from ordering a stop to work being carried on in
violation of this chapter or applicable law.
(E) Staking. The lot, block or tract and the location of the buildings or
structures thereon shall be staked out on the ground before
construction is commenced.
(F) Access to construction site. The building inspector shall, as a condition
of the issuance of a permit required by this chapter, have the right to
enter the premises for which said permit is issued at any reasonable
time during the work and until final inspection and approval thereof has
been given, to inspect said premises and its compliance with all
regulations relating to the construction, repair, use, and location of
buildings or structures.
§ 4-1-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-1-10
1-1:133
§ 4-1-11. Failure to obtain permit. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
§ 4-1-12. Inspections. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
Buildings and structures and the lot or premises on which they are placed
shall be inspected by the building inspector or his or her designee at such
time and in such manner as may be necessary to secure compliance with
the laws, rules, orders and approved plans applicable thereto.
(A) Residential. The term of permit for uniform one-and two-family
dwellings and manufactured buildings or dwellings shall be two years.
(B) Other: Every permit not covered under subsection (A) of this section
shall expire if the work authorized by the permit is not commenced
within 12 months from the date of the permit. If any work in progress is
suspended or abandoned for 12 months, the permit shall expire
regardless of when the work was initially commenced. Before the work
can be resumed, a new permit shall be obtained. [Amended
11-18-2019]
(A) Double fees. In addition to any other penalty for a violation of this
chapter, a person who proceeds with work for which a permit is
required under this chapter before obtaining a permit shall pay twice
the fee otherwise required by this chapter. The payment of a double fee
shall not relieve any person from any of the requirements of this
chapter.
(B) Duty of police officers. It shall be the duty of all police officers to report
at once to the building inspector any work for which a permit is
required by this chapter and for which the required permit has
apparently not been obtained.
(A) Progress inspections. The following progress inspections are the
minimum required at each permitted project unless waived by the
building inspector:
(1) Erosion control inspection. Erosion control inspections shall be
performed concurrently with all other required construction
inspections.
(2) Foundation footing and excavation inspection. The excavation for
the foundation shall be inspected after the placement of any forms
or required reinforcement and before the placement of the
permanent foundation material.
(3) Foundation reinforcement inspection. The placement of
reinforcement shall be inspected where the reinforcement is
required for code compliance.
(4) Foundation inspection. The foundation shall be inspected after
completion. Where damp proofing, exterior insulation or drain tile
§ 4-1-10 MONROE CODE § 4-1-12
1-1:134
§ 4-1-13. Certificate of occupancy. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
are required for code compliance, the foundation shall be inspected
before backfilling.
(5) Rough inspection. A rough inspection shall be performed for each
of the following construction categories after the rough work is
completed but before it is concealed:
A) General construction, including framing.
B) Electrical.
C) Plumbing.
D) Heating, ventilating and air conditioning.
(6) Insulation inspection. An inspection shall be made of the insulation
and vapor retarders after they are installed but before they are
concealed.
(B) Final inspection. All buildings, structures or additions and alterations
thereto shall have final inspection upon completion and before
occupancy, except as provided in this chapter. If, on the final inspection
no violation of this or any other code, law or order is found, the fact
shall be so certified to by the zoning administrator and building
inspector, who shall thereupon issue a certificate of occupancy, stating
the purpose for which the building is to be used. No building or part
thereof shall be occupied until such final inspection is conducted and
certificate has been issued except with the written consent of the
building inspector, nor shall any building be occupied in any manner
which conflicts with the conditions set forth in the certificate of
occupancy. The certificate of occupancy may be waived for accessory
buildings and structures, small additions, minor alterations or those
projects where no zoning code requirements are affected.
(C) Inspection requests. Inspection requests under this chapter shall be
made in writing or orally by the permit holder or his or her authorized
agent when the work is ready. The building inspector or his or her
designee, shall perform the requested inspection by the end of the
second business day following the day of notification, not including
Saturday, Sunday or legal holidays, and upon completion of such
inspection shall either approve that portion of the construction as
completed or shall notify the permit holder or his or her agent that the
same fails to comply with the code and the nature of any deficiency.
Construction may proceed if the inspection has not taken place within
the required time span.
(D) Electrical inspections in public buildings and places. Under section SPS
316.920(2) of the Wisconsin administrative code, the city shall exercise
jurisdiction over the inspection of electrical construction in public
buildings and places of employment.
§ 4-1-12 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-1-13
1-1:135
§ 4-1-14. Powers and duties of building inspector. [2-17-2015; 2016
Code]
(A) New construction. It shall be unlawful for an owner to use or permit the
use of any building or structure or part thereof constructed, enlarged,
altered, repaired, or moved, until a certificate of occupancy shall have
been issued by the building inspector. Such certificate shall show that
such building or structure, or part thereof, and the proposed use
thereof are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and any
other regulations of the city.
(B) Change of use. The use or occupancy of any building or structure shall
not be changed until a certificate of occupancy permitting the new use
or occupancy is issued by the building inspector when the new
occupancy is such as to require alterations or repairs of the building or
structure, as specified in this chapter. No such certificate of occupancy
shall be issued unless the building or structure shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter and any other codes of the city governing
the use and occupancy of buildings or structures.
(A) Enforcement. The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed
to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Right of entry. The building inspector or his or her authorized
representative may enter any building or structure during reasonable
hours to perform his or her duties and responsibilities under this
chapter or to prevent violations of this chapter, upon presentation of
proper credentials.
(C) Work stoppage. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, or in an unsafe, unworkmanlike or dangerous
manner, the building inspector may order the work stopped by notice in
writing served on any person engaged in the doing or causing such
work to be done, and any such person shall immediately stop such work
until authorized by the building inspector to recommence and proceed
with the work.
(D) Unlawful use of building or structure. Whenever any building or
structure or portion thereof is being used or occupied contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, the building inspector shall order such use or
occupancy discontinued, and the building or structure or portion
thereof vacated, by notice served on any person using or causing such
use or occupancy to be continued, and such person shall vacate such
building or structure or portion thereof within 10 days after receipt of
such notice, or make the building or structure or portion thereof comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
(E) Condemnation of building or structure. Any building or structure or
portion thereof which violates the provisions of this chapter, due to
removal, decay, deterioration of any appliance, device or requirement
originally required by this chapter, or which has become damaged by
§ 4-1-13 MONROE CODE § 4-1-14
1-1:136
§ 4-1-15. Zoning restrictions. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
The restrictions of the zoning regulations of this code with respect to the
location of trade and industries, the use and occupancy of buildings or
structures, the height and bulk of buildings or structures, and the areas
of yards, courts and other open spaces, shall not be considered modified
by any provisions of this chapter, and such restrictions shall be controlling
except insofar as this chapter imposes greater restrictions by reason of the
type of construction used, in which case the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
§ 4-1-16. Street encroachments. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
the elements or fire to an extent of 50 percent of its assessed valuation
may be condemned by the building inspector.
(F) Exposure of structural frame. The building inspector may order
portions of the structural frame of a building or structure to be exposed
for inspection when in his or her opinion they are in an unsafe
condition.
(G) Notice. The building inspector shall serve notice in writing on the
owner, reputed owner or person in charge of any building or structure
found to be unsafe, setting forth what must be done to make such
building or structure safe.
(H) Correction of deficiencies. The person receiving such notice shall
commence work within 48 hours to make the changes, repairs or
alterations set out in such notice and diligently proceed with such work
or demolish the building or structure. No such building or structure
shall be occupied or used for any purpose after the building inspector
serves written notice of its unsafe and dangerous condition until the
instructions of the building inspector have been complied with.
(I) Failure to comply. If at the expiration of the time as set forth in the first
notice, the instructions as stated have not been complied with, a second
notice shall be served personally upon the owner, his or her agent or the
person in possession, charge or control of such building or structure or
part thereof; stating such precautionary measures as may be necessary
or advisable to place such building or structure or part thereof in a safe
condition. Should the necessary changes not be made within 30 days
after service of such second notice, the building inspector shall begin
an appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity to restrain,
correct or remove such violations and compel compliance. In case of
emergency or where such second notice has not been complied with,
the building inspector may proceed with the work specified in such
notice, and cause the cost of same to be paid and levied as a lien against
the property.
§ 4-1-14 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-1-16
1-1:137
(A) General. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no part of a
building or structure erected or enlarged shall project beyond a street
line or a building or structure line.
(B) Projections removable. A part of a building or structure permitted to
project beyond a street line or building or structure line shall be so
constructed that its removal may be made without causing the building
or structure to become structurally unsafe.
(C) Structural support. No part of a building or structure or of an
enlargement of a building or structure that is necessary for structural
safety shall project beyond the property line or building or structure
line, but this shall not prohibit the projection of the footings of street
walls beyond the street line or beyond the building or structure line
within the street line, to the extent of not more than 12 inches.
(D) Permissible projections. Under the conditions and limitations
prescribed in this section the following projections shall be permissible:
(1) No person shall erect, repair or maintain any awning over any
sidewalk or street within the city, contrary to any of the provisions
of this section. No person shall erect or repair any awning over the
sidewalk or street without first obtaining a permit from the building
inspector.
(2) Any awning framework shall be at least 7 1/2 feet in height, above
the highest point of the walk. The lowest point of flap or fringe of
such awning shall at no point be less than 7 feet above the sidewalk
immediately beneath it, and shall not extend closer than two feet
from the inner curb line. Wooden awnings shall not be installed in
the fire district, except that "Swiss type" or similar awnings may be
permitted by the building inspector.
(3) Marquees at entrances to buildings or structures may extend
beyond the building or structure line and across the sidewalk to
within two feet of the curb line, provided that they are not less than
10 feet above the curb level at all points, and, within the fire limits,
are constructed of incombustible materials. They shall be securely
supported from the building or structure, and shall be properly
drained.
(4) Cornice moldings, belt courses, lintels, sills, architraves, pediments
and similar projections of a decorative character may extend
beyond the building or structure line not more than four inches
when they are 10 feet or more above curb level. The only exception
to the above shall be for "Swiss type" or similar fronts which shall
not extend beyond the building or structure line more than 30
inches.
(5) Entrance doors on streets and alleys shall be hung so as not to
project, when fully opened, beyond the building or structure line
without a permit authorized by the board of public works.
§ 4-1-16 MONROE CODE § 4-1-16
1-1:138
§ 4-1-17. Rainwater leaders. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
It shall be unlawful to allow downspouts or rainwater leaders from roof
gutters to spill the water in such manner as to overflow the adjacent
property. Anyone causing or allowing such condition to exist shall, upon
notice in writing, cause such condition to be corrected within 10 days after
receiving such notice.
§ 4-1-18. Design and workmanship. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
(6) Fire escapes and balconies to fire towers or other required exits,
constructed of steel or other incombustible material, when
required, shall not project beyond the property line on streets,
alleys and public grounds, including municipal parking areas
unless impractical to do otherwise, and with permission of board of
public works.
(7) Areas projecting beyond the building or structure line which are to
be entirely below the sidewalk level may be installed only by
permission from the board of public works.
(E) Limitations. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize a
projection beyond the property line or building or structure line that is
prohibited by the zoning regulations of this code or by any other law.
(F) Alterations. No change or enlargement shall be made to a part of a
building or structure projecting beyond the property line except in
conformity with the provisions of this section for new construction.
(G) Encroachments. Parts of buildings or structures which project beyond
the property line or building or structure at the time this chapter
becomes law may be maintained as constructed until their removal is
directed by the city.
(A) Generally accepted good practice required. Design of structural
members and workmanship in the fabrication and preparation of
materials, and their installation, shall conform to generally accepted
good practice. This chapter shall be controlling, but shall not suspend
or supersede other requirements of good practice which shall be
regarded as supplementing the requirements of this chapter. Except as
may be otherwise provided in law or this chapter, the standards of
federal or state agencies, national technical organizations, or fire
underwriters shall be considered generally accepted good practice.
(B) Working stresses. All parts of buildings and structures, dwellings and
accessory buildings or structures shall be so designed that the safe
stresses of the materials used are not exceeded.
(C) Details and connections. All members shall be so framed, tied and
braced as to develop the strength and rigidity necessary for the purpose
for which they may be used. No member shall be stressed beyond the
strength of its details and connections.
§ 4-1-16 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-1-19
1-1:139
§ 4-1-19. Roofed passageways. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
Whenever in the opinion of the building inspector it is necessary for the
protection of the public, the owner or contractor shall erect a roofed
passageway in front of every building or structure to be constructed, altered
or repaired on or near the lot line of any street. Such passageway shall
extend over the sidewalk for a distance of not less than six feet and shall
have a clearance of seven feet, and shall be approved by the building
inspector.
§ 4-1-20. Repairs to buildings or structures; damaged buildings or
structures. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
§ 4-1-21. Unsafe buildings or structures. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
(A) Every building or structure shall be kept in good repair to maintain the
conditions of safety and habitability prescribed by this chapter, or the
housing and property maintenance code.
(B) Every building or structure that may be damaged by fire or otherwise
shall be examined by the building inspector before a permit is issued to
repair or replace the same, and such parts of said building or structure
as in his or her opinion are unsafe or damaged to an extent that will
impair the safety of the reconstructed building or structure, shall be
taken down.
(A) A building or structure is or becomes dangerous or unsafe shall, unless
made safe and secure, be taken down and removed.
(B) A building or structure declared structurally unsafe by the building
inspector may be restored to safe condition; provided, that if the cost of
reconstruction or restoration is greater than 50 percent of the assessed
valuation of the building or structure exclusive of foundations, such
building or structure, exclusive of foundations, if reconstructed or
restored, shall be made to conform with respect to materials and type of
construction to the requirements for construction of new buildings and
structures.
(C) Upon receipt of information that a building or structure or part thereof
is dangerous to life, health or adjoining property, by reason of bad
conditions, defective construction, overloaded floors, decay, lack of
guards against fire, general dilapidation or other cause, the building
inspector shall make or cause to be made an inspection and if it is found
that an unsafe condition exists, he or she shall serve or cause to be
served on the owner or some one of the owners, executors,
administrators, agents or lessees or other persons who may have a
vested or contingent interest in the same a written notice containing a
description of the building or structure found to be unsafe, a statement
of particulars in which the building or structure is unsafe, and an order
requiring the same to be made safe and secure or removed as in the
judgment of the building inspector may be necessary; and he or she
§ 4-1-19 MONROE CODE § 4-1-21
1-1:140
§ 4-1-22. Demolition or razing of buildings and structures.
[2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
shall affix a notice of such order by placing a card with the inscription
"This building cannot be used for human habitation, occupancy or use"
in a conspicuous place on the outside wall of the building or structure,
and no person shall remove or deface such notice. The owner or person
upon whom such notice was served shall thereupon immediately cause
the same to be made safe or to be removed, as ordered; and if any
such building or structure is used for any purpose requiring a license,
the building inspector may cause such license to be revoked until the
building or structure is made safe to comply with the requirements of
this chapter.
(D) If the person served with a notice or order to remove or repair an
unsafe building or structure shall fail, within a reasonable time, to
comply with the requirements thereof, or where the public safety
requires immediate action, the building inspector may enter upon the
premises, with such assistance as may be necessary, and cause the
building or structure to be made safe or to be removed, and the cost of
such work may be recovered by the city in an action against the owner
or tenant or cause the same to be paid and levied as a lien against the
property.
(A) Demolition permit required.
(1) No person, or his or her agent or servant, shall demolish or cause to
be demolished any building, structure or part thereof without first
obtaining a permit from the building inspector.
(2) Whenever a building or structure shall be demolished, the roof and
each upper story shall be taken down before the demolition of the
next lower story is begun, and no material shall be placed in such
manner as to overload any part of such building or structure in the
course of demolition, and all brick, stone, timber and structural
parts of each story shall be lowered to the ground immediately
upon displacement, and all dry mortar, mortar, lime, brick dust or
other flying material shall, before and during removal, be
dampened sufficiently to prevent it from floating or being blown
into the street or on adjoining property and all sidewalks shall be
protected by fences and scaffolds as required by this chapter for
the protection of sidewalks during the erection of buildings or
structures.
(3) The building site of any building or structure that has been
demolished shall be properly cleared of all debris and rubbish and
shall be properly graded and leveled off to conform with the
adjoining grade of the neighborhood, or fenced in with one inch by
six inch solid board fence post less than six feet in height.
§ 4-1-21 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-1-22
1-1:141
§ 4-1-23. Appeal from building inspector order. [2-17-2015; 2016
Code]
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building inspector may appeal the
decision to the council. A two-thirds vote of the alderpersons present shall
be necessary to reverse the decision of the building inspector.
§ 4-1-24. Fees. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
Fees for plan examination and for issuance of any permit required by this
chapter shall be set by resolution of the council. All city departments and
agencies shall be exempt from the payment of fees required by this chapter.
Notwithstanding the forgoing fees required by this chapter shall be paid for
plan examination and for issuance of any permit for work performed by the
housing authority, water utility, storm water utility or wastewater treatment
plant.
§ 4-1-25. Penalty. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
Any person who violates any part of this chapter shall upon conviction be
subject to a Class 2 forfeiture. A separate offense exists for each calendar
day during which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 4-2
HOUSING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 4-2-1. Title. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
This chapter shall be known as the HOUSING AND PROPERTY
MAINTENANCE CODE OF THE CITY OF MONROE and shall be cited as
such.
§ 4-2-2. Purpose. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
This chapter is adopted to preserve and promote the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the people
of the city and environs. This includes, among others, physical, aesthetic,
spiritual and monetary values. It is recognized that residential or
nonresidential buildings, structures, yards or vacant areas and
combinations thereof which are or become so dilapidated, unsafe,
dangerous, unhygienic, overcrowded, inadequately maintained or lacking
in basic equipment or facilities, light, ventilation and heating, constitute
a menace to the health, safety and general welfare of the people. The
(B) Razing of buildings or structures. The provisions of subsection (2) of
section 66.0413 of the Wisconsin statutes are hereby adopted by
reference. The building inspector, chief of the fire department and city
attorney are hereby designated as the officers to carry out the
provisions hereof.
§ 4-1-22 MONROE CODE § 4-2-2
1-1:142
establishment and enforcement of minimum housing and property
maintenance standards is necessary to preserve and promote the private
and public interest.
§ 4-2-3. Definitions. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
APPROVED — Means approved by the building inspector under the
regulations of this chapter or approved by an authority designated by law
or this chapter.
ATTRACTIVE APPEARANCE — Means the exterior appearance of buildings,
structures, stairs, porches and similar appurtenances and the improvement,
planting and landscaping of yards and vacant areas. The determination
of "attractive" shall be under the generally accepted reasonable meaning
prevailing in the community of the term "attractive appearance" and shall
take into consideration the appearance of the surrounding specific locality
involved and the community as a whole.
BASEMENT — Means a story whose floor line is below grade at any exterior
entrance or exit and whose ceiling is not more than five feet above grade
at any such exterior entrance or exit. For single-family and two-family
detached dwellings a basement shall be designated as a story only when the
floor line is below grade for less than 50 percent of the perimeter of the
exterior wall or when the average ceiling height is more than five feet above
such grade.
BUILDING — Means any structure that is designed or used for sheltering
people, animals or plants, for storing property or for working, office,
parking, sales or display space, regardless of any contribution that the
structure makes to the production process in it; that in physical appearance
is annexed to that real property; that is covered by a roof or encloses space;
that is not readily moved or disassembled; and that is commonly known to
be a building because of its appearance and because of the materials of
which it is constructed. For the purposes of this chapter a "mobile home" is
a building.
CAPACITY IN PERSONS — Means when applied to a building the maximum
number of persons that can occupy such building, as determined by the
required floor space per person as established in the Wisconsin
administrative code.
DWELLING — Means a building or portion thereof designed or used
exclusively for human habitation, but not including hotels or motels.
DWELLING UNIT — Means one or more rooms in a dwelling which are
arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual
bathrooms and complete single kitchen facilities, permanently installed,
shall always be included with each dwelling unit. Under this chapter a
mobile home shall be considered a dwelling unit.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY — Means all of the real property of a lot or parcel
except for real property underlying a building.
§ 4-2-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-2-3
1-1:143
EXTERMINATION — Means the control or elimination of infestation by
eliminating harboring places and removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as food, and by poisoning, spraying, trapping,
fumigation by a licensed fumigator or any other effective elimination
procedure.
FAMILY — Means one or more persons occupying premises and living as
a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a
boarding house, lodging house or hotel.
GARBAGE — Means all kinds of organic refuse resulting from the
preparation of food, and all decayed or spoiled food products from any
source whatever.
GOOD WORKING CONDITION — Means capable of performing the task for
which it was designed and in the manner intended by this code.
HABITABLE ROOM — Means any room in a residential building which is
either a sleeping room or a living room.
IMPERVIOUS TO WATER — Means constructed of concrete, cement block,
terrazzo, brick tile or other material approved by the building inspector, and
having tight-fitting joints, and not having more than 4.5 percent absorption
by test.
INFESTATION — Means the sustained presence of household pests, vermin
or rodents.
INOPERATIVE VEHICLE — Means any vehicle which cannot be lawfully
operated on a public highway.
LIVING ROOM — Means a room used for sitting, dining or cooking
purposes, but shall not include a room designed or intended to be used
for laundry, workshop, furnace, play, bathroom, water closet or storage
purposes.
LODGING HOUSE — Means a residential building or portion thereof,
containing lodging rooms which accommodate five or more persons who
are not members of the keeper's family where lodging or meals, or both, or
lodging and kitchen privileges are provided for compensation.
LODGING ROOM — Means a room rented as sleeping and living quarters,
but without cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom,
including a room or rooms so rented in a single-family dwelling or dwelling
unit.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Means occupancy of a building in part for
residential use and in part for some other use not accessory thereto.
MOBILE HOME — Shall have the meaning set forth in section 5-2-1 of this
code.
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Means a vehicle which is built on
a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently
towable by a motor vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration
§ 4-2-3 MONROE CODE § 4-2-3
1-1:144
is required and is designed primarily as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that
are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of
being towed or carried, including model homes, are not mobile recreational
vehicles.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Means a vehicle, including a combination of two
or more vehicles, which is self-propelled, including, without limitation, a
commercial motor vehicle or a vehicle which is propelled by electric power.
OPERATOR — Means any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or
having possession thereof in which dwelling units or lodging rooms are
located or let.
PAVED OR GRAVELED SURFACE — Means a ground surface covered with
compacted gravel, poured concrete with or without decorative surface
materials, blacktop, pavers, or other asphaltic or rubber mixture which may
include sand or gravel as an ingredient and which creates a hard surface. A
graded natural surface or one covered with stone or gravel intended only as
a landscaping element shall not be considered a paved or graveled surface.
PLUMBING — Means all piping and equipment for supply, use or drainage
of liquid or gaseous material.
PROVIDED — Means furnished, supplied, paid for or under control of the
owner.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Means building which is arranged, designed,
used or intended to be used for residential occupancy or mixed occupancy
by one or more families or lodgers, and which includes the following types:
Single-family detached dwellings.
Two-family detached dwellings.
Multiple-family dwellings (including apartment hotels).
Lodging houses.
RUBBISH — Means all inorganic refuse matter such as tin or aluminum
cans, wire or metal, glass, china, crockery, paper, cloth, stone, earth, wood,
ashes and things of similar nature.
SEMITRAILER — Means a vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used
in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and
that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle, but does not
include a mobile home or a mobile recreational vehicle. A vehicle used with
a ready-mix motor truck to spread the load is considered a semitrailer.
SLEEPING ROOM — Means a room used for sleeping purposes.
SUPPLIED — Means paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control
of, the owner or operator.
TRAILER — Means a vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
property or passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by
a motor vehicle, but does not include a mobile home.
VEHICLE — Means every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including,
§ 4-2-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-2-3
1-1:145
without limitation, automobiles, trucks, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles,
trailers, farm tractors and implements or trailers designed to be pulled by
farm tractors.
§ 4-2-4. Administration and enforcement. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
(A) Housing and property maintenance administrator. The office of the
housing and property maintenance administrator is hereby created to
enforce this chapter. The building inspector shall exercise the powers
and responsibilities of the housing and property maintenance
administrator under this chapter.
(B) Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the housing
and property maintenance administrator or his or her authorized
representative may enter at reasonable times any building, structure or
premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by
this code.
(C) Duties. The duties of the housing and property maintenance
administrator shall be as follows:
(1) Provide and maintain a public information bureau relative to all
matters arising out of this chapter.
(2) Maintain permanent and current records of all matters arising out
of this chapter.
(3) Conduct a systematic inspection of buildings, structures and lands
to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter and take
such action as necessary to secure such compliance.
(4) Initiate, direct and review from time to time a study of the
provisions of this chapter and make recommendations to the mayor
and council.
(5) Coordinate such inspection and code compliance programs with
inspection or improvement programs of other neighborhood groups
whose purpose is neighborhood improvement.
(6) Whenever the housing and property maintenance administrator
determines that there has been or is a violation, or that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there have been or is a violation
of any provision of this code, he or she shall give notice of such
violation or alleged violation to the person or persons responsible.
Such notice shall:
A) Be in writing.
B) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification.
C) Specify the violations which exist and the remedial action
required.
§ 4-2-3 MONROE CODE § 4-2-4
1-1:146
§ 4-2-5. Minimum housing standards. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for basic
equipment, lighting, ventilation and electrical services for all residential
buildings and parts thereof and to obtain the public and private benefits
accruing from the provision of such services. A suitable environment for
safe and healthy living is encouraged by adequate water and sanitary
facilities, proper storage and disposal of garbage and other refuse, safe
means of egress, provision of light, air, heat and electrical service. No
person shall occupy as owner or let to another for occupancy any space
in a residential building to live, sleep, cook or eat, which does not comply
with applicable local, state and federal codes and with the following
requirements:
D) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires.
(7) Whenever the housing and property maintenance administrator
finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to
protect the public health or safety, he or she may, without notice or
hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency
and requiring that such action be taken as he or she considers
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other
provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately.
(D) Authority of police officers. Any sworn officer of the Monroe police
department shall have concurrent authority to enforce this chapter to
the same extent and subject to the same rules and procedures as the
housing and property maintenance administrator, provided however,
that no such officer shall delegate authority under this chapter to a
person who is not a sworn officer of the Monroe police department.
(A) Sanitary facilities requirements. Every dwelling unit shall contain a
kitchen sink, a flush water closet, a lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower all in good working condition and properly connected to hot and
cold water lines and to an approved water and sewer system. The flush
water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be contained within
a room or rooms so as to afford privacy to a person within said room.
Each lodging house shall provide at least one flush water closet,
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an
approved water and sewer system and in good working condition, for
each seven persons or fraction thereof residing in such lodging house,
including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use
of said facilities, except that the required number of bathtubs or
showers may be reduced by the zoning board of appeals for lodging
houses utilizing gang bathrooms containing multiple bathtubs or
showers. All such facilities shall be located on the floor occupied by
persons sharing such facilities and shall be accessible from a common
hall or passageway. Basement bathroom facilities shall not be
considered as fulfilling this requirement. Every lavatory basin and
bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times.
§ 4-2-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-2-5
1-1:147
(B) Water heating facilities. Every residential building shall have supplied
water heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in
safe and good working condition and have a minimum withdrawal
temperature capacity of 120 degrees Fahrenheit.
(1) Water heating units shall have a capacity equal to or greater than
the following:
Tank storage: 100 degrees
Fahrenheit rise/gallon per
hour
Tankless type:
100 degrees
Fahrenheit
rise/gallon per
minute
Units served
Number of
gallons
Heating
capacity
Gallons per
minute
1 20 20 2.75
2 30 30 5.00
3 40 35 7.75
4 50 40 10.00
5 60 45 12.75
6 70 50 15.00
7 80 55 17.75
8 90 65 20.00
9 100 70 22.75
10 110 80 25.00
11 120 95 27.75
(2) Every gas water heating unit shall be equipped with a pilot light
and automatic gas shutoff.
(3) No water heating unit shall be allowed in any sleeping room.
(4) No gas or oil fired water heating unit shall be allowed in a
bathroom, closet, under any stairway or in a confined space with
access only to above locations.
(5) All fuel burning heaters shall be connected to a vent to the exterior.
(C) Garbage and rubbish storage. The owner of every residential building
shall be responsible for supplying such building with garbage and
rubbish storage facilities as follows:
(1) Rubbish storage and disposal.
A) If stored outdoors, rubbish shall be stored in flytight,
rodentproof, nonflammable, reasonably waterproof box or
container.
§ 4-2-5 MONROE CODE § 4-2-5
1-1:148
B) If stored in the basement or cellar of a building, rubbish shall
be stored in nonflammable containers.
C) No loose rubbish is allowed.
(2) Garbage storage and disposal.
A) Garbage shall be disposed of in containers that conform to
specifications established by the board of public works or in a
garbage grinder that discharges into the sanitary sewer
system.
B) Garbage may be disposed of in outside storage containers
maintained and located so that no odors permeate any dwelling
units.
C) Each container shall be cleaned at least weekly.
D) No loose garbage is allowed.
(D) Exits. Every dwelling unit and lodging room shall have direct access to
at least two accessible unobstructed means of egress leading to safe
and open public right of way at ground level as required by state and
city codes.
(E) Windows, ventilation requirements. Every habitable room shall have
outside windows having a total area enclosed by the sash of at least 8
percent of the floor area of the room, but not less than 12 square feet.
The top of at least one such window shall be not less than 6 1/2 feet
above the floor, and at least 50 percent of the required window area
must open. Windows in each habitable room, bathroom windows and all
doors opening to the exterior of the dwelling shall be provided with
screens of no less than no. 16 wire mesh which will effectively prevent
the entrance of flies and mosquitoes. Provided, however, approved door
closers may be used in lieu of screen doors on exterior hallway doors on
apartment buildings. Every residential building having basement
windows or exterior basement doors shall have screens of not less than
no. 16 wire mesh on all doors and windows, when open. Such required
outside windows shall open directly toward a street, alley or toward an
unobstructed approved yard or court on the same lot with the building.
Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the
light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms set forth in this
chapter, except interior bathrooms may be permitted when allowed by
city and state codes.
(F) Electrical service requirements. Every room shall contain such
electrical receptacles and fixtures as required by this code. Each
lodging room offered for rent shall be provided with lamps or fixtures
with bulbs having a total capacity of at least 150 watts incandescent or
equivalent. Every such receptacle and fixture shall be connected to the
source of electric power in a proper manner.
§ 4-2-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-2-5
1-1:149
§ 4-2-6. Safe and sanitary maintenance of property. [2-17-2015;
2016 Code]
(G) Heating facilities. Every residential building shall have heating facilities
which are properly installed, are maintained in good working condition,
and are capable of adequately heating all habitable rooms to a
temperature of 67 degrees Fahrenheit. All temperature readings shall
be taken from 42 inches to 48 inches above the floor when there are no
drafts or unusual wall conditions. All fuel burning heaters shall be
effectively vented to assure proper draft. No unvented fuel burning
space heaters shall be allowed in sleeping rooms. Appropriate
clearances around all room or space heaters shall be provided and
maintained, and the floor shall be protected in an acceptable manner.
(H) Lighting requirements. In every building that contains three or more
dwelling units all passageways, stairways and exits required for
emergency exiting shall be illuminated with lighting that conforms to
minimum standards contained in applicable state or federal
regulations.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to recognize the private and
public benefits resulting from the safe, sanitary and attractive
maintenance of residential and nonresidential buildings, structures,
yards, and vacant areas. Attractive and well maintained property will
enhance the neighborhood and city and provide a suitable environment
for increasing physical and monetary values.
(B) Minimum requirements. Every owner and operator shall improve and
maintain all property under its control to comply with the following
minimum requirements:
(1) All improvements and other surfaces shall be constructed or
graded in a manner that diverts water away from buildings.
(2) Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight, rodentproof, capable of affording privacy,
and shall be kept in proper repair. Any sagging or bulging shall be
properly repaired to a level or plumb position. Interior walls and
ceilings shall provide a suitable base for decorative finish, and shall
not have noticeable surface irregularities or cracking. Interior
walls and ceilings shall have a hard, waterproof surface in spaces
subject to moisture. Floor surfacing shall provide ease of
maintenance and durability appropriate for the use of the room.
(3) Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be
reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, and shall be
kept in proper working condition and repair.
(4) Every interior and exterior stair, porch, railing, and related
accessory shall be constructed so as to be safe to use and capable
of supporting the load that normal use may place on it. Each such
§ 4-2-5 MONROE CODE § 4-2-6
1-1:150
item shall be kept in proper condition and repair, and shall present
an attractive appearance.
(5) Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
maintained in good working condition, free from defect, leaks and
obstructions.
(6) The floor surface of every water closet and bathroom shall be
properly maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water
and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
(7) Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is
required by this code shall be maintained in proper working
condition.
(8) No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment or utility required by this code to be removed, shut off,
or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, dwelling unit or lodging
room, except for temporary interruption necessary while repairs
are in process, or during emergencies when discontinuance of
service is approved by an authorized inspector.
(9) All exterior property shall be kept free from weeds, and all grass
areas shall be kept mowed to a height of not more than six inches.
(10) All exterior property shall be properly maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, free from brush, severed tree limbs, rubbish or
garbage, physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation and
junked or discarded property, including, without limitation,
refrigerators, furnaces, washing machines, stoves, machinery or
machinery parts, wood, bricks, cement blocks or other unsightly
material or debris.
(11)No person shall do the following on exterior property that is part of
any lot in the A-1, A-2, R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning districts:
A) Park or leave standing a vehicle on other than a paved or
graveled surface.
B) Park or leave standing a semitrailer. This subsection shall not
preclude placement of a semitrailer that has been expressly
authorized in a permit issued by the city.
C) Occupy or allow to be occupied for a period exceeding 48 hours
any space in a vehicle for living, sleeping, cooking or eating.
D) Park or leave standing a vehicle if any part of such vehicle is
not located on or over a paved or graveled surface. This
subsection shall not preclude placement of a vehicle that has
been expressly authorized in a permit issued by the city.
§ 4-2-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-2-6
1-1:151
E) Place or allow to be placed on such lot for more than 30
consecutive days a container that is designed or used for the
disposal of solid or liquid waste, other than a container
obtained from the city and used to contain solid waste that is
picked up as part of a city-run solid waste disposal service.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a container used exclusively
for disposal of materials related to the construction or
demolition of a structure or other facility for which a building
permit has been issued may remain on such lot for term of such
permit.
F) Leave standing any vehicle parts.
G) Allow an inoperative motor vehicle to remain on such lot for
more than 30 consecutive days.
(12) Fences, other minor construction, walks and paved or graveled
surfaces shall be properly maintained in a safe, sanitary and
substantial condition.
(13) Exterior surfaces of buildings that are not inherently resistant to
deterioration shall be periodically treated with a protective coating
of paint or other suitable preservative which will provide adequate
resistance to weathering and maintain an attractive appearance.
(14) Landscaping, plantings and other decorative surface treatments
shall be installed as necessary and maintained to present an
attractive appearance in all court and yard areas. Plantings shall be
maintained so as not to present hazards to adjoining properties or
to persons or vehicles traveling on public ways and shall be
maintained so as to enhance the appearance and value of the
neighborhood and the city.
(C) Investigation and access by housing and property maintenance
administrator.
(1) The housing and property maintenance administrator shall
investigate any report of property within the city which is
suspected of being in violation of this section.
(2) The housing and property maintenance administrator may enter
upon any lands at all reasonable times to carry out his or her duties
under this section.
(3) The housing and property maintenance administrator shall not be
liable, either personally or as an agent, independent contractor, or
servant of the city, in an action in trespass or any other action for
damages resulting from the performance of his or her duties under
this section, so long as he or she exercises reasonable care in the
performance of such duties.
(D) Maintenance by city; lien for maintenance or repair.
§ 4-2-6 MONROE CODE § 4-2-6
1-1:152
§ 4-2-7. Space requirements in residential buildings. [2-17-2015;
2016 Code]
The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for the
quantity, location and use of space in residential building units so as to
preserve and promote the public interest. A suitable environment for safe,
healthy and desirable living can be enhanced by providing adequate space
and privacy for occupants of all residential buildings. No person shall
occupy or let to another for occupancy as living quarters any dwelling or
dwelling unit which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) If any person neglects to maintain or repair property as required by
this section, the housing and property maintenance administrator
may cause such property to be brought into compliance in the
manner he or she considers most economical.
(2) The housing and property maintenance administrator shall
establish procedures for the enforcement of this section. Such
procedures shall be set forth in writing, and shall be available to
the public upon request.
(3) The cost of bringing such property into compliance shall be
charged to the owner or owners of such property. All such charges
shall be due and payable 30 days from the date of billing. Such
charges shall not be payable in installments.
(4) The city clerk shall bill the property owner or owners to recover the
cost of any work or materials expended to bring the property into
compliance with this section.
(5) If the charge is not paid when due, the charge shall become a lien
upon the property. The charge shall be entered on the next tax roll
in a column headed "for property maintenance," as a delinquent tax
against the property on which the maintenance or repair was
performed. All proceedings in relation to the collection, return and
sale of property for delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to such
charge, except as otherwise provided by statute.
(A) Every detached single-family dwelling other than mobile homes shall be
at least 500 square feet in floor area on the first floor level.
(B) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor area
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
floor area for every additional occupant thereof, the floor area to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room floor area. In every
dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
habitable floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of
habitable floor area for each occupant thereof.
§ 4-2-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-2-7
1-1:153
§ 4-2-8. Fire safety. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for basic fire
safety for all residential buildings and parts thereof and to obtain the public
and private benefits accruing from the provisions of this section. No person
shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit
as living quarters, which does not comply with the following requirements:
(C) No dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such
room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping
room can be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall
room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had
only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water
closet compartment.
(D) In all dwelling units the average ceiling height shall be not less than
seven feet six inches and the minimum ceiling height shall be not less
than seven feet in the entire first floor area. The minimum ceiling height
shall be seven feet six inches for all floor areas above the first floor
except undersloping roofs where the minimum shall be seven feet six
inches for not less than 50 percent of the floor area, and where that
portion of the floor area under the sloping roof having a ceiling height
of less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in
computing the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
(E) No sleeping room shall have its floor level below the alley, court, yard or
street grade immediately adjoining and abutting upon said habitable
rooms except that in single-family dwellings it may be permitted when
the following conditions are complied with:
(1) The exterior walls shall be damp-proofed.
(2) A refrigerant air-conditioner or dehumidifier shall be available for
use when needed, which is designed to handle the square foot of
the floor area on the sleeping or living lower level.
(3) Proper drainage away from exterior walls of the structure shall be
provided.
(4) Sash area of windows shall be at least 10 percent of the floor area
of the room. At least 50 percent of the required window sash area
shall open, or in lieu thereof, mechanical ventilation shall be
provided with a minimum capacity of two cubic feet per minute per
square foot of floor area.
(F) Every lodging room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall
contain at least 70 square feet of habitable floor area, and every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain
at least 50 square feet of habitable floor area for each occupant thereof,
but not more than seven square feet of closet space may be included
per occupant.
§ 4-2-7 MONROE CODE § 4-2-8
1-1:154
§ 4-2-9. Responsibility of owners and occupants. [2-17-2015; 2016
Code]
The responsibility of owners, operators and occupants of residential
buildings is as follows:
(A) No highly flammable or explosive material shall be stored in a
residence, and no dwelling unit shall be allowed in a building
containing liquids with a flash point below 110 degrees Fahrenheit.
(B) No materials shall be allowed to accumulate in locations that may block
egress from fires or interfere with fire-fighting operations.
(C) Every electric wire shall have adequate insulation maintained in good
condition.
(D) All switch and outlet plates shall be properly fastened in position.
(E) All short circuits or breaks shall be immediately corrected.
(F) No temporary wiring, except proper extension cords for temporary use
of appliances.
(G) Maximum fuse sizes shall be conspicuously posted on fuse boxes.
(A) Every owner of a residential building containing two or more dwelling
units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean, proper and
sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the residential building
and premises thereof.
(B) Every occupant of a residential building shall keep in a clean, proper
and sanitary condition that part of the residential building and premises
thereof which he or she occupies and controls except the operator of
every lodging house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance
of all walls, floors, ceilings and every other part of the lodging house.
Every occupant of a residential building shall dispose of all his or her
refuse and garbage in the containers required by this code.
(C) Every owner of a residential building shall be responsible for hanging,
installation and maintenance of all screens and double or storm doors
and windows whenever the same are required under this code.
(D) Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single-dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
in or on the premises and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
residential building shall be responsible for such extermination
whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a residential
building in a reasonable condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more
of the dwelling units or lodging rooms in any residential building or in
§ 4-2-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-2-9
1-1:155
§ 4-2-10. Lodging houses; permits. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
The purpose of this section is to provide permits for lodging houses other
than those licensed by the state of Wisconsin.
the shared or public parts of any residential building, extermination
thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(E) Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures in
such dwelling in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible
for exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
(F) The owner or operator shall not occupy or let to another for occupancy
any space in a residential building unless it is clean, sanitary, fit for
human occupancy, complies with the requirements of this code and the
occupancy is limited to the maximum permitted by this code.
(G) The owner of each residential building containing three or more
separate dwelling units and an enclosed common area that is accessible
to all dwelling units in such building shall neatly display in a
conspicuous accessible place within such common area a list of not less
than two alternate agents and their phone numbers who may be called
to arrange for emergency work required when the owner or operator is
not readily available.
(H) The owner of each residential building that is not subject to the
requirements of subparagraph (G) of this section and that contains one
or more rental dwelling units shall notify in writing each lessee of a
dwelling unit in such building, or include in the lease for the dwelling
unit, not less than two alternate agents and their phone numbers who
may be called to arrange for emergency work required when the owner
or operator is not readily available.
(I) The operator of every lodging house shall change supplied linen and
towels before the letting of any room to any occupant and at least once
during each week such room is occupied. The operator shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and
sanitary condition.
(A) Permit required. The owner or operator of a lodging house located
within the city shall obtain a permit from the housing and property
maintenance administrator for such premises in the name of the owner
and operator. The permit may be issued by the housing and property
maintenance administrator after inspection and shall remain in force
unless an objection is filed with the housing and property maintenance
administrator by the health, fire or police department. This objection
shall include a written statement concerning the specific correctable
violation of any city regulation. The permit shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place in a public area of the building. No permit shall be
transferred from one address to another. Permits shall be transferred to
a new owner upon proper application.
§ 4-2-9 MONROE CODE § 4-2-10
1-1:156
§ 4-2-11. Designation of unfit buildings. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
The purpose of this section is to provide for the designation and repair
or razing of those buildings which are so dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous,
unhygienic, inadequately maintained or lacking in basic equipment,
facilities, light, ventilation and heating so as to constitute a menace to the
occupants or public.
(B) Application for permit. The owner or operator of every lodging house
shall make proper application for a permit to the housing and property
maintenance administrator before the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for a new building, or within seven days after the acquisition
of an occupied building.
(C) Inspection, suspension of permit. Whenever, upon inspection of any
such premises, the inspector finds that conditions or practices exist
which are in violation of any provision of this code, the inspector shall
give notice in writing to the owner or operator of such premises, that
unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable
period, to be determined by the inspector but in any event not less than
15 nor more than 30 days, the permit therefor will be suspended. At the
end of such period the inspector shall reinspect such premises and if he
or she finds that such conditions or practices have not been corrected,
he or she shall give notice in writing to the owner or operator that the
latter's permit has been suspended. The housing and property
maintenance administrator shall, without unnecessary delay, forward
each written suspension to the zoning board of appeals for a hearing
and a decision within the same time period as provided for appeals in
title 2, chapter 11 of this code. Permits may be revoked after an
opportunity has been provided for a hearing before the zoning board of
appeals. After a permit has been revoked, each day of operation of the
lodging house shall be considered a separate offense.
(A) Defects; notice. Any building which shall be found to have any of the
following defects may be designated as unfit for human habitation and
in need of repairs or razing and so placarded by an authorized
inspector. Legal notice shall be served upon the owner and on the
operator of any building:
(1) Which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, dangerous, unsanitary,
unsafe or vermin infested that it creates a serious hazard to the
health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
(2) Which lacks illumination, ventilation, heating, basic equipment or
sanitary facilities adequate to protect the health, safety or general
welfare of the occupants or of the public.
(3) Which because of its general condition, location or appearance is a
blighting influence or causes decreasing physical or monetary
value of property in the neighborhood.
§ 4-2-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-2-11
1-1:157
§ 4-2-12. Responsibility of agent of owner. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
Any person acting as the agent of the owner shall not be construed to be
the owner within the terms of this chapter, but shall immediately notify the
owner of any order or notice issued by the building inspector relating to the
property of the owner.
§ 4-2-13. Penalty. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
A person who violates any provision of this chapter or fails to comply
with any of its requirements shall upon conviction be subject to a Class
3 forfeiture. A separate offense exists each calendar day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 4-3
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 4-3-1. Definition. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
"Swimming pool" as used in this chapter means any artificial body of water
over 18 inches deep used or intended to be used for wading or swimming,
constructed, installed or maintained in or above the ground on private
property within the city, but does not include any such body of water that is
located within a residential building.
(B) Placarding unfit building. Any building or part thereof designated and
placarded by the inspector as unfit for human habitation and in need of
repairs or razing shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered
by the inspector.
(1) No building or part thereof which has been designated and
placarded as unfit for human habitation and in need of repairs or
razing shall again be used for human habitation until written
approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by the
inspector. The inspector shall remove such placard whenever the
defect or defects upon which the designation and placarding action
were based have been eliminated.
(2) No person shall deface or remove the placard from any building or
part thereof which has been condemned as unfit for human
habitation and placarded as such.
(C) Razing required. Any building or part thereof designated as unfit for
human habitation and in need of repairs or razing by the inspector,
which in the opinion of the inspector, would be unreasonable to repair
shall be razed or removed upon legal written service of the order of the
inspector. If the owner shall fail or refuse to comply with the order, the
inspector shall cause such building to be razed or removed under the
procedures provided for unsafe buildings in this code.
§ 4-2-11 MONROE CODE § 4-3-2
1-1:158
§ 4-3-2. Approval. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
Every person who constructs a swimming pool shall, before commencing
construction, furnish plans and specifications to the building inspector for
approval and pay building permit fees as required by this title.
§ 4-3-3. Fence requirements, compliance. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
§ 4-3-4. Fees. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
Fees for plan examination and for issuance of any permit required by this
chapter shall be set by resolution of the council. All city departments and
agencies shall be exempt from the payment of fees required by this chapter.
Notwithstanding the forgoing fees required by this chapter shall be paid for
plan examination and for issuance of any permit for work performed by the
housing authority, water utility, storm water utility or wastewater treatment
plant.
(A) Every person in possession of land within the city upon which a
swimming pool is being constructed shall maintain a temporary fence
or solid structure completely enclosing such construction.
(1) The temporary fence or structure shall be placed immediately upon
commencement of construction.
(2) The temporary fence or structure shall be subject to approval by
the building inspector.
(3) The temporary fence or structure shall remain in place until
replaced by a permanent fence or structure as set forth in
subsection (B) of this section.
(B) Every person in possession of land within the city upon which a
swimming pool is located shall maintain a permanent fence or solid
structure completely enclosing such swimming pool.
(1) The permanent fence or structure shall be placed within 10 days
after the completion of construction.
(2) The permanent fence or structure shall be not less than four feet in
height.
(3) Except for gates and doors, no opening in such fence or structure
shall be larger than six inches square.
(4) Each gate and door opening through the fence or structure shall be
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device that is capable
of keeping the door or gate securely closed at all times when not in
actual use.
(C) All gates or doors opening through the temporary or permanent fence
or structure shall be kept securely closed at all times when not in actual
use.
§ 4-3-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 4-3-5
1-1:159
§ 4-3-5. Penalty. [2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be
subject to a Class 3 forfeiture. A separate offense exists each calendar day
during which a violation occurs or continues.
Title 5, Zoning Regulations
Chapter 5-1
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
§ 5-1-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the City of Monroe
Zoning Ordinance, except where as referred to herein, where it shall be
known as "this chapter."
§ 5-1-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the State
of Wisconsin Statutes. Specific statutory references are provided within
the body of this chapter solely as a means of assisting the reader. Such
references are not to be considered as all-inclusive and shall in no manner
be construed so as to limit the application or interpretation of this chapter.
State Law References: Section 62.23(7), 62.231, 87.30, Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 5-1-3. Purpose and intent.
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of protecting the health, safety,
morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the public. This
chapter is designed to control and lessen congestion in the streets; to
secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote adequate light
and air; to protect groundwater resources; to prevent the overcrowding
of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to preserve, protect,
and promote property values; to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public facilities;
and to preserve burial sites as defined in Sec. 157.70(1)(b), Wisconsin
Statutes. It is also the intent of this chapter is to implement certain goals
and objectives of the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan, which are best
addressed through zoning approaches, as enabled by Wisconsin Statutes.
§ 5-1-4. Separability and nonliability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City of Monroe Common
Council that provisions of this chapter are separable in accordance with the
following:
§ 4-3-5 MONROE CODE § 5-1-4
1-1:160
§ 5-1-5. Abrogation.
It is not intended that this chapter abrogate or interfere with any
constitutionally protected vested right. It is also not intended that this
chapter abrogate, repeal, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing
easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, or
permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
§ 5-1-6. Rules of interpretation.
(1) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provisions of this chapter not specifically included in said judgment.
(2) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any portion of this chapter to a particular property, water,
building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of
said provision to any other property, water, building, or structure not
specifically included in said judgment.
(3) If any requirement or limitation attached to an authorization given
under this chapter is found invalid, it shall be presumed that the
authorization would not have been granted without the requirement or
limitation and, therefore, said authorization shall also be invalid.
(4) The City does not guarantee, warrant, or represent that only those
areas designated as floodplain will be subject to periodic inundation
and hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the City, its
officers, employees, agents, or representatives for any flood damages,
sanitation problems, or structural damages.
(1) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals, and welfare.
(2) Where property is affected by the regulations imposed by any provision
of this chapter and by other governmental regulations, the regulations
which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or
requirements shall prevail. Regardless of any other provision of this
chapter, no land shall be developed or used, and no structure erected or
maintained, in violation of any state or federal regulations. Where there
are conflicts between or among regulations within this chapter, the
regulations that are more restrictive or which impose higher standards
or requirements shall prevail. In all instances, where there are conflicts
between the text of this chapter and any tables or figures of this
chapter, the text shall prevail.
(3) No structure, land, water, or air shall hereafter be used, and no
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered
without a building permit, except structures not requiring a building
§ 5-1-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-1-6
1-1:161
§ 5-1-7. Jurisdiction.
This chapter is applicable to all territory located within the corporate limits
of the City of Monroe, all areas within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
City of Monroe, and all areas where boundary agreements are in place.
§ 5-1-8. (Reserved)
§ 5-1-9. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon passage and publication according
to law, following the date of repeal and recreation of the Official Zoning
Map. All plans approved under previous zoning regulations shall be valid
and may be used to obtain permits for a period of not more than one year
after the effective date of this Title 5, except where subject to developer
agreement provisions such as planned developments.
§ 5-1-10. Applicability.
permit (e.g., swing set, clothesline, etc.), and without full compliance
with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable local, county,
and state regulations.
(4) Nothing herein contained shall require any changes in plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any building or part thereof for
which a building permit has been issued before the effective date of this
Title 5, and the construction of which shall have been started within one
year from the date of such permit.
(5) Except as provided in this chapter, under provisions for nonconforming
uses, nonconforming developments, substandard lots, and
nonconforming structures and buildings (see Chapter 5), no building,
structure, development, or premises shall be hereinafter used or
occupied, and no applicable permit granted, that does not conform to
the requirements of this chapter.
(6) In cases of mixed occupancy or mixed-use buildings, the regulations for
each land use shall apply to the portion of the structure or land so
occupied or so used. In the case of buildings containing both residential
and nonresidential uses, the density, intensity, and bulk standards for
nonresidential buildings shall apply.
(7) Except for outlots authorized under Title 6, Subdivision Regulations, to
contain permanently protected green space area, no yard or other open
space area shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a
building or structure on any other lot.
(1) All sections of this chapter are applied to all properties, all development
activity, and all uses of land and property within the City of Monroe and
extraterritorial jurisdiction. Beyond this chapter, these kinds of
activities are subject to all City, state, and federal requirements.
§ 5-1-6 MONROE CODE § 5-1-10
1-1:162
§ 5-1-11. through § 5-1-19. (Reserved)
§ 5-1-20. Word usage.
The interpretation of this chapter shall abide by the provisions and rules of
this section, except where the context clearly requires otherwise, or where
the result would clearly be inconsistent with the apparent intent of this
chapter.
§ 5-1-21. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations in this chapter are intended to have the
following meanings:
(2) The use of land is generally addressed in Chapters 2 and 3.
Development activities including redevelopment and building and site
renovations are regulated throughout the ordinance rather than in any
one section or chapter.
(3) Where questions of applicability arise, the interpretation of
applicability falls under the duties of the Zoning Administrator.
(1) Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses
and derivative forms.
(2) Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
words in the plural number shall include the single number.
(3) The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
(4) The words "shall," "must," and "will" are mandatory.
(5) The words "may," "can," and "might" are permissive.
(6) The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations,
partnerships, associations, trusts, and any other legal entity.
(7) The word "City" shall mean the City of Monroe, Wisconsin.
(8) The word "county" shall mean the County of Green, Wisconsin.
(9) The word "state" shall mean the State of Wisconsin.
(10) The words "Plan Commission" shall mean the City of Monroe Plan
Commission.
(11) The word "Council" shall refer to the City of Monroe Common Council.
(12) The words "Board" or "Board of Appeals" shall refer to the City of
Monroe Zoning Board of Appeals.
(13) If there is any ambiguity between the text of this chapter and any
illustration or figure, the text shall control.
§ 5-1-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-1-21
1-1:163
AbbreviationMeaning
ft Foot
N/A Not applicable
sq. ft. Square feet
Wis. Stats. Wisconsin Statutes
§ 5-1-22. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, wherever they occur in this Title
5, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section. If a term used
in this Title 5 is not defined in this section or elsewhere in this chapter,
the definition of said term will be provided by the Zoning Administrator,
based on professional sources available including the American Planning
Association and Urban Land Institute. For definitions of specific land uses,
refer to Chapter 3. For definitions of specific sign types, refer to Chapter 9.
Definitions provided by this section include:
ACCESS — A means of providing vehicular or nonvehicular egress from or
ingress to a property, public right-of-way, or private roadway.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, ATTACHED — An accessory structure which
is physically connected to the principal building. Attached accessory
structures shall be considered part of the principal structure and are
subject to the setback standards for principal structures.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, DETACHED — An accessory structure which is
not physically connected to the principal building. A minor attachment does
not render an accessory structure attached. Examples of minor attachments
include, but are not limited to, decks 18 inches or less above grade, arbors
and fences, and similar open unclosed structures such as breezeways over
the pedestrian pathway between structures and no wider than five feet.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, NONRESIDENTIAL — See Chapter 3. A
structure or combination of structures that: (1) are located on the same lot,
tract, or development parcel as the primary nonresidential building; (2) are
clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a primary
building or use; and (3) are subordinate to and serving a primary building
or use.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, RESIDENTIAL — See Chapter 3. Structures
accessory to a residential use including but not limited to structures used
to shelter parked passenger vehicles (including garages and carports),
structures used to store residential maintenance equipment of the subject
property, workshops, kennels, boathouses, and pool houses. Residential
accessory structures may be attached or detached from the principal
residential structure.
ACCESSORY USE — A use subordinate to the principal use of a building or
lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal land use.
Accessory uses in residential districts shall not involve the conduct of any
business, trade, or industry, except as defined as a "home occupation" and
§ 5-1-21 MONROE CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:164
shall not include the boarding of animals or the keeping of fowl or farm
animals (except pets or as otherwise permitted by the Municipal Code).
ACRE — 43,560 square feet.
ADAPTIVE REUSE — Adapting an existing building originally designed for
an institutional, quasipublic, public or other specific/special purpose to a
new use.
ADDITION — Any construction that increases the size of a building or
structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor
area.
ADDRESS — The number or other designation assigned by the City to a
housing unit, business establishment, or other structure or site for purposes
of mail delivery, emergency services, and so forth.
AGENT OF OWNER — A person authorized in writing by the property
owner to represent and act for a property owner in contacts with City
employees, committees, commissions, and the Common Council, regarding
matters regulated by the Zoning Ordinance.
AIRPORT — Any area of land designated, set aside, used, or intended for
use, for the landing and take-off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas
designated, set aside, used, or intended for use, for airport buildings or
other airport facilities, rights-of-way, or approach zones, together with all
airport buildings and facilities located thereon.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure, object, or natural growth, or use of
land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in
landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing
and taking off.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PRODUCTION, LARGE-SCALE — A large-scale
facility devoted primarily to production of fermented malt beverages at
or above 300,000 barrels per calendar year (or as established by Wis.
Stats. 125.29), or the production of wine, distilled spirits, or any other
alcoholic beverage at or above 25,000 gallons per calendar year. Such
facilities may include indoor or outdoor tasting or sampling facilities for
products produced on-site and sale of other products directly related to onsite
activities.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PRODUCTION, SMALL-SCALE — A small-scale
facility devoted primarily to production of fermented malt beverages at a
level of less than 300,000 barrels per calendar year, or the production of
less than 25,000 gallons of wine, distilled spirits, or any other alcoholic
beverage per calendar year. Such facilities may include tasting or sampling
facilities for products produced on-site and sale of other products directly
related to on-site activities.
ALLEY — A minor public right-of-way/street or thoroughfare providing
secondary access to a property. Alley access does not constitute frontage for
the purposes of minimum lot frontage.
§ 5-1-22 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:165
ALTERATION — Any change, addition, or modification in construction
(other than repair/maintenance), or any change in the structural members
of buildings such as load-bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, etc.
ANIMAL UNIT — A measure which represents a common denominator for
the purpose of defining a husbandry or intensive agricultural land use.
The animal unit measure relates to the maximum carrying capacity of one
acre of land and is related to the amount of feed various species consume,
and the amount of waste they produce. The following figure indicates the
number of common farm species which comprise a single animal unit:
Figure 5-1-22a: Animal Units
Type of
Livestock
Number of
Animals/
Animal
Unit
Type of
Livestock
Number
of
Animals/
Animal
Unit
Type of
Livestock
Number of
Animals/
Animal
Unit
Horse (>2
yrs)
1 Calves (<1
yr)
5 Lambs 14
Colt (<2
yrs)
2 Brood sow
or boar
2 Chickens -
egg layers
30
Cattle (>2
yrs)
1 Hogs (up to
220 lbs)
3 Chickens -
fryers
60
Cattle (<2
yrs)
2 Sheep 10 Turkeys 50
Source: The Stockman's Handbook
APPEAL — A means for obtaining review of a decision, determination,
order, or failure to act pursuant to the terms of this chapter as expressly
authorized by the provisions of § 5-10-42.
ARTERIAL STREET — Any state trunk highway within the corporate limits
of the City.
AUTOMOBILE — Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
transportation of persons or goods along public streets or alleys, or other
public ways.
AWNING — A shielding or decorative fixture attached to a structure and
extending from the face of the structure that is permanent in nature, which
may be fixed or retractable.
BALCONY — A platform that is attached to and projects from the wall
of a principal building and is surrounded by a railing or balustrade. This
definition is different and separate from a porch, deck, fire escape, etc.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building between the floor and ceiling,
having at least 1/2 of its height below grade.
BERM — An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site,
screen undesirable views, reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes.
§ 5-1-22 MONROE CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:166
BLOCK — The property abutting the street between the two nearest
intersecting or intercepting streets. A railroad right-of-way, the boundary
line of unsubdivided acreage, or a body of water shall be regarded the
same as an intersecting or intercepting street for the purpose of defining a
"block."
BOAT — A vehicle designed for operation as a watercraft propelled by oars,
sails, or engine(s).
BOATHOUSE — A structure used for the storage of watercraft and
associated materials which has one or more walls or sides.
BUFFERYARD — Any permitted combination of distance, vegetation,
fencing, and berming which results in a reduction of visual, noise and other
interaction with an adjoining property.
BUILDABLE AREA — The area remaining on a lot after the minimum
setback, drainage provisions, and other site constraint requirements of this
Title 5 have been met.
BUILDABLE DEPTH — The depth of the lot left to be built upon after the
front and rear yards are provided.
BUILDABLE WIDTH — The width of the lot left to be built upon after the
side yards are provided.
BUILDING — A structure with a permanent location on the land, having a
roof that may provide shelter, support, protection, or enclosure of persons,
animals, or property of any kind.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by principal and
accessory buildings or structures.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT — The outline of the total area covered by a
building's perimeter at the ground level.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the established grade to
(a) the highest point of a flat roof; (b) the deck line of a mansard roof; or (c)
the average height between eaves and ridge for a gable, hip, and gambrel
roof.
BUILDING SEPARATION — The narrowest distance between two buildings
(see "minimum building separation").
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which the main or principal use of
the lot is conducted.
BULK — The combination of building height, size, and location on a lot.
CALIPER — A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its
trunk measurement four foot above natural grade.
CANOPY — A structure or sign attached and extending from the face of a
building, constructed as a permanent fixture.
CAPACITY — The maximum lawful level of designed use of any structure,
or part thereof, as determined by the City's adopted building code and
§ 5-1-22 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:167
expressed in terms of occupants, seats, persons, employees, or other units
specified by the building code.
CLUB — Structures and facilities owned or operated by a corporation,
association, person, or persons, for a social, educational, or recreational
purpose, but not primarily for profit and not primarily to render a service
which is customarily carried on as a business.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The long-range master plan for the desirable
use and development of land in the City as officially adopted and as
amended from time to time by the Commission and certified to the Council.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which may be appropriate or desirable in a
specific zone but requires special approval because if not carefully located
or designed, said use may not be deemed compatible with neighborhood
uses or may create special problems.
CONDOMINIUM — An estate in real property consisting of an undivided
interest in common with other purchasers in a portion of a parcel of real
property, together with separate interest in space. A condominium may
include, in addition, separate interest in other portions of such property.
COURT — An open space within one lot which is surrounded by structures
on more than 50% of its perimeter.
COVENANT — A contract between two or more parties which constitutes a
restriction of a particular parcel of land.
DECK — An uncovered and open platform built above grade and attached
to a principal or accessory building, typically supported by pillars or posts.
Decks are considered to be part of a building or structure. Setbacks shall
be measured from the outermost portion of the deck.
DENSITY — A term used to describe the number of dwelling units per acre.
DESIGN STANDARDS — A guideline/specification or set of guidelines/
specifications regarding the architectural appearance of a building or
improvement that governs the alteration, construction, demolition, or
relocation of a building or improvement.
DEVELOPED AREA — That area which is made up of physical property
improvements including but not limited to structures, parking, drives,
signage and utility features.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any buildings; the primary or principal use or
change in primary or principal use of any buildings or land; any extension of
any use of land; deposition of materials; or any clearing, grading, or other
movement of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this
chapter.
DORMER — A structural element of a house that protrudes from the plane
of a sloping roof surface. Dormers are used to create usable space in the
roof of a building by adding headroom and usually also by enabling addition
of windows.
§ 5-1-22 MONROE CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:168
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway providing access to a public right-of-way.
DWELLING — A building or one or more portions thereof, containing one
or more dwelling units, but not including habitations provided in
nonresidential uses such as lodging uses and commercial campgrounds.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A dwelling joined to another dwelling at one or
more sides by a shared wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A dwelling entirely surrounded by open space
on the same lot.
EASEMENT — Written authorization, recorded in the Register of Deeds
office, from a landowner authorizing another party to use any designated
part of the land owner's property for a specified purpose.
ELEVATION (BUILDING) — The view of any building or other structure
from any one of four sides regardless of the configuration or orientation of
a building. Each elevation will generally be identified as a north, south, east
or west building elevation. Also see "facade."
EXTRATERRITORIAL AREA — The area outside of the City limits in which
the City of Monroe may exercise extraterritorial powers of planning, land
division, and/or zoning review.
FACADE — The wall planes of a building which are visible from one side or
perspective (e.g., front, side, rear). See "elevation (building)."
FAMILY — A person living as an individual or any of the following groups
living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and sharing common
living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities:
Any number of people related by blood, marriage, domestic
partnership, legal adoption, guardianship or other duly-authorized
custodial relationship;
(1)
Two unrelated adult individuals and the minor children of each. For
the purpose of this section, "children" means natural children,
grandchildren, legally adopted children, stepchildren, foster children,
or a ward as determined in a legal guardianship proceeding;
(2)
(3) Three unrelated adult individuals;
Up to four unrelated persons who have disabilities/are disabled or
handicapped under the Fair Housing Amendment Act (FHAA) or the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), are living as a single household
because of their disability, and require assistance from a caregiver.
This definition does not include those persons currently illegally
using or addicted to a "controlled substance" as defined in the
Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. § 802(6).
(a)
(4)
§ 5-1-22 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:169
FARM BUILDING — Any building, other than a dwelling unit, used for
storing agricultural equipment or farm produce or products, having
livestock or poultry, or processing dairy products.
FENCE — Any artificially constructed barrier erected to separate, enclose
or screen areas of land.
FENCE, PICKET — A type of fence constructed of evenly spaced vertical
boards that are connected by two or more horizontal rails.
FENCE, SOLID — A fence, including solid entrance and exit gates, that is
least 90% opaque and that effectively conceals the materials stored and
operations conducted behind it from view.
FENCE, WOOD RAIL — A type of fence constructed of wooden beams
or timber logs (usually split lengthwise into rails) that are arranged in a
manner that allows for more than 75% of the fence's surface area to be open
for the free passage of light and air.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a
building, including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements, and attached
accessory buildings, stairs, escalators, unenclosed and enclosed porches,
heating and utility rooms, etc. Measurements shall be made from the
outside of the exterior walls and to the center of interior walls dividing
attached buildings.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor
area of a structure or structures by the lot area on which such structure(s)
are located.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of
which are one foot from a uniform point source of one candle.
FRONTAGE — See "lot frontage."
GARAGE — An attached or detached building or structure, or part thereof,
used or designed to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles. Garages
are also commonly used to store other items associated with the use of a lot
such as yard maintenance and children's play equipment.
Up to two personal attendants who provide services for family members
or roomers who are disabled or handicapped under the Fair Housing
Amendment Act (FHAA) or the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
and need assistance with the activities of daily living shall be
considered part of a family. Such services may include personal care,
housekeeping, meal preparation, laundry or companionship.
(5)
Exceptions: The definition of "family" does not include:
Any society, club, fraternity/sorority, association, lodge, combine,
commune, federation, or similar organization; and
(a)
Any group of individuals whose association is temporary or
seasonal in nature.
(b)
(6)
§ 5-1-22 MONROE CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:170
GRADE, EXISTING — The surface elevation of the ground or pavement at a
stated location as it exists prior to disturbance in preparation for a project
regulated by the ordinance.
GRADE, FINISHED — The final elevation of the ground surface after manmade
alteration, such as grading, grubbing, filling or excavating have been
made and is part of an approved grading and drainage plan by the City of
Monroe.
GREEN AREA — An area landscaped with shrubs, trees, and other
vegetative groundcover.
GROSS DENSITY — The result of dividing the number of dwelling units
located on a site by the gross site area.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total floor area inside the building envelope on
all levels of a building.
GROSS SITE AREA — The total area of a single lot or the sum of multiple
lots in common use.
GROUP DEVELOPMENT — See § 5-7-2. Any development located on one lot
and comprised of any single instance or any combination of the following
development types:
HISTORIC BUILDING OR SITE — Any building or site that meets one or
more of the following criteria: buildings or sites listed on the Wisconsin or
National Register of Historic Places, either individually or as a contributing
building or site to a historic district; buildings or sites with a State Historic
Preservation Officer opinion or certification that the property is eligible to
be listed on the State Register or National Register of Historic Places, either
individually or as a contributing building or site to a historic district; or is
locally designated as a local landmark.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Surfaces that prohibit infiltration of stormwater.
Homes, buildings, and other structures with roofs, as well as concrete,
brick, stone, asphalt, gravel, and similar paved surfaces are considered
impervious.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — A measure of the intensity of land use,
determined by dividing the total of all impervious surfaces on a site by the
gross site area.
INFILL SITE — Any vacant lot or parcel within developed areas of the City,
where at least 80% of the land within a 300-foot radius of the site has been
developed; and where water, sewer, streets, schools, and fire protection
One or more principal multifamily residential buildings with 24 or more
residential units on the same lot.
(1)
Three or more principal structures on the same lot, whether serving a
single use or more than one use.
(2)
Any addition of principal buildings that increases the total number of
principal structures on the same lot to three or more.
(3)
§ 5-1-22 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:171
have already been developed and are provided. Annexed areas located on
the periphery of the City limits shall not be considered infill sites.
INTENSITY — A term used to describe the amount of gross floor area or
landscaped area on a lot or site compared to the gross site area.
LANDSCAPE SURFACE AREA RATIO (LSR) — The percentage of the gross
site area or lot area which is preserved as permanently protected green
space or landscaped area in relation to the percentage of gross site or lot
area included in development.
LANDSCAPED AREA — The area of a site which is planted and continually
maintained in vegetation, including grasses, flowers, herbs, garden plants,
native or introduced groundcovers, shrubs, bushes, and trees. The
landscaped area also includes the area located within planted and
continually maintained landscaped planters as well as subordinate
accessory use of other landscape elements such as mulch, river rock, etc.
LARGE DEVELOPMENT — See § 5-7-2. Any new development containing
any single building in which the combined area of the building footprint
exceeds 50,000 square feet. Does not include new additions of less than
50,000 square feet, or basements and penthouses when used primarily for
storage and mechanical equipment.
LOT — A parcel of land in one ownership and not divided by a street nor
including any land within the limits of a public right-of-way.
LOT AREA — The computed area contained within the lot lines of a recorded
lot, including land over which easements have been established.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at the point where the side lot lines intersect the right-of-way.
All sides of a lot that abuts a street shall be considered lot frontage. On
curvilinear streets, the distance of the arc between the side lot lines shall
be considered the lot frontage.
LOT LINE — A lot line is the legal property line (including the vertical plane
established by the line and the ground) bounding a lot except that where
any portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way or a proposed public
right-of-way, the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for
applying this chapter.
LOT LINE, FRONT — A lot line which abuts a public or private street rightof-
way. In the case of a lot which has two of more street frontages, the lot
line along the street with the shortest frontage distance shall be the front
lot line. (See also "lot line, street side"). See Figure 5-1-22b.
LOT LINE, REAR — In the case of rectangular or most trapezoidal shaped
lots, that lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front lot line
of the lot. In the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line
20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum
possible distance from the front line shall be considered to be the rear lot
§ 5-1-22 MONROE CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:172
line. In the case of lots that have frontage on more than one road or street,
the rear lot line shall be opposite the front lot line (shorter of the frontages).
See Figure 5-1-22b.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot lines. A side lot
line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line. A side lot
line separating a lot from another lot is called an interior side lot line. See
Figure 5-1-22b.
LOT LINE, STREET SIDE — Any lot line which abuts a public or private
street right-of-way which is not the front lot line (see also "lot line, front").
See Figure 5-1-22b.
LOT WIDTH — The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines
of a lot, measured parallel to the front lot line(s) at the required front yard
setback (see "minimum lot width").
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of
the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135°. The point of
intersection of the street lines or their greatest angle is the "corner."
LOT, FLAT — Any lot which connects to a street, road, or other right-of-way
by a narrow appendage.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
Figure 5-1-22b: Regular Lot Descriptions
LOT, THROUGH — A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets (also known as a "double-frontage lot"). See Figure 5-1-22b.
MAINTENANCE — An activity that restores the character, scope, size, or
design of a serviceable area, structure, or land use to its previously existing,
undamaged condition. Activities that change the character, size, or scope of
a project beyond the original design or otherwise alter a serviceable area,
structure, or land use are not included in this definition.
MAJOR COLLECTOR STREET — The following segments of streets lying
within the corporate limits of the City:
§ 5-1-22 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:173
That part of 6th Street that lies east of the intersection with 16th
Avenue and west of the intersection with 6 1/2 Street;
(1)
That part of West 8th Street that lies east of the corporate limits of the
City and west of the intersection with 1st Avenue;
(2)
That part of 8th Street that lies east of the intersection with 1st Avenue
and west of the intersection with 11th Avenue;
(3)
That part of 9th Street that lies east of the intersection with 11th
Avenue and west of the intersection with 20th Avenue;
(4)
That part of 11th Street that lies east of the intersection with STH 69
and west of the intersection with 20th Avenue;
(5)
That part of 13th Street that lies east of the intersection with 16th
Avenue and west of the intersection with 17th Avenue;
(6)
That part of 13th Street that lies east of the intersection with 20th
Avenue and west of the corporate limits of the City;
(7)
That part of 16th Street that lies east of the intersection with 16th
Avenue and west of the intersection with 20th Avenue;
(8)
That part of 19th Street that lies east of the intersection with 11th
Avenue and west of the intersection with 16th Avenue;
(9)
That part of 21st Street that lies east of the corporate limits of the City
and west of the intersection with 11th Avenue;
(10)
That part of 4th Avenue west that lies south of the intersection with
West 17th Street and north of the intersection with 21st Street;
(11)
That part of 11th Avenue that lies south of the intersection with 19th
Street and north of the intersection with 21st Street;
(12)
That part of 16th Avenue that lies south of the intersection with 16th
Street and north of the intersection with 19th Street;
(13)
That part of 16th Avenue that lies south of the intersection with 6th
Street and north of the intersection with 11th Street;
(14)
That part of 17th Avenue that lies south of the intersection with 9th
Street and north of the intersection with 13th Street;
(15)
That part of 17th Avenue that lies south of the intersection with 17th
Street and north of the intersection with 30th Street;
(16)
That part of 18th Avenue that lies south of the intersection with 1st
Street and north of the intersection with 16th Street;
(17)
That part of 20th Avenue that lies south of the intersection with 6th
Street and north of the intersection with 16th Street.
(18)
§ 5-1-22 MONROE CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:174
MANUFACTURED HOME — A one- or two-family home certified and labeled
as a manufactured home under 42 U.S.C. § 5401-5426 which when placed
on the site is set on an enclosed foundation in accordance with § 70.043(1),
Wis. Stats., and Subchapters III, IV, and V of Chapter COMM 21, Wis. Adm.
Code, or a comparable foundation as approved by the local building services
supervisor, is installed according to manufacturer's instructions, is properly
connected to utilities, has asphalt shingles and a gable or hip roof, has
insulated glass windows, has vinyl, aluminum or other quality siding, and is
a minimum of 22 feet wide.
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT — Devices installed for a use appurtenant to
the property, structures, or principal use. Mechanical equipment includes,
but is not limited to, HVAC equipment, transformers, gas and electric
meters, utility-related equipment, exhaust fans external to buildings,
louvers, vents, and industrial process equipment.
MINIMUM BUILDING SEPARATION — The narrowest permitted building
separation.
MINIMUM LANDSCAPE SURFACE RATIO — The lowest permitted
landscape surface ratio (see "landscape surface area ratio").
MINIMUM LOT AREA — The minimum size lot permitted within the
specified zoning district.
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH — The smallest permissible lot width for the
applicable zoning district.
MINIMUM SETBACK — The narrowest distance permitted from a street,
side, or rear property line to a structure.
MIXED USE — Some combination of residential, commercial, industrial,
office, institutional, and/or other land uses within a district or development.
MOBILE HOME — A type of single-family dwelling unit suitable for yearround
occupancy designed to be towed as a single unit or in sections,
with or without a permanent foundation, with walls of rigid, uncollapsible
construction, and with water supply, sewage disposal, and electrical
convenience. A mobile home includes both a "mobile home" and a
"manufactured home" as defined by Wisconsin Statutes. A mobile home
does not include a "modular home" as defined by this chapter. Any similar
dwelling unit which has its own motor or remains on wheels shall be
considered a recreational vehicle.
MODULAR HOME — A dwelling unit meeting the Uniform Building Code
that is transported to the building site in sections, does not have a
permanent chassis, and is permanently mounted on a permanent
foundation. A modular home is regulated as a single-family dwelling unit
under § 5-3-6(1).
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL — A building or structure designed for three
or more separate dwelling units in which one dwelling unit may have a roof,
wall, or floor in common with another dwelling unit.
§ 5-1-22 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:175
NAVIGABLE WATER — All-natural inland lakes, rivers, streams, ponds,
sloughs, flowages, and other waters within the territorial limits of
Wisconsin, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters. All bodies
of water with a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and with levels of
flow sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the shallowest
draft on an annually recurring basis. For the purposes of this chapter,
rivers and streams will be presumed to be navigable if they are designated
as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States
Geological Survey quadrangle maps until such time that the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources has made a determination that the
waterway is not, in fact, navigable.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any building or other
structure which was lawfully existing under ordinances or regulations
preceding this chapter, but which would not conform to this chapter if
the building or structure were to be erected under the provisions of this
chapter.
NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT — A lawful development approved
under ordinances or regulations preceding the effective date of this Title 5,
but which would not conform to this chapter if the development were to be
created under the current provisions of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A nonconforming or substandard lot is a lot
legally established prior to the effective date of this Title 5 or subsequent
applicable amendments thereto which would not be permitted under the
current terms of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure legally established prior
to the effective date of this Title 5 or subsequent applicable amendments
thereto which would not be permitted under the current terms of this
chapter. Parking, loading, access drives, and other paved areas are included
in the definition of "structure."
NONCONFORMING USE — An active and actual use of land, buildings,
or structures which was lawfully existing prior to the enactment of this
chapter or amendments thereto, which has continued as the same or less
intensive use to the present, and which does not comply with the applicable
regulations of this chapter.
NONRESIDENTIAL USE — The individual uses including but not limited to
"agricultural land uses," "institutional land uses," "commercial land uses,"
"industrial land uses," "storage land uses," "transportation land uses,"
"extraction and disposal land uses," and "energy production land uses" as
listed in Chapter 3.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area
with less than a fully opaque covering or the depiction of the covered male
genitals in a discernible turgid state or the showing of bare buttocks, anus,
or female breast.
OCCUPANCY — The use of land, buildings or structures. The residing of
an individual or individuals overnight in a dwelling unit or the installation,
storage, or use of equipment, merchandise, or machinery in any
§ 5-1-22 MONROE CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:176
nonresidential structure. Change of occupancy is not intended to include
change of tenants or proprietors.
OCCUPANCY, CHANGE OF — A discontinuance of an existing use and
the substitution therefor of a use of a different kind or class. Change of
occupancy is not intended to include a change of tenants or proprietors
unless accompanied by a change in the type of use.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map adopted pursuant to Section 62.23 of the
Wisconsin Statutes which shows existing and proposed streets, highways,
parkways, parks and playgrounds, school sites, etc.
OPACITY — The degree to which vision is blocked by bufferyard. Opacity is
the proportion of a bufferyard's vertical plane which obstructs views into an
adjoining property, i.e., the screening effectiveness of a bufferyard or fence
expressed as the percentage of vision that the screen blocks.
OPEN SPACE — Any area not covered by a structure.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — A mark delineating the highest water
level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave
evidence upon the landscape. The ordinary high-water mark is commonly
that point where natural vegetation changes from predominately aquatic
to predominately terrestrial. In areas where the ordinary high-water mark
is not evident, setbacks shall be measured from the stream bank of the
following water bodies that have permanent flow or open water: the main
channel, adjoining side channels, back waters, and sloughs.
OUTDOOR WOOD FURNACE — An outdoor accessory structure designed
to heat water through a wood fire and then transmit that heated water to
the principal building for direct use and/or heating the principal building.
OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT — A zoning district which imposes uniform
restrictions on all properties within its area which are in addition to the
restrictions specific to the underlying or base zoning districts.
OWNER — The person, persons, or entity having the right of legal title to a
lot or parcel of land.
PARAPET — The extension of a false front or wall above the roofline.
PARCEL — Any area of land (lot or contiguous group of lots) in the City
under single ownership as shown on the last assessor's roll of the county or
the records of the City, whichever is the most recent.
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET — An area of a parking lot or drive which
has been designated for parking on a site plan and is located on a paved
surface per the requirements of § 5-7-6.
PATIO — An open, level-surfaced area which is typically impervious has an
elevation of no more than one foot, and without walls or a roof, intended for
outdoor seating and recreation.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — Criterion established to control and limit
the impacts generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings.
§ 5-1-22 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:177
PERMANENTLY PROTECTED GREEN SPACE — Permanently protected
green space areas that are protected from development such as wetlands,
floodplains, drainage ways, steep slopes, lakeshores, certain woodlands,
native or restored habitat, and stormwater facilities.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which allows for precipitation from any
source to infiltrate directly into the ground.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A structure, together with its accessory structures
and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and
is maintained and controlled by an organized religious body organized
to sustain public worship, which is exempt from federal income tax as
regulated by the Internal Revenue Service Code.
PLAT — A map or drawing which graphically delineates the boundary of
land lots/parcels for the purpose of identification and record title.
POLE BUILDING — A typically metal-clad structure most often utilizing
wooden poles and trusses for support with unfinished, uninsulated interiors.
Such structures are normally used for agricultural purposes, for
construction trade storage, or for general storage, and are not intended for
human occupancy.
PORCH — A covered platform at an entrance to a dwelling, which is not
heated or cooled or used for livable space, that is attached to the outside
of a building. The post of the porch is considered the wall for setback
purposes.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — The building containing the principal use,
including the foundation, basement, and attic. When calculating area,
attached residential accessory structures such as attached garages,
attached garden sheds, and attached pool houses are not considered part of
the principal structure.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main use to which a parcel is devoted and the main
purpose for which the premises exists.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any improvement, facility, or service, together
with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to
provide for public needs, such as: streets, roads, alleys, or pedestrian walks
or paths; storm sewers; flood control improvements; water supply and
distribution facilities; sanitary sewage disposal and treatment; and public
utility and energy services.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — Equipment used by residents of a
principal building on-premises including but not limited to swimming pools,
swings, slides, climbers, teeter-totters, play-forts, sandboxes, supports for
basketball baskets and backboards, badminton nets and similar equipment,
but not including recreational vehicles normally utilized off-premises,
including but not limited to boats, trailers, campers, travel trailers and
snowmobiles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A term encompassing any type of vehicle
used primarily for recreational pleasure. Examples include but not limited
to travel trailers, motor homes, boats, all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles,
§ 5-1-22 MONROE CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:178
etc. Recreational vehicles shall include any mobile structure designed for
temporary occupancy, but shall exclude manufactured homes.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — The items listed in Wis. Stats. § 287.07(1m)
to (4).
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources which is representative of large floods known to have
occurred generally in Wisconsin and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on a particular stream. The regional flood generally
has an average frequency in the order of the 100-year recurrence interval
flood determined from an analysis of floods on a particular stream and other
streams in the same general region.
RESIDENTIAL USE — The individual uses listed under "dwelling unit type"
in § 5-3-6.
RUMMAGE SALE — See "garage or estate sale" in Chapter 3.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume,
or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained
on the part of one so clothed.
SCALE (OF DEVELOPMENT) — A term used to describe the gross floor
area, height, or volume of a single structure or group of structures.
SETBACK — The shortest distance between the exterior of a building or
structure and the nearest point on the referenced lot line, excluding
permitted projections per § 5-4-4.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, or physical
contact with a person's unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female
breast.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
SHORELAND SETBACK — The minimum distance required between the
ordinary high-water mark of a stream or other body of water and any
portion of a building or structure.
SIGN — See § 5-9-3.
SIGN BAND — A horizontal area on the facade of a building located between
the transom and the cornice, which is typically opaque and provides a
location for signage indicating the name of the establishment.
SILL — A horizontal, lower member or bottom of a door or window casing.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit type that consists of a
fully detached single-family residence which is located on an individual lot.
Single-family dwelling units are designed for one family (family residential)
and have no roof, wall, or floor in common with any other dwelling unit. A
single-family dwelling that contains an in-family suite is still considered a
single-family dwelling.
§ 5-1-22 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:179
SITE AREA — See "gross site area."
SITE PLAN — See § 5-10-31.
SLOPE — An incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic ratio of
horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude. (Example: slope is three feet
horizontal and one-foot vertical).
SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant,
water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and other
discarded or salvageable materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or
contained gaseous materials resulting from industrial, commercial, mining
and agricultural operations, and from community activities, but does not
include solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or
dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which
are point sources subject to permits under Wis. Stats. Chapter 283, or
source material, as defined in Wis. Stats. 254.31(10), special nuclear
material, as defined in Wis. Stats. 254.31(11), or by-product material, as
defined in Wis. Stats. 254.31(1).
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit is issued,
provided the actual start of activity was within 365 calendar days of the
permit date. The actual start of activity means the first placement of
permanent construction on the site. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of public streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations; nor does it
include the erection of temporary forms.
STEEP SLOPE — Steep slopes are areas which contain a ratio of horizontal
magnitude to vertical magnitude of 8:1 (gradient of 12% or greater).
STORY — That portion of a building, other than a basement, that is between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it or, if
there is not a floor above, then the space between such floor and the ceiling
immediately above it.
STREET — A right-of-way for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road,
avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated and
includes all of the area between the roadway or right-of-way lines.
STREET TERRACE — The space between the sidewalk and the curb, or the
equivalent space where sidewalk or curb are not installed.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
a more or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something
having a permanent location on the ground, excluding landscape features,
fences, swimming pools, public utilities, and other minor site improvements.
SUBSTANDARD LOT — A lot of record which lawfully existed prior to this
chapter, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if the lot
were to be created under the current provisions of this chapter.
§ 5-1-22 MONROE CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:180
TEMPORARY USE — A land use which is present on a property for a limited
and specified period of time. See § 5-3-18.
TRANSOM — A horizontal bar of stone, wood or glass across the opening of
a door or window.
TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL — A building designed for two separate
dwelling units in which one dwelling unit may have a roof, wall, or floor
in common with another dwelling unit. For the purposes of this chapter,
duplex, twin house, and two-flat dwellings are considered to be two-family
residential. A single-family dwelling with an attached accessory dwelling
unit is not a two-family dwelling.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP — The circumstance where special conditions
affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, have made
strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage,
height, or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the
purposes of this Title 5.
USE — The purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged,
designed, or intended, or for which it is, or may be, occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE — A relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance
will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions
peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a
literal enforcement of the Chapter would result in unnecessary and undue
hardship.
VISION TRIANGLE — See § 5-7-10(4).
WETLAND — An area that is saturated by surface water or groundwater,
with vegetation adapted for life under those soil conditions. See also Section
23.32(1), Wis. Stats.
WOODLAND — Areas of trees whose combined canopies cover a minimum
of 80% of an area of one acre or more, as shown on USGS 7.5-minute
topographic maps for the City of Monroe and its environs.
YARD — An open space, other than a court, on a lot unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth
of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and
a line parallel thereto on the lot.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is the minimum distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel
thereto on the lot.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the
width of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line
and a line parallel thereto on the lot.
§ 5-1-22 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-1-22
1-1:181
YARD, STREET SIDE — For corner lots, the yard between the front and rear
lot lines, extending from the street side lot line to the nearest part of the
nearest building or structure.
ZONING DISTRICT — An area within the City in which certain uniform
regulations and requirements apply under the provisions of this Title 5.
ZONING MAP, OFFICIAL — The map adopted and designated by the City as
being the "Official Zoning Map."
Chapter 5-2
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 5-2-1. Purpose.
The area located within the jurisdiction of this chapter is hereby divided
into zoning districts of such number as is necessary to achieve compatibility
of land uses within each district, to implement the City of Monroe
Comprehensive Plan, and to achieve the other purposes of this chapter.
§ 5-2-2. Standard Zoning Districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, all areas within the jurisdiction of this
chapter are hereby divided into the following standard zoning districts. See
Chapter 6 for overlay zoning districts.
Agricultural Zoning District
RH-35 Rural Holding — 35
Residential Zoning Districts
SR-3 Single Family Residential — 3
SR-4 Single Family Residential — 4
SR-5 Single Family Residential — 5
SR-7 Single Family Residential — 7
DR-8 Duplex Residential — 8
TR-10 Two Family Residential — 10
MR-15 Multi-Family Residential — 15
MR-30 Multi-Family Residential — 30
MH-7 Mobile Home Residential — 7
Mixed Use Zoning Districts
NMU Neighborhood Mixed Use
I Institutional Use
SMU Suburban Mixed Use
UMU Urban Mixed Use
CMU Central Mixed Use
§ 5-1-22 MONROE CODE § 5-2-2
1-1:182
IOA Intensive Outdoor Activity
Industrial Zoning Districts
BP Business Park
LI Light Industrial
HI Heavy Industrial
EX Extraction
Planned Development Zoning District
PD Planned Development
§ 5-2-3. Map of standard Zoning Districts.
Zoning districts established by this chapter are shown on the Official Zoning
Map of the City of Monroe, which together with all explanatory materials
thereon, is hereby made part of this chapter.
§ 5-2-4. Interpretation of zoning district boundaries.
The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any
zoning district boundary shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of
Monroe:
(1) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following the limits of any City, town, or county boundary shall be
construed as following such limits.
(2) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following streets or railroad lines shall be construed as following the
centerline of such streets or railroad lines.
(3) Zoning district boundary lines shown as following or approximately
following platted lot lines or other property lines as shown on the City
of Monroe or Green County tax maps shall be construed as following
such lines.
(4) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other continuously
flowing watercourses shall be construed as following the channel
centerlines of such watercourses, and, in the event of a natural change
in the location of such streams, rivers, or other watercourses, the
zoning district boundary shall be construed as moving with the channel
centerline.
(5) Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following ridgelines or watershed boundaries shall be construed as
following such lines.
(6) Zoning district boundaries shown as separated from, any of the features
listed in Subsections (1) through (5), above, shall be construed to be at
such distances there from as are shown on the Official Zoning Map.
§ 5-2-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-4
1-1:183
§ 5-2-5. Description and purpose of zoning districts.
The following sections specify the description and purpose of the standard
zoning districts established by this chapter, establish principal and
accessory uses permitted by right or as conditional uses, establish bulk,
density, and intensity standards, and reference other applicable regulations.
Definitions and regulations for land uses are provided in Chapter 3. Section
5-3-5 includes a Table of Land Uses indicating which land uses are allowed
in each zoning district, and whether they are permitted by right, by
conditional use, as accessory uses, or as temporary uses.
§ 5-2-6. (RH-35) Rural Holding Zoning District.
(7) Where any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a zoning district
boundary line, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the location of the
line shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(8) An annexation ordinance may place the annexed territory in one or
more zoning districts under this Title 5. If such ordinance fails to place
all or any part of the annexed territory into one or more zoning districts,
the territory not placed in any zoning district shall become part of the
RH-35 District.
(9) Whenever any street, alley, or other public right-of-way is vacated by
official action, the zoning districts abutting each side of the former
public right-of-way shall automatically be extended to the centerline of
the former public right-of-way.
(1) Intent. This district intended to permit very low-density single-family
detached residential development at a density of no more than one
dwelling unit for every 35 gross acres. This district acts as a "holding
zone" to preserve productive agricultural lands in the long-term,
protect existing farm operations from encroachment by incompatible
uses, promote further investments in farming, and may maintain
eligibility for farming incentive programs.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Single-family.
(b) Cultivation.
(c) Community garden.
(d) Market garden.
(e) Outdoor open space institutional.
(f) Passive outdoor recreation.
(g) Active outdoor recreation.
§ 5-2-4 MONROE CODE § 5-2-6
1-1:184
(h) Essential services.
(i) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
(j) Artisan production shop.
(k) Commercial kitchen.
(l) Commercial animal boarding/daycare.
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Single-family.
(b) Husbandry.
(c) On-site agricultural retail.
(d) Intensive agriculture.
(e) Agricultural services.
(f) Indoor institutional.
(g) Large-scale public services and utilities.
(h) Bed-and-breakfast.
(i) Vacation rental home.
(j) Campground.
(k) Indoor maintenance service.
(l) Outdoor maintenance service.
(m) Production greenhouse.
(n) Indoor food cultivation and farming.
(o) Indoor storage and wholesaling.
(p) Outdoor storage and wholesaling.
(q) Personal storage facility.
(r) Transit center.
(s) Airport.
(t) Heliport.
(u) Communication tower.
(v) Composting.
§ 5-2-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-6
1-1:185
(w) Large wind energy system.
(x) Large solar energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Residential kennel.
(e) Home occupation.
(f) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(g) In-family suite.
(h) Farm residence.
(i) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(j) Residential stable.
(k) On-site parking lot.
(l) Company cafeteria.
(m) Incidental outdoor storage.
(n) Satellite dish.
(o) Personal antenna and towers.
(p) Communication antenna.
(q) Small wind energy system.
(r) Small solar energy system.
(s) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Accessory dwelling unit.
(b) Migrant employee housing.
(c) Residential apiary.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
§ 5-2-6 MONROE CODE § 5-2-6
1-1:186
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer
to § 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Temporary outdoor storage container (nonresidential).
(c) Garage or estate sale.
(d) Farmer's market (conditional use permit required).
(e) Temporary farm product sales.
(f) Temporary outdoor sales.*
(g) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(h) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(i) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(j) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(k) Temporary relocatable building (conditional use permit required).
(l) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(m) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (RH-35) Rural Holding
District.
Principal Buildings and Lots Regulation
Maximum residential density* 1 dwelling unit per 35 acres*
Minimum lot area* 40,000 square feet*
Maximum lot area 2 acres
Minimum landscaped surface ratio 25%
Minimum lot width 100 feet
Minimum lot frontage at right-ofway
40 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
For garage door or loading dock
door
40 feet
For open porch or awning/
canopy
22 feet
Minimum street side setback (on
corner lots)
30 feet
Minimum side setback 10 feet
Minimum rear setback 25 feet
§ 5-2-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-6
1-1:187
§ 5-2-7. (SR-3) Single Family Residential — 3 Zoning District.
Maximum principal building height 50 feet
Minimum principal building
separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement setback
(excludes driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
Minimum parking required See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings Residential Nonresidential
Minimum front setback Even with or
behind the
principal
structure
Even with or
behind the
principal
structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 20 feet 20 feet
*Note: This district is designed to allow the property owner to create
one new lot (with a minimum lot area of 40,000 square feet and a
maximum lot area of two acres) from a "parent lot" of between one and
70 acres. The new lot may include the existing residence, allowing the
rest of the undeveloped original lot to be sold. The required maximum
residential density of one dwelling per 35 acres is intended to retain
agricultural or other rural uses until urban services are available to
enable a zoning map amendment to a development-oriented zoning
district.
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district intended to preserve and enhance existing areas of
very low-density single-family detached dwellings. Unlike the case for
the (RH-35) Rural Holding District, the land use standards for this
district permit primarily single-family detached residential
development at an approximate density of three dwelling units per acre
and a variety of related institutional land uses and are not oriented to a
wide range of agricultural activities.
§ 5-2-6 MONROE CODE § 5-2-7
1-1:188
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Single-family.
(b) Community garden.
(c) Outdoor open space institutional.
(d) Passive outdoor recreation.
(e) Active outdoor recreation.
(f) Essential services.
(g) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(c) Communication tower.
(d) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Residential kennel.
(e) Home occupation.
(f) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(g) In-family suite.
(h) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(i) On-site parking lot.
(j) Satellite dish.
(k) Personal antenna and towers.
(l) Small solar energy system.
§ 5-2-7 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-7
1-1:189
(m) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Accessory dwelling unit.
(b) Communication antenna.
(c) Small wind energy system.
(d) Residential apiary.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Garage or estate sale.
(c) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(d) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(e) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(f) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(g) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(h) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (SR-3) Single Family
Residential — 3 District.
Principal Buildings
and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 12,000 square feet
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
50%
Minimum lot width 100 feet
Minimum lot frontage at
right-of-way
40 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
For garage door or
loading dock door
32 feet
For open porch or
awning/canopy
22 feet
§ 5-2-7 MONROE CODE § 5-2-7
1-1:190
§ 5-2-8. (SR-4) Single Family Residential — 4 Zoning District.
Minimum side street
setback (on corner lots)
30 feet
Minimum side setback 10 feet
Minimum rear setback 30 feet
Maximum principal
building height
40 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings Residential Nonresidential
Minimum front setback Even with or behind
the principal
structure
60 feet and at least 5
feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 18 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district intended to create, preserve, and enhance areas for
moderate density single-family detached dwellings at an approximate
density of four dwelling units per acre.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Single-family.
(b) Community garden.
(c) Outdoor open space institutional.
§ 5-2-7 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-8
1-1:191
(d) Passive outdoor recreation.
(e) Active outdoor recreation.
(f) Essential services.
(g) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(c) Communication tower.
(d) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Residential kennel.
(e) Home occupation.
(f) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(g) In-family suite.
(h) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(i) On-site parking lot.
(j) Satellite dish.
(k) Personal antenna and towers.
(l) Small solar energy system.
(m) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Accessory dwelling unit.
§ 5-2-8 MONROE CODE § 5-2-8
1-1:192
(b) Communication antenna.
(c) Small wind energy system.
(d) Residential apiary.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Garage or estate sale.
(c) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(d) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(e) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(f) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(g) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(h) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (SR-4) Single Family
Residential — 4 District.
Principal Buildings
and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 9,000 square feet
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
45%
Minimum lot width 75 feet
Minimum lot frontage at
right-of-way
40 feet
Minimum front setback 25 feet
For garage door or
loading dock door
27 feet
For open porch or
awning/canopy
17 feet
Minimum street side
setback (on corner lots)
25 feet
Minimum side setback 7 feet
Minimum rear setback 25 feet
§ 5-2-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-8
1-1:193
§ 5-2-9. (SR-5) Single Family Residential — 5 Zoning District.
Maximum principal
building height
35 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings Residential Nonresidential
Minimum front setback Even with or behind
the principal
structure
60 feet and at least 5
feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 18 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district intended to create, preserve, and enhance areas for
moderate density single-family detached dwellings at an approximate
density of five dwelling units per acre.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Single-family.
(b) Community garden.
(c) Outdoor open space institutional.
(d) Passive outdoor recreation.
(e) Active outdoor recreation.
(f) Essential services.
§ 5-2-8 MONROE CODE § 5-2-9
1-1:194
(g) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(c) Communication tower.
(d) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Residential kennel.
(e) Home occupation.
(f) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(g) In-family suite.
(h) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(i) On-site parking lot.
(j) Satellite dish.
(k) Personal antenna and towers.
(l) Small solar energy system.
(m) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Accessory dwelling unit.
(b) Communication antenna.
(c) Small wind energy system.
(d) Residential apiary.
§ 5-2-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-9
1-1:195
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Garage or estate sale.
(c) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(d) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(e) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(f) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(g) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(h) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (SR-5) Single Family
Residential — 5 District.
Principal Buildings
and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 7,200 square feet
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
45%
Minimum lot width 60 feet
Minimum lot frontage at
right-of-way
40 feet
Minimum front setback 25 feet
For garage door or
loading dock door
27 feet
For open porch or
awning/canopy
17 feet
Minimum street side
setback (on corner lots)
25 feet
Minimum side setback 7 feet
Minimum rear setback 25 feet
Maximum principal
building height
35 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
§ 5-2-9 MONROE CODE § 5-2-9
1-1:196
§ 5-2-10. (SR-7) Single Family Residential — 7 Zoning District.
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings Residential Nonresidential
Minimum front setback Even with or behind
the principal
structure
60 feet and at least 5
feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 18 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district intended to create, preserve, and enhance areas for
moderate density single-family detached dwellings at an approximate
density of seven dwelling units per acre.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Single-family.
(b) Community garden.
(c) Outdoor open space institutional.
(d) Passive outdoor recreation.
(e) Active outdoor recreation.
(f) Essential services.
(g) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
§ 5-2-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-10
1-1:197
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(c) Communication tower.
(d) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Residential kennel.
(e) Home occupation.
(f) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(g) In-family suite.
(h) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(i) On-site parking lot.
(j) Satellite dish.
(k) Personal antenna and towers.
(l) Small solar energy system.
(m) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Accessory dwelling unit.
(b) Communication antenna.
(c) Small wind energy system.
(d) Residential apiary.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-2-10 MONROE CODE § 5-2-10
1-1:198
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Garage or estate sale.
(c) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(d) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(e) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(f) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(g) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(h) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (SR-7) Single Family
Residential — 7 District.
Principal Buildings
and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 5,000 square feet
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
40%
Minimum lot width 50 feet
Minimum lot frontage at
right-of-way
40 feet
Minimum front setback 20 feet
For garage door or
loading dock door
22 feet
For open porch or
awning/canopy
12 feet
Minimum street side
setback (on corner lots)
20 feet
Minimum side setback 7 feet
Minimum rear setback 20 feet
Maximum principal
building height
35 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
§ 5-2-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-10
1-1:199
§ 5-2-11. (DR-8) Duplex Residential — 8 Zoning District.
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings Residential Nonresidential
Minimum front setback Even with or behind
the principal
structure
60 feet and at least 5
feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 18 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district intended to create, preserve, and enhance areas for
single-family detached and two-family attached dwellings at an
approximate density of eight dwelling units per acre.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Single-family.
(b) Twin house.
(c) Duplex.
(d) Community garden.
(e) Outdoor open space institutional.
(f) Passive outdoor recreation.
(g) Active outdoor recreation.
(h) Essential services.
(i) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
§ 5-2-10 MONROE CODE § 5-2-11
1-1:200
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(c) Communication tower.
(d) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Residential kennel.
(e) Home occupation.
(f) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(g) In-family suite.
(h) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(i) On-site parking lot.
(j) Satellite dish.
(k) Personal antenna and towers.
(l) Small solar energy system.
(m) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Communication antenna.
(b) Small wind energy system.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
§ 5-2-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-11
1-1:201
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Garage or estate sale.
(c) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(d) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(e) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(f) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(g) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(h) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (DR-8) Duplex
Residential — 8 District.
Principal Buildings
and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 5,000 square feet for single-family dwelling
unit 4,200 square feet per dwelling unit for
duplex or twin house
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
40%
Minimum lot width 30 feet per dwelling unit
Minimum lot frontage at
right-of-way
20 feet per dwelling unit
Minimum front setback 25 feet
For garage door or
loading dock door
27 feet
For open porch or
awning/canopy
17 feet
Minimum street side
setback (on corner lots)
25 feet
Minimum side setback 7 feet
For legal twin houses and townhouses on
separate lots, the interior side setback
adjacent to the shared lot line shall be 0
feet.
Minimum rear setback 25 feet
Maximum principal
building height
35 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
§ 5-2-11 MONROE CODE § 5-2-11
1-1:202
§ 5-2-12. (TR-10) One and Two Family Residential — 10 Zoning
District.
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings Residential Nonresidential
Minimum front setback Even with or behind
the principal
structure
60 feet and at least 5
feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 18 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district intended to create, preserve, and enhance areas for
single-family detached and two-flat dwellings at an approximate density
of 10 dwelling units per acre.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Single-family.
(b) Two flat.
(c) Community garden.
(d) Outdoor open space institutional.
(e) Passive outdoor recreation.
(f) Active outdoor recreation.
(g) Essential services.
(h) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
§ 5-2-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-12
1-1:203
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(c) Communication tower.
(d) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Residential kennel.
(e) Home occupation.
(f) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(g) In-family suite.
(h) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(i) On-site parking lot.
(j) Satellite dish.
(k) Personal antenna and towers.
(l) Small solar energy system.
(m) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Accessory dwelling unit.
(b) Communication antenna.
(c) Small wind energy system.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-2-12 MONROE CODE § 5-2-12
1-1:204
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Garage or estate sale.
(c) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(d) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(e) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(f) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(g) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(h) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (TR-10) One and Two
Family Residential — 10 District.
Principal Buildings
and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 7,200 square feet
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
40%
Minimum lot width 50 feet
Minimum lot frontage at
right-of-way
40 feet
Minimum front setback 25 feet
For garage door or
loading dock door
27 feet
For open porch or
awning/canopy
17 feet
Minimum street side
setback (on corner lots)
25 feet
Minimum side setback 7 feet
Minimum rear setback 25 feet
Maximum principal
building height
35 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
§ 5-2-12 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-12
1-1:205
§ 5-2-13. (MR-15) Multi-Family Residential — 15 Zoning District.
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings Residential Nonresidential
Minimum front setback Even with or behind
the principal
structure
60 feet and at least 5
feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 18 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district intended to create, preserve, and enhance areas for
multifamily uses in small buildings at medium densities, up to 15
dwelling units per acre.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Townhouse (three to four units per building).
(b) Multiplex (three to four units per building).
(c) Apartment (three to four units per building).
(d) Community garden.
(e) Outdoor open space institutional.
(f) Passive outdoor recreation.
(g) Active outdoor recreation.
(h) Essential services.
(i) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
§ 5-2-12 MONROE CODE § 5-2-13
1-1:206
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Townhouse (five to eight units per building).
(b) Multiplex (five to eight units per building).
(c) Apartment (five to eight units per building).
(d) Boarding house.
(e) Cultivation.
(f) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(g) Community living arrangement (16+ residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(9).
(h) Institutional residential.
(i) Group daycare center.
(j) Live/work unit.
(k) Transit center.
(l) Off-site parking lot.
(m) Off-site structured parking.
(n) Communication tower.
(o) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Home occupation.
(e) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(f) In-family suite.
(g) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(h) On-site parking lot.
(i) Satellite dish.
§ 5-2-13 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-13
1-1:207
(j) Personal antenna and towers.
(k) Small solar energy system.
(l) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Residential kennel.
(b) Communication antenna.
(c) Small wind energy system.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Garage or estate sale.
(c) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(d) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(e) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(f) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(g) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(h) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (MR-15) Multi-Family
Residential — 15 District.
Principal Buildings
and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
40%
Minimum lot width 60 feet
Minimum lot frontage at
right-of-way
40 feet
Minimum front setback 25 feet
For garage door or
loading dock door
27 feet
§ 5-2-13 MONROE CODE § 5-2-13
1-1:208
§ 5-2-14. (MR-30) Multi-Family Residential — 30 Zoning District.
For open porch or
awning/canopy
17 feet
Minimum street side
setback (on corner lots)
25 feet
Minimum side setback 10 feet
For legal twin houses and townhouses on
separate lots, the interior side setback
adjacent to the shared lot line shall be 0
feet.
Minimum rear setback 25 feet
Maximum principal
building height
35 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings Residential Nonresidential
Minimum front setback Even with or behind
the principal
structure
60 feet and at least 5
feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 18 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district intended to create, preserve, and enhance areas for
multifamily uses in small and mid-sized buildings at higher densities, up
to 30 dwelling units per acre.
§ 5-2-13 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-14
1-1:209
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Townhouse (three to eight units per building).
(b) Multiplex (three to eight units per building).
(c) Apartment (three to eight units per building).
(d) Community garden.
(e) Outdoor open space institutional.
(f) Passive outdoor recreation.
(g) Active outdoor recreation.
(h) Essential services.
(i) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Apartment (9+ units per building).
(b) Boarding house.
(c) Cultivation.
(d) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(e) Community living arrangement (16+ residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(9).
(f) Institutional residential.
(g) Group daycare center.
(h) Transit center.
(i) Off-site parking lot.
(j) Off-site structured parking.
(k) Communication tower.
(l) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
§ 5-2-14 MONROE CODE § 5-2-14
1-1:210
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Home occupation.
(e) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(f) In-family suite.
(g) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(h) On-site parking lot.
(i) Satellite dish.
(j) Personal antenna and towers.
(k) Small solar energy system.
(l) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Residential kennel.
(b) Communication antenna.
(c) Small wind energy system.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Garage or estate sale.
(c) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(d) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(e) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(f) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(g) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(h) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (MR-30) Multi-Family
Residential — 30 District.
§ 5-2-14 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-14
1-1:211
Principal Buildings
and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
40%
Minimum lot width 100 feet
Minimum lot frontage at
right-of-way
40 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
For garage door or
loading dock door
32 feet
For open porch or
awning/canopy
22 feet
Minimum street side
setback (on corner lots)
30 feet
Minimum side setback 12 feet
For legal twin houses and townhouses on
separate lots, the interior side setback
adjacent to the shared lot line shall be 0
feet
Minimum rear setback 30 feet
Maximum principal
building height
40 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory buildings Residential Nonresidential
Minimum front setback Even with or behind
the principal
structure
60 feet and at least 5
feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 20 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
§ 5-2-14 MONROE CODE § 5-2-14
1-1:212
§ 5-2-15. (MH-7) Mobile Home Residential — 7 Zoning District.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district intended to create, preserve, and enhance
subdivisions exclusively for mobile home developments at an
approximate density of seven dwelling units per acre. The regulations
for mobile homes and mobile home parks contained in Chapter 16,
Division 3, of the Monroe Municipal Code shall apply in addition to the
requirements of this zoning district. Where there are conflicts between
this Title 5 and Chapter 16, the more restrictive regulations shall apply.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Mobile home.
(b) Mobile home subdivision.
(c) Community garden.
(d) Outdoor open space institutional.
(e) Passive outdoor recreation.
(f) Active outdoor recreation.
(g) Essential services.
(h) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Mobile home park.
(b) Cultivation.
(c) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(d) Communication tower.
(e) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
§ 5-2-14 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-15
1-1:213
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Home occupation.
(e) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(f) In-family suite.
(g) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(h) On-site parking lot.
(i) Satellite dish.
(j) Personal antenna and towers.
(k) Small solar energy system.
(l) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Residential kennel.
(b) Communication antenna.
(c) Small wind energy system.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Garage or estate sale.
(c) Farmer's market (conditional use permit required).
(d) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(e) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(f) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(g) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(h) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(i) Temporary vehicle sales.*
§ 5-2-15 MONROE CODE § 5-2-15
1-1:214
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (MH-7) Mobile Home
Residential — 7 District. (A mobile home that is replacing an existing
unit can meet either the following table or the setbacks met by the
existing unit, whichever are less restrictive.)
Principal
Buildings and
Lots
Mobile Home
Subdivision or
Park
Mobile Home
Lot or Leased
Space
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum zoning
district area
10 acres Must be within a
mobile home
subdivision or
park
Must be within a
mobile home
subdivision or
park
Minimum lot or
leased space
area
N/A 5,000 square
feet
7,200 square
feet
Minimum
landscaped
surface ratio
40% 40% 45%
Minimum lot or
leased space
width
100 feet 50 feet 60 feet
Minimum lot or
leased space
frontage at
right-of-way or
private drive
edge
40 feet 40 feet 40 feet
Minimum
subdivision or
park perimeter
setback
N/A N/A
Minimum front
setback
20 feet 25 feet
Minimum street
side setback (on
corner lots or
leased spaces)
20 feet 25 feet
Minimum side
setback
7 feet 7 feet
Minimum rear
setback
20 feet along all
perimeter
boundaries in
addition to all
other required
setbacks
20 feet 35 feet
Maximum
principal
building height
N/A 20 feet 20 feet
§ 5-2-15 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-15
1-1:215
§ 5-2-16. through § 5-2-20. (Reserved)
§ 5-2-21. (NMU) Neighborhood Mixed Use Zoning District.
Minimum
building
separation
N/A 10 feet 10 feet
Minimum
pavement
setback
(excludes
driveway
entrances)
10 feet from
right-of-way
5 feet from
interior lot line
10 feet from
right-of-way
5 feet from
interior lot line
10 feet from
right-of-way
5 feet from
interior lot line
Minimum
parking required
N/A See Chapter 3 See Chapter 3
Minimum
garage door or
carport setback
to alley (if
applicable)
N/A 10 feet 10 feet
Accessory
Buildings
Mobile Home
Subdivision or
Park
Mobile Home
Lot or Leased
Space
Nonresidential
Uses
Minimum front
setback
N/A Even with or
behind principal
structure
Even with or
behind principal
structure
Minimum side
setback
N/A 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear
setback
N/A 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height N/A 18 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district is intended to permit residential development and
small-scale commercial uses compatible with adjacent residential uses
§ 5-2-15 MONROE CODE § 5-2-21
1-1:216
and neighborhood character. Residential uses are intended to occur at
an approximate density of five dwelling units per acre.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Single-family.
(b) Two-flat.
(c) Outdoor open space institutional.
(d) Passive outdoor recreation.
(e) Active outdoor recreation.
(f) Essential services.
(g) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
(h) Office.
(i) Personal or professional service.
(j) Indoor sales or service.
(k) Commercial animal boarding/daycare.
(l) Bed-and-breakfast.
(m) Indoor maintenance service.
(n) Apartments with limited commercial.
(o) Mixed-use building.
(p) Live/work unit.
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Twin house.
(b) Duplex.
(c) Townhouse (three to four units per building).
(d) Multiplex (three to four units per building).
(e) Apartment (three to four units per building).
(f) Cultivation.
(g) Community garden.
§ 5-2-21 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-21
1-1:217
(h) Indoor institutional.
(i) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(j) Community living arrangement (16+ residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(9).
(k) Institutional residential.
(l) Artisan production shop.
(m) Physical activity studio.
(n) Commercial kitchen.
(o) Indoor commercial entertainment.
(p) Outdoor commercial entertainment.
(q) Drive-through and in-vehicle sales or service.
(r) Group daycare center.
(s) Vacation rental home.
(t) Commercial indoor lodging.
(u) Transit center.
(v) Off-site parking lot.
(w) Off-site structured parking.
(x) Communication tower.
(y) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Home occupation.
(e) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(f) In-family suite.
(g) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(h) On-site parking lot.
(i) Company cafeteria.
§ 5-2-21 MONROE CODE § 5-2-21
1-1:218
(j) Incidental outdoor display.
(k) Incidental indoor sales.
(l) Satellite dish.
(m) Personal antenna and towers.
(n) Small solar energy system.
(o) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Residential kennel.
(b) Incidental outdoor storage.
(c) Communication antenna.
(d) Small wind energy system.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Temporary outdoor storage container (nonresidential).
(c) Farmer's market (conditional use permit required).
(d) Temporary outdoor sales.*
(e) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(f) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(g) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(h) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(i) Temporary relocatable building* (conditional use permit required).
(j) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(k) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (NMU) Neighborhood
Mixed Use District.
§ 5-2-21 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-21
1-1:219
Principal Buildings
and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 7,200 square feet
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
45%
Minimum lot width 60 feet
Minimum lot frontage at
right-of-way
40 feet
Minimum front setback 25 feet
For garage door or
loading dock door
27 feet
For open porch or
awning/canopy
17 feet
Minimum street side
setback (on corner lots)
25 feet
Minimum side setback 12 feet
For legal twin houses, townhouses, and
multitenant buildings with common walls
approved through the group development
process (§ 5-7-2), the interior side setback
adjacent to the shared lot line shall be 0
feet.
Minimum rear setback 25 feet
Maximum principal
building height
35 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings Residential Nonresidential
Minimum front setback Even with or behind
the principal
structure
60 feet and at least 5
feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 18 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
§ 5-2-21 MONROE CODE § 5-2-21
1-1:220
§ 5-2-22. (I) Institutional Zoning District.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district is intended to permit both large- and small-scale
institutional development including those on single sites within larger
areas of both residential and nonresidential zoning districts. This
district avoids the creation of commercial spot zone intrusions in
primarily residential or industrial areas where spots of commercial
zoning may be incompatible.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Community garden.
(b) Outdoor open space institutional.
(c) Passive outdoor recreation.
(d) Active outdoor recreation.
(e) Essential services.
(f) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
(g) Office.
(h) Personal or professional service.
(i) Artisan production shop.
(j) Physical activity studio.
(k) Commercial kitchen.
(l) Group daycare center.
(m) Indoor maintenance service.
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Boarding house.
§ 5-2-21 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-22
1-1:221
(b) Cultivation.
(c) Market garden.
(d) Indoor institutional.
(e) Large-scale public service and utilities.
(f) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(g) Community living arrangement (16+ residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(9).
(h) Institutional residential.
(i) Off-site parking lot.
(j) Off-site parking service.
(k) Intensive outdoor activity.
(l) Communication tower.
(m) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Home occupation.
(e) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(f) In-family suite.
(g) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(h) On-site parking lot.
(i) On-site structured parking.
(j) Company cafeteria.
(k) Incidental outdoor display.
(l) Incidental indoor sales.
(m) Satellite dish.
(n) Personal antenna and towers.
(o) Small solar energy system.
§ 5-2-22 MONROE CODE § 5-2-22
1-1:222
(p) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Residential kennel.
(b) Communication antenna.
(c) Small wind energy system.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Temporary outdoor storage container (nonresidential).
(c) Farmer's market (conditional use permit required).
(d) Temporary outdoor sales.*
(e) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(f) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(g) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(h) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(i) Temporary relocatable building.*
(j) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(k) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (I) Institutional District.
Principal Buildings
and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 20,000 square feet
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
25%
Minimum lot width 100 feet
Minimum lot frontage at
right-of-way
40 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
For garage door or
loading dock door
40 feet
§ 5-2-22 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-22
1-1:223
§ 5-2-23. (SMU) Suburban Mixed-Use Zoning District.
For open porch or
awning/canopy
22 feet
Minimum street side
setback (on corner lots)
30 feet
Minimum side setback 10 feet
For legal twin houses, townhouses, and
multitenant buildings with common walls
approved through the group development
process (§ 5-7-2), the interior side setback
adjacent to the shared lot line shall be 0
feet.
Minimum rear setback 25 feet
Maximum principal
building height
50 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings Residential Nonresidential
Minimum front setback Even with or behind
the principal
structure
60 feet and at least 5
feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 20 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district intended to permit a wide range of large- and smallscale
office, retail, service, and lodging, and entertainment uses that
§ 5-2-22 MONROE CODE § 5-2-23
1-1:224
are compatible with the desired community character. Residential uses
are intended to occur at an approximate density of up to 30 dwelling
units per acre.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Outdoor open space institutional.
(b) Passive outdoor recreation.
(c) Active outdoor recreation.
(d) Essential services.
(e) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
(f) Office.
(g) Personal or professional service.
(h) Indoor sales or service.
(i) Outdoor display.
(j) Artisan production shop.
(k) Physical activity studio.
(l) Commercial kitchen.
(m) Indoor commercial entertainment.
(n) Drive-through and in-vehicle sales or service.
(o) Group daycare center.
(p) Commercial animal boarding/daycare.
(q) Indoor maintenance service.
(r) Vehicle sales.
(s) Apartments with limited commercial.
(t) Mixed-use building.
(u) Live/work unit.
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Community garden.
§ 5-2-23 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-23
1-1:225
(c) Market garden.
(d) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(e) Community living arrangement (16+ residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(9).
(f) Outdoor commercial entertainment.
(g) Cheese slicing and packaging.
(h) Commercial indoor lodging.
(i) Vehicle service and repair.
(j) Transit center.
(k) Off-site parking lot.
(l) Off-site structured parking.
(m) Communication tower.
(n) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Home occupation.
(e) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(f) In-family suite.
(g) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(h) On-site parking lot.
(i) On-site structured parking.
(j) Company cafeteria.
(k) Incidental outdoor display.
(l) Incidental indoor sales.
(m) Incidental light industrial.
(n) Incidental outdoor storage.
(o) Satellite dish.
§ 5-2-23 MONROE CODE § 5-2-23
1-1:226
(p) Personal antenna and towers.
(q) Small solar energy system.
(r) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Residential kennel.
(b) Communication antenna.
(c) Small wind energy system.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Temporary outdoor storage container (nonresidential).
(c) Farmer's market (conditional use permit required).
(d) Temporary outdoor sales.*
(e) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(f) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(g) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(h) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(i) Temporary relocatable building.*
(j) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(k) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (SMU) Suburban Mixed-
Use District.
Principal Buildings and
Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 20,000 square feet
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
25%
Minimum lot width 100 feet
§ 5-2-23 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-23
1-1:227
Minimum lot frontage at
right-of-way
40 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
For garage door or
loading dock door
40 feet
For open porch or
awning/canopy
22 feet
Minimum street side
setback (on corner lots)
30 feet
Minimum side setback 10 feet
For legal twin houses, townhouses, and
multitenant buildings with common walls
approved through the group development
process (§ 5-7-2), the interior side setback
adjacent to the shared lot line shall be 0
feet.
Minimum rear setback 25 feet
Maximum principal
building height
50 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings Residential Nonresidential
Minimum front setback Even with or behind
the principal
structure
60 feet and at least 5
feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 20 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
§ 5-2-23 MONROE CODE § 5-2-23
1-1:228
§ 5-2-24. (UMU) Urban Mixed-Use Zoning District.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district is intended to permit areas, generally on
established commercial corridors, that are mixed use in character and
establish standards that are compatible with the existing mix of land
uses and redevelopment objectives. This district is intended to provide
for a variety of employment, retail and community service
opportunities, while allowing some residential uses at an approximate
density of up to 30 dwelling units per acre. Residential uses should not
become the majority ground-floor land use in this district. Uses shall be
compatible not only with other uses within the district, but land uses in
adjoining zoning districts as well.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Outdoor open space institutional.
(b) Passive outdoor recreation.
(c) Active outdoor recreation.
(d) Essential services.
(e) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
(f) Office.
(g) Personal or professional service.
(h) Indoor sales or service.
(i) Outdoor display.
(j) Artisan production shop.
(k) Physical activity studio.
(l) Commercial kitchen.
(m) Indoor commercial entertainment.
(n) Drive-through and in-vehicle sales or service.
(o) Group daycare center.
(p) Commercial animal boarding/daycare.
(q) Indoor maintenance service.
(r) Vehicle sales.
(s) Apartments with limited commercial.
§ 5-2-23 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-24
1-1:229
(t) Mixed-use building.
(u) Live/work unit.
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Boarding house.
(b) Cultivation.
(c) Community garden.
(d) Market garden.
(e) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(f) Community living arrangement (16+ residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(9).
(g) Outdoor commercial entertainment.
(h) Cheese slicing and packaging.
(i) Commercial indoor lodging.
(j) Vehicle service and repair.
(k) Production greenhouse.
(l) Indoor food cultivation and farming.
(m) Transit center.
(n) Off-site parking lot.
(o) Off-site structured parking.
(p) Communication tower.
(q) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) Recreational facility.
(c) Landscape feature.
(d) Home occupation.
(e) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
§ 5-2-24 MONROE CODE § 5-2-24
1-1:230
(f) In-family suite.
(g) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(h) On-site parking lot.
(i) On-site structured parking.
(j) Company cafeteria.
(k) Incidental outdoor display.
(l) Incidental indoor sales.
(m) Incidental light industrial.
(n) Incidental outdoor storage.
(o) Satellite dish.
(p) Personal antenna and towers.
(q) Small solar energy system.
(r) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Residential kennel.
(b) Communication antenna.
(c) Small wind energy system.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Temporary outdoor storage container (nonresidential).
(c) Farmer's market (conditional use permit required).
(d) Temporary outdoor sales.*
(e) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(f) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(g) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(h) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
§ 5-2-24 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-24
1-1:231
(i) Temporary relocatable building.*
(j) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(k) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (UMU) Urban Mixed-
Use District.
Principal Buildings and
Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 10,000 square feet
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
15%
Minimum lot width 50 feet
Minimum lot frontage at
right-of-way
40 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
For garage door or
loading dock door
40 feet
For open porch or
awning/canopy
22 feet
Minimum street side
setback (on corner lots)
30 feet
Minimum side setback 10 feet
For legal twin houses, townhouses, and
multitenant buildings with common walls
approved through the group development
process (§ 5-7-2), the interior side setback
adjacent to the shared lot line shall be 0
feet.
Minimum rear setback 30 feet
Maximum principal
building height
50 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings Residential Nonresidential
§ 5-2-24 MONROE CODE § 5-2-24
1-1:232
§ 5-2-25. (CMU) Central Mixed-Use Zoning District.
Minimum front setback Even with or behind
the principal
structure
60 feet and at least 5
feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 20 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district is intended to permit both large- and small-scale
downtown commercial development at an intensity which provides
significant incentives for infill development, redevelopment, and the
continued economic viability of existing development. The district is
also intended to retain the existing "Main Street" characteristics of the
core blocks in Monroe's historic downtown. Residential uses are
intended to occur at a minimum approximate density of 10 dwelling
units per acre.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Outdoor open space institutional.
(b) Passive outdoor recreation.
(c) Active outdoor recreation.
(d) Essential services.
(e) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(7).
(f) Office.
(g) Personal or professional service.
(h) Indoor sales or service.
(i) Outdoor display.
§ 5-2-24 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-25
1-1:233
(j) Artisan production shop.
(k) Physical activity studio.
(l) Commercial kitchen.
(m) Indoor commercial entertainment.
(n) Indoor maintenance service.
(o) Apartments with limited commercial.
(p) Mixed-use building.
(q) Live/work unit.
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Community garden.
(c) Market garden.
(d) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(8).
(e) Community living arrangement (16+ residents) meeting the
requirements of § 5-3-8(9).
(f) Outdoor commercial entertainment.
(g) Group daycare center.
(h) Commercial indoor lodging.
(i) Transit center.
(j) Off-site parking lot.
(k) Off-site structured parking.
(l) Communication tower.
(m) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Recreational facility.
(b) Landscape feature.
(c) Home occupation.
§ 5-2-25 MONROE CODE § 5-2-25
1-1:234
(d) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(e) On-site parking lot.
(f) On-site structured parking.
(g) Company cafeteria.
(h) Incidental outdoor storage.
(i) Incidental indoor sales.
(j) Satellite dish.
(k) Personal antenna and towers.
(l) Small solar energy system.
(m) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements.
(a) Residential accessory structure.
(b) In-home daycare (four to eight children).
(c) In-family suite.
(d) Incidental outdoor display.
(e) Communication antenna.
(f) Small wind energy system.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Temporary outdoor storage container (nonresidential).
(c) Farmer's market.
(d) Temporary outdoor sales.*
(e) Temporary outdoor assembly.*
(f) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(g) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(h) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
§ 5-2-25 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-25
1-1:235
(i) Temporary relocatable building.*
(j) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(k) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (CMU) Central Mixed-
Use District.
Principal Buildings
and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 5,000 square feet
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
0%
Minimum lot width 20 feet
Minimum lot frontage
at right-of-way
20 feet
Minimum front
setback
5 feet maximum
For garage door or
loading dock door
0 feet
For open porch or
awning/canopy
0 feet
Minimum street side
setback (on corner
lots)
5 feet maximum
Minimum side setback 10 feet
For legal twin houses, townhouses, and
multitenant buildings with common walls
approved through the group development
process (§ 5-7-2), the interior side setback
adjacent to the shared lot line shall be 0 feet.
Minimum rear setback 0 feet
Maximum principal
building height
50 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
0 feet
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings Residential Nonresidential
§ 5-2-25 MONROE CODE § 5-2-25
1-1:236
§ 5-2-26. (IOA) Intensive Outdoor Activity Zoning District.
Minimum front
setback
Even with or behind
the principal structure
60 feet and at least 5
feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum rear setback 6 feet 6 feet
Maximum height 20 feet 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district intended to permit large-scale outdoor commercial
entertainment uses associated with significant impacts on neighboring
properties, particularly related to traffic, parking, noise, operating
hours, and lighting. The City will consider the use of this zoning district
on a case-by-case basis at the request of a property owner.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Indoor commercial entertainment.
(b) Outdoor commercial entertainment.
(c) Intensive outdoor activity.
(d) Outdoor storage and wholesaling.
(e) Off-site parking lot.
(f) Off-site structured parking.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Tourist rooming house (single-family dwelling unit only).
§ 5-2-25 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-26
1-1:237
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Recreational facility.
(b) Landscape feature.
(c) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(d) On-site parking lot.
(e) On-site structured parking.
(f) Incidental outdoor display.
(g) Incidental indoor sales.
(h) Satellite dish.
(i) Personal antenna and towers.
(j) Communication antenna.
(k) Small wind energy system.
(l) Small solar energy system.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary outdoor storage container (nonresidential) (conditional
use permit required).
(b) Temporary outdoor assembly (conditional use permit required).
(c) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(d) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(e) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(f) Temporary relocatable building.*
(g) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(h) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (IOA) Intensive Outdoor
Activity District.
§ 5-2-26 MONROE CODE § 5-2-26
1-1:238
Principal Buildings and
Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 20,000 square feet
Minimum landscaped surface
ratio
25%
Minimum lot width 100 feet
Minimum lot frontage at rightof-
way
40 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
For garage door or loading
dock door
40 feet
For open porch or awning/
canopy
22 feet
Minimum street side setback
(on corner lots)
100 feet
Minimum side setback 50 feet
Minimum rear setback 100 feet
Maximum principal building
height
60 feet
Minimum principal building
separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement setback
(excludes driveway entrances)
10 feet from right-of-way
5 feet from interior lot line
Minimum parking required See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings
Minimum front setback 60 feet and at least 5 feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 20 feet
Minimum rear setback 20 feet
Maximum height 18 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
§ 5-2-26 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-27
1-1:239
§ 5-2-27. through § 5-2-29. (Reserved)
§ 5-2-30. (BP) Business Park Zoning District.
(1) Intent. This district intended to accommodate high-quality business,
industrial, office, and related land uses at an intensity that is
compatible with the overall community character of the City.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Outdoor open space institutional.
(b) Passive outdoor recreation.
(c) Essential services.
(d) Office.
(e) Personal or professional service.
(f) Physical activity studio.
(g) Commercial kitchen.
(h) Commercial animal boarding/daycare.
(i) Indoor maintenance service.
(j) Light industrial.
(k) Indoor storage and wholesaling.
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Community garden.
(c) Active outdoor recreation.
(d) Indoor commercial entertainment.
(e) Outdoor commercial entertainment.
(f) Drive-through and in-vehicle sales or service.
(g) Cheese slicing and packaging.
(h) Group daycare center.
(i) Commercial indoor lodging.
(j) Transit center.
§ 5-2-27 MONROE CODE § 5-2-30
1-1:240
(k) Heliport.
(l) Off-site parking lot.
(m) Off-site structured parking.
(n) Communication tower.
(o) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Recreational facility.
(b) Landscape feature.
(c) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(d) On-site parking lot.
(e) On-site structured parking.
(f) Company cafeteria.
(g) Incidental outdoor display.
(h) Incidental indoor sales.
(i) Incidental light industrial.
(j) Incidental outdoor storage.
(k) Satellite dish.
(l) Personal antenna and towers.
(m) Small solar energy system.
(n) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements.
(a) Communication antenna.
(b) Small wind energy system.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Temporary outdoor storage container (nonresidential).
§ 5-2-30 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-30
1-1:241
(c) Farmer's market (conditional use permit required).
(d) Temporary outdoor assembly* (conditional use permit required).
(e) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(f) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(g) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(h) Temporary relocatable building.*
(i) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(j) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (BP) Business Park
District.
Principal Buildings and
Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 1 acre
Minimum landscaped
surface ratio
20%
Minimum lot width 100 feet
Minimum lot frontage at
right-of-way
100 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
For garage door or
loading dock door
30 feet
For open porch or
awning/canopy
30 feet
Minimum street side
setback (on corner lots)
30 feet
Minimum side setback 10 feet
For legal twin houses, townhouses, and
multitenant buildings with common walls
approved through the group development
process (§ 5-7-2), the interior side setback
adjacent to the shared lot line shall be 0
feet.
Minimum rear setback 10 feet
Maximum principal
building height
75 feet
Minimum principal
building separation
10 feet
§ 5-2-30 MONROE CODE § 5-2-30
1-1:242
§ 5-2-31. (LI) Light Industrial Zoning District.
Minimum pavement
setback (excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from all lot lines
Minimum parking
required
See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings
Minimum front setback At least 5 feet behind the principal
structure
Minimum side setback 10 feet
Minimum rear setback 10 feet
Maximum height 50 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district is intended to permit both large- and small-scale
industrial and office development at an intensity which is consistent
with the objectives of economic development and compatibility with
adjacent residential and commercial development. The primary
distinguishing feature of this district is that it is geared to indoor
industrial activities which are not typically associated with high levels
of noise, soot, odors and other potential nuisances for adjoining
properties.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Outdoor open space institutional.
(b) Passive outdoor recreation.
(c) Essential services.
(d) Office.
(e) Personal or professional service.
(f) Outdoor display.
§ 5-2-30 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-31
1-1:243
(g) Artisan production shop.
(h) Cheese slicing and packaging.
(i) Indoor maintenance service.
(j) Vehicle sales.
(k) Vehicle service and repair.
(l) Light industrial.
(m) Production greenhouse.
(n) Indoor food production and processing.
(o) Indoor storage and wholesaling.
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Community garden.
(c) Active outdoor recreation.
(d) Large-scale public services and utilities.
(e) Outdoor maintenance service.
(f) Indoor food cultivation and farming.
(g) Personal storage facility.
(h) Transit center.
(i) Distribution center.
(j) Off-site parking lot.
(k) Off-site structured parking.
(l) Communication tower.
(m) Large wind energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Recreational facility.
(b) Landscape feature.
(c) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(d) On-site parking lot.
§ 5-2-31 MONROE CODE § 5-2-31
1-1:244
(e) On-site structured parking.
(f) Company cafeteria.
(g) Incidental outdoor display.
(h) Incidental indoor sales.
(i) Incidental light industrial.
(j) Incidental outdoor storage.
(k) Satellite dish.
(l) Personal antenna and towers.
(m) Small wind energy system.
(n) Small solar energy system.
(o) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements.
(a) Communication antenna.
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Temporary outdoor storage container (nonresidential).
(c) Farmer's market (conditional use permit required).
(d) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(e) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(f) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(g) Temporary relocatable building.*
(h) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(i) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (LI) Light Industrial
District.
Principal Buildings and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 10,000 square feet
§ 5-2-31 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-31
1-1:245
Minimum landscaped surface ratio 80%
Minimum lot width 80 feet
Minimum lot frontage at right-ofway
50 feet
Minimum front setback 25 feet
Minimum street side setback (on
corner lots)
25 feet
Minimum side setback 10 feet
For legal twin houses,
townhouses, and multitenant
buildings with common walls
approved through the group
development process (§ 5-7-2), the
interior side setback adjacent to
the shared lot line shall be 0 feet.
Minimum rear setback 10 feet
Maximum principal building
height
60 feet
Minimum principal building
separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement setback (lot
line to pavement; excludes
driveway entrances)
10 feet from all lot lines
Minimum parking required See Chapter 3
Minimum garage door setback to
alley (if applicable)
10 feet
Accessory Buildings
Minimum front setback 60 feet and at least 5 feet behind
the principal structure
Minimum side setback 10 feet
Minimum rear setback 25 feet
Maximum height 45 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
§ 5-2-31 MONROE CODE § 5-2-32
1-1:246
§ 5-2-32. (HI) Heavy Industrial Zoning District.
(1) Intent. This district intended to provide space for manufacturing and
industrial operations which are potentially incompatible with
residential and commercial uses.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Outdoor open space institutional.
(b) Passive outdoor recreation.
(c) Essential services.
(d) Office.
(e) Personal or professional service.
(f) Outdoor display.
(g) Artisan production shop.
(h) Commercial kitchen.
(i) Cheese slicing and packaging.
(j) Indoor maintenance service.
(k) Outdoor maintenance service.
(l) Vehicle service and repair.
(m) Light industrial.
(n) Heavy industrial.
(o) Production greenhouse.
(p) Indoor food production and processing.
(q) Indoor storage and wholesaling.
(r) Outdoor storage and wholesaling.
(s) Distribution center.
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Community garden.
(c) Active outdoor recreation.
§ 5-2-32 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-32
1-1:247
(d) Large-scale public services and utilities.
(e) Adult-oriented entertainment business.
(f) Indoor food cultivation and farming.
(g) Personal storage facility.
(h) Transit center.
(i) Freight terminal.
(j) Airport.
(k) Heliport.
(l) Off-site parking lot.
(m) Off-site structured parking.
(n) Communication tower.
(o) Composting.
(p) Recycling and waste disposal.
(q) Salvage or junkyard.
(r) Sand and mineral processing.
(s) Large wind energy system.
(t) Large solar energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Recreational facility.
(b) Landscape feature.
(c) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(d) On-site parking lot.
(e) On-site structured parking.
(f) Company cafeteria.
(g) Incidental outdoor display.
(h) Incidental indoor sales.
(i) Incidental light industrial.
(j) Incidental outdoor storage.
(k) Satellite dish.
§ 5-2-32 MONROE CODE § 5-2-32
1-1:248
(l) Personal antenna and towers.
(m) Communication antenna.
(n) Small wind energy system.
(o) Small solar energy system.
(p) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements.
(a) (None).
(6) Temporary uses. Most temporary uses are limited to 90 days per
calendar year. Temporary uses below marked with an asterisk (*) may
be extended in duration through the conditional use process. Refer to
§ 5-3-18 for detailed definitions and requirements for each of the
following land uses.
(a) Temporary moving container (residential).
(b) Temporary outdoor storage container (nonresidential).
(c) Temporary on-site construction storage.*
(d) Temporary contractor's project office.*
(e) Temporary on-site real estate sales office.*
(f) Temporary relocatable building.*
(g) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(h) Temporary vehicle sales.*
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (HI) Heavy Industrial
District.
Principal Buildings and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 5 acres
Minimum landscaped surface ratio 15%
Minimum lot width 100 feet
Minimum lot frontage at right-ofway
100 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
For garage door or loading
dock door
30 feet
For open porch or awning/
canopy
30 feet
§ 5-2-32 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-32
1-1:249
§ 5-2-33. (EX) Extraction Zoning District.
Minimum street side setback (on
corner lots)
30 feet
Minimum side setback 10 feet
For legal twin houses,
townhouses, and multitenant
buildings with common walls
approved through the group
development process (§ 5-7-2),
the interior side setback
adjacent to the shared lot line
shall be 0 feet.
Minimum rear setback 10 feet
Maximum principal building height 75 feet
Minimum principal building
separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement setback
(excludes driveway entrances)
10 feet from all lot lines
Minimum parking required See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings
Minimum front setback At least 5 feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 10 feet
Minimum rear setback 10 feet
Maximum height 50 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Intent. This district intended to provide for quarrying and sand and
gravel extraction, uses which, if sited properly, can be located within
the City.
(2) Principal uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
§ 5-2-32 MONROE CODE § 5-2-33
1-1:250
(3) Principal uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements for each of the following land
uses.
(a) Cultivation.
(b) Community garden.
(c) Light industrial.
(d) Indoor storage and wholesaling.
(e) Communication tower.
(f) Extraction.
(g) Sand and mineral processing.
(h) Large wind energy system.
(i) Large solar energy system.
(4) Accessory uses permitted by right. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed
definitions and requirements for each of the following land uses.
(a) Landscape feature.
(b) Nonresidential accessory structure.
(c) On-site parking lot.
(d) Incidental light industrial.
(e) Incidental outdoor storage.
(f) Satellite dish.
(g) Personal antenna and towers.
(h) Communication antenna.
(i) Small wind energy system.
(j) Small solar energy system.
(k) Tourist rooming house.
(5) Accessory uses permitted as conditional use. Refer to Chapter 3 for
detailed definitions and requirements.
(a) On-site structured parking.
(6) Temporary uses. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed definitions and
requirements for each of the following land uses. (Exempt from
setbacks unless specified in Chapter 3).
(a) Temporary outdoor storage container (nonresidential).
§ 5-2-33 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-33
1-1:251
(b) Temporary shelter structure (conditional use permit required).
(c) Temporary vehicle sales.
(7) Density, Intensity, and Bulk Regulations for the (EX) Extraction District.
Principal Buildings and Lots Requirement
Minimum lot area 5 acres
Minimum landscaped surface ratio 40%
Minimum lot width 100 feet
Minimum lot frontage at right-ofway
100 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
For garage door or loading dock
door
30 feet
For open porch or awning/
canopy
30 feet
Minimum street side setback (on
corner lots)
30 feet
Minimum side setback 10 feet
For legal twin houses,
townhouses, and multitenant
buildings with common walls
approved through the group
development process (§ 5-7-2),
the interior side setback
adjacent to the shared lot line
shall be 0 feet.
Minimum rear setback 10 feet
Maximum principal building height 75 feet
Minimum principal building
separation
10 feet
Minimum pavement setback
(excludes driveway entrances)
10 feet from all lot lines
Minimum parking required See Chapter 3
Accessory Buildings
Minimum front setback At least 5 feet behind the
principal structure
Minimum side setback 10 feet
Minimum rear setback 10 feet
Maximum height 50 feet
(8) Regulations applicable to all land uses.
§ 5-2-33 MONROE CODE § 5-2-33
1-1:252
§ 5-2-34. (PD) Planned Development Zoning District.
(a) Bulk standards (including exceptions and adjustments): See
Chapter 4.
(b) Building design standards: See Chapter 7.
(c) Performance standards: See Chapter 7.
(d) Landscaping requirements: See Chapter 8.
(e) Signage regulations: See Chapter 9.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for the possible
relaxation of certain development standards pertaining to the
underlying standard zoning district. In exchange for such flexibility, it is
anticipated that development within a Planned Development District
will reflect the City's planning policies as set forth in the City's
Comprehensive Plan and offer one or more of the following advantages:
(a) Positively contribute to the appearance and function of land uses
and site design in the area.
(b) Promote a greater level of architectural quality and be compatible
with other structures in the area.
(c) Conserve and protect environmentally sensitive areas, areas of
natural beauty, and natural green spaces.
(d) Preserve the cultural and historic character and significance of
existing structures or areas.
(e) Provide substantial buffers and transitions between different land
uses and densities.
(f) Reduce congestion on streets and improve pedestrian and bicycle
circulation.
(2) Intent. The Planned Development District is established to encourage
and promote improved environmental and aesthetic design in the City
by allowing for greater freedom, imagination and flexibility in the
development of land while insuring substantial compliance to the basic
intent of this Title 5 and the general plan for community development.
To this intent, it allows variation in the relationship of uses, structures
and open spaces in developments conceived and implemented as
comprehensive and cohesive unified plans and projects. It is further
intended to encourage more rational and economic development with
relationship to public services, energy efficiency and community
appearance consistent with the overall intent of this Title 5 and the
general plan for community development. The Planned Development
District shall allow development to be designed, reviewed, approved,
constructed, and managed as approved by the Common Council rather
than required by a standard zoning district.
§ 5-2-33 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-2-34
1-1:253
Chapter 5-3
LAND USE REGULATIONS
§ 5-3-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to indicate which land uses may locate in each
zoning district and under what requirements; and which land uses may not
locate therein. Certain land uses may locate in a given district as a matter
of right upon compliance with special regulations for such a land use. A
(a) The City may permit flexibility in the types of uses, area and yard
requirements, off-street parking, and/or other regulations set forth
in this Title 5 by use of exceptions subject to the demonstration of
their appropriateness for the area under consideration.
(b) It is not intended that the City will automatically grant exceptions
in a Planned Development District, and it is expected the City will
grant only such exceptions when they are consistent and
comparable with benefits to the community that result from the
Planned Development.
(c) The City may require, as conditions of approval, any reasonable
stipulation, limitation, or design factor which will promote suitable
development in the Planned Development District.
(3) Applicability.
(a) Ownership. A tract of land proposed to be developed as a PD shall
be under the control of a single owner, partnership, or corporation,
where each owner agrees in advance to be bound by the conditions
and regulations which will be effective within the district and to
record such covenants, easements, and other provisions with the
county.
(b) Size. There is no minimum or maximum size for a PD.
(c) Condominium projects with jointly owned common spaces and/or
commonly owned structural walls, roofs, or other structural
elements must be approved as PDs if, as a result of a condominium
division of the land, the lot requirements of the district in which the
development is located cannot otherwise be met. This requirement
would apply to townhouses where the resulting lot size would be
less than otherwise required.
(4) See § 5-10-33 for the process to establish Planned Development Zoning.
(5) See § 5-10-33(3)(c) through (d) for the general development plan and
specific implementation plan requirements.
(6) Planned developments are exempt from the requirements of § 5-7-2,
Group and large development standards.
§ 5-2-34 MONROE CODE § 5-3-1
1-1:254
further distinction is made for land uses which may locate in a given district
only upon obtaining a conditional use permit.
§ 5-3-2. Regulation of allowable uses.
The allowable land uses for each zoning district are established in Chapter
2 of this chapter. Detailed descriptions and regulations for uses are found
in §§ 5-3-6 through 5-3-18. Even if a land use may be indicated as permitted
by right or requiring a conditional use in a particular district, such a
land use may not necessarily be permitted or permissible on any or every
property in such district. No land use is permitted or permissible on a
property unless it can be located on it or implemented in full compliance
with all of the applicable standards and regulations of this chapter or
unless an appropriate variance has been granted pursuant to § 5-10-41. For
land uses not specifically listed, the Zoning Administrator shall make an
interpretation to identify a comparable use or determine if an amendment
to this chapter is necessary.
(1) Principal land uses permitted by right. Principal land uses listed as
permitted by right (designated by the letter "P" in § 5-3-5) are permitted
per the general land use requirements of this Article; per the density,
intensity, and bulk regulations of the specific zoning district in which
they are located; per any additional requirements imposed by
applicable overlay districts; per all other applicable requirements of
this chapter; and per any and all other applicable City, county, state,
and federal regulations.
(2) Principal land uses permitted as conditional uses. Principal land uses
allowed only with a conditional use permit (designated by the letter "C"
in § 5-3-5) may be permitted subject to all the requirements applicable
to uses permitted by right as listed in Subsection (1), above, plus any
additional requirements applicable to that particular land use imposed
as part of the conditional use permit process established in § 5-10-28.
Except for uses approved under a general development plan and
specific implementation plan in a planned development (see § 5-10-33),
all uses requiring a conditional use permit shall comply with the
procedural requirements of § 5-10-28.
(3) Accessory land uses. Accessory land uses are allowed subject to all the
requirements and exceptions applicable to principal land uses
permitted by right as listed in Subsection (1), above. Accessory land
uses allowed only with a conditional use permit are subject to all the
requirements and exceptions applicable to principal land uses requiring
a conditional use permit as listed in Subsection (2), above.
(4) Temporary land uses. Temporary land uses permitted by right
(designated by the letter "P" in the Table of Land Uses in § 5-3-5) are
permitted on a temporary basis subject to permitting requirements of
§ 5-10-29 of this chapter. Temporary land uses permitted only with a
conditional use permit (designated by the letter "C" in the Table of Land
§ 5-3-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-2
1-1:255
§ 5-3-3. Regulations applicable to all land uses.
All uses of land initiated within the jurisdiction of this chapter on, or
following, the effective date of this chapter shall comply with all of the
provisions of this chapter.
Uses) may be permitted subject to temporary use and conditional use
permitting requirements of § 5-10-28 and § 5-10-29.
(1) Land use regulations and requirements. All uses of land shall comply
with all the regulations and requirements of this chapter. Such
regulations directly relate to the protection of the health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents of the City of Monroe.
(2) Density, intensity, and bulk regulations and requirements. All
development and use of land shall comply with all the applicable
requirements of Chapters 2 and 4 of this Title 5.
(3) Overlay zoning district requirements. All land use and/or development
of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements any
applicable overlay zoning district (See Chapter 6).
(4) Performance standards. All development of land shall comply with all
applicable requirements established in Chapter 7.
(5) Landscape regulations. All development of land shall comply with all
the regulations and requirements of Chapter 8 pertaining to the
provision of landscaping and bufferyards. Such requirements address
issues such as minimum required landscaping of developed land and
minimum required provision of bufferyards between adjoining zoning
districts which are directly related to the effective bulk of a structure.
(6) Signage regulations. All land use and/or development of land shall
comply with all requirements of Chapter 9, pertaining to the
configuration and amount of signage permitted on property. Such
requirements address issues such as the maximum area of permitted
signage and the number and configuration of permitted signage.
(7) Number of buildings per lot. Only one principal building shall be
permitted on any one lot, with the following exceptions:
(a) Group or large developments (§ 5-7-2).
(b) Planned developments (§ 5-2-34).
(c) Mobile home parks (§ 5-2-15(10)).
(d) Temporary buildings (§ 5-3-18).
(8) Residential uses in nonresidential buildings. With the exception of
mixed-use buildings described under § 5-3-10, and home occupation
land uses, no building containing a nonresidential land use shall contain
a residential land use.
§ 5-3-2 MONROE CODE § 5-3-3
1-1:256
(9) Number of land uses per building. No more than one nonresidential
land use shall be permitted in any building with the following exception:
multiple permitted-by-right land uses are allowed in a multibusiness
building and only require review by the Zoning Administrator to
confirm the proposed tenants are permitted. Examples include a
multitenant office building; a strip mall; an antique mall; a downtown
building mixing office, personal or professional services, and indoor
sales and service land uses; and other arrangements with multiple
permitted uses in one or more occupied spaces. A land use which is
regulated as a conditional use may only occupy multitenant buildings as
approved through the conditional use process (§ 5-10-28) or a successor
conditional use.
(10) Accessory uses. Accessory uses may be allowed where they comply with
the following conditions and requirements:
(a) Separation from principal structures. Detached accessory
buildings shall be located a minimum of five feet from a residential
dwelling unit on the same lot, except where the structure will be
constructed to fire-rating standards of the Uniform Dwelling Code.
The "separation" distance between a dwelling unit and accessory
structure is determined by measuring the perpendicular distance
from wall to wall of the structures. Minor attachments such as
handrails, latticework, trellises, or pergolas may be located in the
required separation area and do not render the structures attached
for setback purposes.
(b) All accessory structures exceeding 80 square feet in area shall have
a foundation or concrete slab.
(c) Accessory land uses and structures shall not be located within the
required front or street yard setback. This applies to corner, singlefrontage,
and double-frontage lots.
(d) With the exception of an in-home suite or accessory dwelling unit,
in no instance shall an accessory structure, unfinished cellar,
unfinished basement, tent, or recreational trailer be used as a
residence.
(e) Conversion of accessory structures to dwellings. The conversion of
any accessory structure into a dwelling so as to accommodate an
increased number of dwelling units or families shall be permitted
only within a district in which a new building for similar occupancy
would be permitted under this Title 5. The resulting occupancy will
comply with the requirements governing new construction in such
district, including minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit,
building of lot coverage, dimensions of yards and other open
spaces, and off-street parking.
(f) Accessory structures without principal structure. No accessory
structure shall be erected or constructed prior to the erection or
§ 5-3-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-3
1-1:257
§ 5-3-4. Detailed land use descriptions and regulations.
The land use categories employed by this chapter are defined in § 5-3-6
through § 5-3-18. Land use categories which are not listed in this chapter
are not necessarily excluded from locating within any given zoning district.
Section 5-10-10 empowers the Zoning Administrator to make
interpretations on matters regarding specific land use proposals which are
not addressed by this chapter.
construction of the principal structure, paved areas, or belowgrade
improvements.
(11) Group and large development requirements. A group or large
development may include any of the land uses in this chapter that is
permitted by right or by conditional use permit in the subject zoning
district. All uses and/or development of land within a group or large
development shall comply with all requirements of § 5-7-2.
(12) Planned development requirements. All uses and/or development of
land within a planned development shall comply with all requirements
of §§ 5-2-34 and 5-10-33.
(13) Nonconforming lots, uses, structures, and site requirements.
(a) Land uses not in conformance with the requirements of the
applicable zoning district shall be subject to the special limitations
and exceptions as established in Chapter 5. Land uses located on
substandard lots or on nonconforming lots or in nonconforming
structures shall comply with all the regulations and requirements
of Chapter 5.
(b) Substandard lots are buildable, provided the structures meet all
other requirements of this chapter. Substandard lots shall only be
used for one single-family residence (where permitted) or a
permitted nonresidential use.
(14) Site plan review required. All development involving physical
modifications to a site including but not limited to certain types of new
development, building or paving expansions, and redevelopment are
subject to site plan review and approval in accordance with § 5-10-31 of
this Title 5, except for single-family and two-family dwelling units on
individual lots in any zoning district.
(15) Procedural regulations and requirements. All land use and/or
development of land shall comply with all requirements of Chapter 10,
pertaining to the procedures necessary to secure review and approval
of land use and/or development. Such regulations and restrictions
address both procedural and technical requirements.
§ 5-3-3 MONROE CODE § 5-3-5
1-1:258
§ 5-3-5. Table of Land Uses.
The Table of Land Uses on the following pages is provided as a convenience
for the City and the general public. Where there are conflicts between the
text of this chapter and the Table of Land Uses, the text shall prevail.
Rural
Holding
(RH-35)
Single
Family
Residential
-3
(SR-3)
Single
Family
Residential
-4
(SR-4)
Single
Family
Residential
-5
(SR-5)
Single
Family
Residential
-
7
(SR-7)
Duplex
Residential
-8
(DR-8)
One
& Two-
Family
Res.
-
10
(TR-10)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
15
(MR-15)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
30
(MR-30)
Mobile
Home
Residential
-
7
(MH-7)
Neighborhood
Mixed
Use
(NMU)
Institutional
(I)
Suburban
Mixed
Use
(SMU)
Urban
Mixed
Use
(UMU)
Central
Mixed
Use
(CMU)
Intensive
Outdoor
Activity
(IOA)
Business
Park
(BP)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Heavy
Industrial
(HI)
Extraction
(EX)
Land Uses Permitted:
Refer to the detailed definitions
and requirements listed for each
land use on the following pages.
P: By Right
C: By conditional use permit
P/C: Refer to specific
requirements for that land use to
determine if a conditional use
permit is required
Residential Land Uses
(§ 5-3-6)*
P (1) Single-family 35-acre lot
CP P P P P P P (1) Single-family 12,000 sq. ft.
lot
P P P P P P (1) Single-family 9,000 sq. ft.
lot
P P P P P (1) Single-family 7,200 sq. ft.
lot
P P P P (1) Single-family 5,000 sq. ft.
lot
P P (2) Two-flat 7,200 sq. ft. lot
P C (3) Twin house - 2 3,600 sq. ft.
lots
P C (4) Duplex 4,200 sq. ft. lot
P P C (5) Townhouse (3-4 units)
C P (5) Townhouse (5-8 units)
P P C (6) Multiplex (3-4 units)
C P (6) Multiplex (5-8 units)
P P C (7) Apartment (3-4 units)
C P (7) Apartment (5-8 units)
C (7) Apartment (9+ units)
P (8) Mobile home
Dwelling
Unit
Types
P (9) Mobile home subdivision
§ 5-3-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-5
1-1:259
Rural
Holding
(RH-35)
Single
Family
Residential
-3
(SR-3)
Single
Family
Residential
-4
(SR-4)
Single
Family
Residential
-5
(SR-5)
Single
Family
Residential
-
7
(SR-7)
Duplex
Residential
-8
(DR-8)
One
& Two-
Family
Res.
-
10
(TR-10)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
15
(MR-15)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
30
(MR-30)
Mobile
Home
Residential
-
7
(MH-7)
Neighborhood
Mixed
Use
(NMU)
Institutional
(I)
Suburban
Mixed
Use
(SMU)
Urban
Mixed
Use
(UMU)
Central
Mixed
Use
(CMU)
Intensive
Outdoor
Activity
(IOA)
Business
Park
(BP)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Heavy
Industrial
(HI)
Extraction
(EX)
Land Uses Permitted:
Refer to the detailed definitions
and requirements listed for each
land use on the following pages.
P: By Right
C: By conditional use permit
P/C: Refer to specific
requirements for that land use to
determine if a conditional use
permit is required
C (10) Mobile home park
C C C (11) Boarding house
Agricultural Land Uses
(§ 5-3-7)*
PC C C CC C C C CC C CC C C CC C(1) Cultivation
C (2) Husbandry
C (3) On-site agricultural retail
C (4) Intensive agriculture
C (5) Agricultural services
P P P P P P P P P PC P CC C C CC C(6) Community garden
P C CC C (7) Market garden
Institutional Land Uses
(§ 5-3-8)*
C C C (1) Indoor institutional
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (2) Outdoor open space
institutional
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (3) Passive outdoor recreation
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P C CC (4) Active outdoor recreation
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (5) Essential services
C C CC (6) Large-scale public services and
utilities
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (7) Community living arrangement
(1-8 residents)
C C C CC C C C CC C CC C (8) Community living arrangement
(9-15 residents)
C C C C CC C (9) Community living arrangement
(16+ residents)
C C C C (10) Institutional residential
§ 5-3-5 MONROE CODE § 5-3-5
1-1:260
Rural
Holding
(RH-35)
Single
Family
Residential
-3
(SR-3)
Single
Family
Residential
-4
(SR-4)
Single
Family
Residential
-5
(SR-5)
Single
Family
Residential
-
7
(SR-7)
Duplex
Residential
-8
(DR-8)
One
& Two-
Family
Res.
-
10
(TR-10)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
15
(MR-15)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
30
(MR-30)
Mobile
Home
Residential
-
7
(MH-7)
Neighborhood
Mixed
Use
(NMU)
Institutional
(I)
Suburban
Mixed
Use
(SMU)
Urban
Mixed
Use
(UMU)
Central
Mixed
Use
(CMU)
Intensive
Outdoor
Activity
(IOA)
Business
Park
(BP)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Heavy
Industrial
(HI)
Extraction
(EX)
Land Uses Permitted:
Refer to the detailed definitions
and requirements listed for each
land use on the following pages.
P: By Right
C: By conditional use permit
P/C: Refer to specific
requirements for that land use to
determine if a conditional use
permit is required
Commercial Land Uses
(§ 5-3-9)*
P P P P P P P P (1) Office
P P P P P P P P (2) Personal or professional
service
P P P P (3) Indoor sales or service
P P P P P (4) Outdoor display
P C P P P P P P (5) Artisan production shop
C P P P P P (6) Physical activity studio
P C P P P P P P P (7) Commercial kitchen
C P P PC C (8) Indoor commercial
entertainment
C CC CC C (9) Outdoor commercial
entertainment
C P P C (10) Drive-through and in-vehicle
sales or service
CC C P P (11) Cheese slicing and packaging
C C C P P P C C (12) Group daycare center
P P P P P (13) Commercial animal boarding/
daycare
C P (14) Bed-and-breakfast
C C (15) Vacation rental home
CC C C (16) Commercial indoor lodging
C (17) Campground
C P P P P P P P P (18) Indoor maintenance service
C P (19) Outdoor maintenance service
P P P (20) Vehicle sales
CC P P (21) Vehicle service and repair
§ 5-3-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-5
1-1:261
Rural
Holding
(RH-35)
Single
Family
Residential
-3
(SR-3)
Single
Family
Residential
-4
(SR-4)
Single
Family
Residential
-5
(SR-5)
Single
Family
Residential
-
7
(SR-7)
Duplex
Residential
-8
(DR-8)
One
& Two-
Family
Res.
-
10
(TR-10)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
15
(MR-15)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
30
(MR-30)
Mobile
Home
Residential
-
7
(MH-7)
Neighborhood
Mixed
Use
(NMU)
Institutional
(I)
Suburban
Mixed
Use
(SMU)
Urban
Mixed
Use
(UMU)
Central
Mixed
Use
(CMU)
Intensive
Outdoor
Activity
(IOA)
Business
Park
(BP)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Heavy
Industrial
(HI)
Extraction
(EX)
Land Uses Permitted:
Refer to the detailed definitions
and requirements listed for each
land use on the following pages.
P: By Right
C: By conditional use permit
P/C: Refer to specific
requirements for that land use to
determine if a conditional use
permit is required
C (22) Intensive outdoor activity
C (23) Adult-oriented entertainment
business
Mixed Use Buildings
(§ 5-3-10)*
P P P P (1) Apartments with limited
commercial
P P P P (2) Mixed-use building
C P P P P (3) Live/work unit
Industrial Land Uses (§ 5-3-11)
P P P C(1) Light industrial
P (2) Heavy industrial
C C P P (3) Production greenhouse
C C CC (4) Indoor food cultivation and
farming
P P (5) Indoor food production and
processing
Storage Uses (§ 5-3-12)*
C P P P C(1) Indoor storage and wholesaling
C C P (2) Outdoor storage and
wholesaling
C CC (3) Personal storage facility
Transportation Land Uses
(§ 5-3-13)*
C C C C CC C C CC (1) Transit center
CP (2) Distribution center
C (3) Freight terminal
C C (4) Airport
C C C (5) Heliport
§ 5-3-5 MONROE CODE § 5-3-5
1-1:262
Rural
Holding
(RH-35)
Single
Family
Residential
-3
(SR-3)
Single
Family
Residential
-4
(SR-4)
Single
Family
Residential
-5
(SR-5)
Single
Family
Residential
-
7
(SR-7)
Duplex
Residential
-8
(DR-8)
One
& Two-
Family
Res.
-
10
(TR-10)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
15
(MR-15)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
30
(MR-30)
Mobile
Home
Residential
-
7
(MH-7)
Neighborhood
Mixed
Use
(NMU)
Institutional
(I)
Suburban
Mixed
Use
(SMU)
Urban
Mixed
Use
(UMU)
Central
Mixed
Use
(CMU)
Intensive
Outdoor
Activity
(IOA)
Business
Park
(BP)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Heavy
Industrial
(HI)
Extraction
(EX)
Land Uses Permitted:
Refer to the detailed definitions
and requirements listed for each
land use on the following pages.
P: By Right
C: By conditional use permit
P/C: Refer to specific
requirements for that land use to
determine if a conditional use
permit is required
C C C C CC CC C CC (6) Off-site parking lot
C C C C CC CC C CC (7) Off-site structured parking
Telecommunication Land Uses
(§ 5-3-14)*
CC C C CC C C C CC C CC C C CC C(1) Communication tower
Extraction & Disposal Land
Uses (§ 5-3-15)
C(1) Extraction
C C (2) Composting
C (3) Recycling and waste disposal
C (4) Salvage or junkyard
C C(5) Sand and mineral processing
Energy Production Land Uses
(§ 5-3-16)
CC C C CC C C C CC C CC C C CC C(1) Large wind energy system
C C C(2) Large solar energy system
Accessory Land Uses (§ 5-3-17)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P C (1) Residential accessory structure
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P PC P P P (2) Recreational facility
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P PC P P P P(3) Landscape feature
P P P P P P P C C CC C CC (4) Residential kennel
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (5) Home occupation
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P C (6) In-home daycare, 4-8 children
CC C C C C (7) Accessory dwelling unit
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P C (8) In-family suite
P (9) Farm residence
C (10) Migrant employee housing
§ 5-3-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-5
1-1:263
Rural
Holding
(RH-35)
Single
Family
Residential
-3
(SR-3)
Single
Family
Residential
-4
(SR-4)
Single
Family
Residential
-5
(SR-5)
Single
Family
Residential
-
7
(SR-7)
Duplex
Residential
-8
(DR-8)
One
& Two-
Family
Res.
-
10
(TR-10)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
15
(MR-15)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
30
(MR-30)
Mobile
Home
Residential
-
7
(MH-7)
Neighborhood
Mixed
Use
(NMU)
Institutional
(I)
Suburban
Mixed
Use
(SMU)
Urban
Mixed
Use
(UMU)
Central
Mixed
Use
(CMU)
Intensive
Outdoor
Activity
(IOA)
Business
Park
(BP)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Heavy
Industrial
(HI)
Extraction
(EX)
Land Uses Permitted:
Refer to the detailed definitions
and requirements listed for each
land use on the following pages.
P: By Right
C: By conditional use permit
P/C: Refer to specific
requirements for that land use to
determine if a conditional use
permit is required
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P PC P P P P(11) Nonresidential accessory
structure
P (12) Residential stable
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P PC P P P P(13) On-site parking lot
P P P PC P P P C(14) On-site structured parking
P P P P P P P P P (15) Company cafeteria
P P P PC P P P (16) Incidental outdoor display
P P P P PC P P P (17) Incidental indoor sales
P P P P P P(18) Incidental light industrial
P P P P P P P P(19) Incidental outdoor storage
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P PC P P P P(20) Satellite dish
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P PC P P P P(21) Personal antenna and towers
PC C C CC C C C CC C CC CC C CP P(22) Communication antenna
PC C C CC C C C CC C CC CC C P P P(23) Small wind energy system
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P PC P P P P(24) Small solar energy system
CC C C C (25) Residential apiary
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P(26) Tourist rooming house
Temporary Land Uses
(§ 5-3-18)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (1) Temporary moving container
(residential)
P P P P P PC P P P P(2) Temporary outdoor storage
container (nonresidential)
P P P P P P P P P P (3) Garage or estate sale
C CC C CC P C C (4) Farmer's market
P (5) Temporary farm product sales
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
(6) Temporary outdoor sales
§ 5-3-5 MONROE CODE § 5-3-5
1-1:264
Rural
Holding
(RH-35)
Single
Family
Residential
-3
(SR-3)
Single
Family
Residential
-4
(SR-4)
Single
Family
Residential
-5
(SR-5)
Single
Family
Residential
-
7
(SR-7)
Duplex
Residential
-8
(DR-8)
One
& Two-
Family
Res.
-
10
(TR-10)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
15
(MR-15)
Multi-
Family
Residential
-
30
(MR-30)
Mobile
Home
Residential
-
7
(MH-7)
Neighborhood
Mixed
Use
(NMU)
Institutional
(I)
Suburban
Mixed
Use
(SMU)
Urban
Mixed
Use
(UMU)
Central
Mixed
Use
(CMU)
Intensive
Outdoor
Activity
(IOA)
Business
Park
(BP)
Light
Industrial
(LI)
Heavy
Industrial
(HI)
Extraction
(EX)
Land Uses Permitted:
Refer to the detailed definitions
and requirements listed for each
land use on the following pages.
P: By Right
C: By conditional use permit
P/C: Refer to specific
requirements for that land use to
determine if a conditional use
permit is required
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
CC C (7) Temporary outdoor assembly
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
(8) Temporary on-site construction
storage
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
(9) Temporary contractor's project
office
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
(10) Temporary on-site real estate
sales office
C C P PP/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
(11) Temporary relocatable
building
CC C C CC C C C CC C CC CC C CC C(12) Temporary shelter structure
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
P/
C
(13) Temporary vehicle sales
§ 5-3-6. Residential Land Uses.
(1) Single-family dwelling unit: This dwelling unit type consists of a fully
detached single-family residence which is located on an individual lot.
Single-family dwelling units are designed for one family and have no
roof, wall, or floor in common with any other dwelling unit. A singlefamily
dwelling that contains an in-family suite is still considered a
single-family dwelling. Regulations:
(a) The dwelling unit shall be a site-built structure built in compliance
with the State of Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code (UDC) or may
be a manufactured dwelling (modular home) as permitted by the
UCD or a manufactured home that has received a Federal
Manufactured Housing Certificate label.
(b) The dwelling shall be attached to a finished, permanent foundation
such as a poured concrete slab or basement meeting UDC
requirements.
(c) See § 5-7-4 for design standards for single-family dwelling units.
§ 5-3-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-6
1-1:265
(d) Minimum required parking: Two spaces.
1. One "stacked" parking space in a driveway shall count toward
the minimum parking requirement, provided that the parking
space is no less than eight feet in width and 18 feet in depth.
(e) The following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for single-family
dwelling units. Specific requirements for single-family dwelling
units can be found in Chapter 2 under the density, intensity, and
bulk requirements for each residential zoning district.
Figure 5-3-6a: Single-Family Dwelling Unit
Key to Figure
A Front lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal building or
attached garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to accessory
building)
G Minimum driveway setback (side lot line to pavement)
H Minimum pavement setback (lot line to pavement excluding
driveway entrance)
(2) Two-flat: This dwelling unit type consists of a single structure with two
separate residences each having a private individual access and no
shared internal access other than entry foyers and halls. Two-flats are
attached units within a two-story structure with one unit above the
other.
Regulations:
(a) In the case where any dwelling unit is under separate ownership,
evidence that covenants specifying respective obligations with
§ 5-3-6 MONROE CODE § 5-3-6
1-1:266
regard to any common structures, such as the shared wall, roof,
and other inseparable improvements, is required.
(b) This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences.
(c) See § 5-7-4 for design standards for two-family uses.
(d) Minimum required parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit.
(e) One "stacked" parking space in a driveway shall count toward the
minimum parking requirement, provided that the parking space is
no less than eight feet in width and 18 feet in depth.
(f) The following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for two-flat land uses.
Specific requirements for two-flats can be found in Chapter 2 under
the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for each residential
zoning district.
Figure 5-3-6b: Two-Flat
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal building or
attached garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to accessory
building)
G Minimum driveway setback (side lot line to pavement)
H Minimum pavement setback (lot line to pavement excluding
driveway entrance)
§ 5-3-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-6
1-1:267
(3) Twin house: This dwelling unit type consists of two separate residences,
each having a private individual access and no shared internal access.
Similar to duplexes, twin houses are attached side-by-side units, each
with a ground floor and roof. Unlike duplexes, each dwelling unit in a
twin house is located on a separate lot.
Regulations:
(a) In the case where any dwelling unit is under separate ownership,
evidence that covenants specifying respective obligations with
regard to any common structures, such as the shared wall, roof,
and other inseparable improvements, is required.
(b) This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences.
(c) See § 5-7-4 for design standards for two-family uses.
(d) Minimum required parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit.
(e) The following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for twin house land
uses. Specific requirements for twin houses can be found in
Chapter 2 under the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for
each residential zoning district.
Figure 5-3-6c: Twin House
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal building or
attached garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to accessory
building)
G Minimum driveway setback (side lot line to pavement)
H Minimum pavement setback (lot line to pavement excluding
driveway entrance)
§ 5-3-6 MONROE CODE § 5-3-6
1-1:268
Figure 5-3-6c: Twin House
Key to Figure
(4) Duplex: This dwelling unit type consists of two separate residences,
each having a private individual access and no shared internal access.
Similar to twin houses, duplexes are attached side-by-side units, each
with a ground floor and roof. Unlike twin houses, the two dwelling units
in a duplex are located on one lot.
Regulations:
(a) In the case where any dwelling unit is under separate ownership,
evidence that covenants specifying respective obligations with
regard to any common structures, such as the shared wall, roof,
and other inseparable improvements, is required.
(b) This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences.
(c) See § 5-7-4 for design standards for two-family uses.
(d) Minimum required parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit.
(e) One "stacked" parking space per driveway shall count toward the
minimum parking requirement, provided that the parking space is
no less than eight feet in width and 18 feet in depth.
(f) The following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for duplex land uses.
Specific requirements for duplexes can be found in Chapter 2
under the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for each
residential zoning district.
§ 5-3-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-6
1-1:269
Figure 5-3-6d: Duplex
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal building or
attached garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to accessory
building)
G Minimum driveway setback (side lot line to pavement)
H Minimum pavement setback (lot line to pavement excluding
driveway entrance)
(5) Townhouse: This dwelling unit type consists of attached, two-story
residences, each having a private, individual access. This dwelling unit
type may be located on its own lot or within a group development. Each
dwelling unit shares at least one common wall with an adjacent
dwelling unit.
Regulations:
(a) No more than eight and no less than three townhouse dwelling
units may be attached per building.
(b) In the case where any dwelling unit is under separate ownership,
evidence that covenants specifying respective obligations with
regard to any common structures, such as the shared wall, roof,
and other inseparable improvements, is required.
(c) This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences.
§ 5-3-6 MONROE CODE § 5-3-6
1-1:270
(d) See § 5-7-5 for multifamily design standards.
(e) Minimum required parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit
containing zero, one, or two bedrooms, plus 0.5 space per
additional bedroom over two bedrooms per unit.
(f) The following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for townhouse land
uses. Specific requirements for townhouses can be found in
Chapter 2 under the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for
each residential zoning district.
Figure 5-3-6e: Townhouse
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal building or
attached garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to accessory
building)
G Minimum driveway setback (side lot line to pavement)
H Minimum pavement setback (lot line to pavement excluding
driveway entrance)
(6) Multiplex: This dwelling unit type consists of three or more individual
attached dwelling units which have private, individual exterior
entrances.
Regulations:
(a) In the case where any dwelling unit is under separate ownership,
evidence that covenants specifying respective obligations with
§ 5-3-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-6
1-1:271
regard to any common structures, such as the shared wall, roof,
and other inseparable improvements, is required.
(b) This dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences.
(c) See § 5-7-5 for multifamily design standards.
(d) Minimum required parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit
containing zero, one, or two bedrooms, plus 0.5 space per
additional bedroom over two bedrooms per unit. One guest parking
space shall be provided for every three dwelling units.
(e) The following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for multiplex land uses.
Specific requirements for multiplexes can be found in Chapter 2
under the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for each
residential zoning district.
Figure 5-3-6f: Multiplex
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to accessory
building)
G Minimum driveway setback (side lot line to pavement)
H Minimum pavement setback (lot line to pavement excluding
driveway entrance)
(7) Apartment: This dwelling unit type consists of a single structure with
three or more individual attached dwelling units which take access
from a shared entrance or hallway.
§ 5-3-6 MONROE CODE § 5-3-6
1-1:272
Regulations:
(a) In the case where any dwelling unit is under separate ownership,
evidence that covenants specifying respective obligations with
regard to any common structures, such as the shared wall, roof,
and other inseparable improvements, is required.
(b) Group developments shall meet the standards of § 5-7-2. This
dwelling unit type may not be split into additional residences.
(c) See § 5-7-5 for multifamily design standards.
(d) Minimum required parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit
containing zero, one, or two bedrooms, plus 0.5 space per
additional bedroom over two bedrooms per unit. One guest parking
space shall be provided for every three dwelling units.
(e) The following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for apartment land uses.
Specific requirements for apartments can be found in Chapter 2
under the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for each
residential zoning district.
Figure 5-3-6g: Apartment
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal building or
attached garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to accessory
building)
G Minimum driveway setback (side lot line to pavement)
H Minimum pavement setback (lot line to pavement excluding
driveway entrance)
§ 5-3-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-6
1-1:273
Figure 5-3-6g: Apartment
Key to Figure
(8) Mobile home: A type of dwelling unit suitable for year-round occupancy
designed to be towed as a single unit or in sections, with or without a
permanent foundation, with walls of rigid, uncollapsible construction,
and with water supply, sewage disposal, and electrical convenience. A
mobile home includes both a "mobile home" and a "manufactured
home" as defined by Wisconsin Statutes. Any similar dwelling unit
which has its own motor or remains on wheels shall be considered a
recreational vehicle. A modular home is a home meeting the Uniform
Building Code that is transported to the building site in sections, does
not have a permanent chassis, and is permanently mounted on a
permanent foundation. A modular home is regulated as a single-family
dwelling unit under § 5-3-6(1).
Regulations:
(a) No mobile home shall be split into two or more residences.
(b) Within 30 days of occupancy, the owner shall remove the axle and
install skirting.
(c) The building design standards of § 5-7-4 shall not apply.
(d) Minimum required parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit.
(e) The following figure is intended to provide a graphic depiction of
the setback and dimensional requirements for mobile home land
§ 5-3-6 MONROE CODE § 5-3-6
1-1:274
uses. Specific requirements for mobile homes can be found in
Chapter 2 under the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for
each residential zoning district.
Figure 5-3-6h: Mobile Home
Key to Figure
A Minimum lot width (at building minimum setback line)
B Street setback (lot line to principal building or attached
garage)
C Corner lot (street side) setback (lot line to principal building or
attached garage)
D Side setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
E Rear setback (lot line to principal building or attached garage)
F Accessory building side and rear setback (lot line to accessory
building)
G Minimum driveway setback (side lot line to pavement)
H Minimum principal building separation
I Minimum pavement setback (lot line to pavement excluding
driveway entrance)
(9) Mobile home subdivision: This land use is a form of residential
development which is exclusively reserved for individually sold lots
containing mobile homes. Each lot and mobile home must meet the
requirements listed under § 5-3-6(8), above.
Regulations:
(a) Development shall be located so as to blend with adjacent
residentially zoned areas to the greatest extent possible.
§ 5-3-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-6
1-1:275
§ 5-3-7. Agricultural land uses.
(b) No access shall be permitted to local residential streets, except to
the internal roadways and streets.
(c) Specific requirements for mobile home subdivisions can be found in
Chapter 2 under the density, intensity, and bulk requirements for
each residential zoning district.
(10) Mobile home park: This land use is a form of residential development
which is exclusively reserved for individually sold or rented air right
pads containing mobile homes. Each mobile home must meet the
requirements listed under § 5-3-6(8), above.
Regulations:
(a) Development shall be located so as to blend with adjacent
residentially zoned areas to the greatest extent possible.
(b) No access shall be permitted to local residential streets, except to
the internal roadways and streets.
(11) Boarding house: A residential land use where occupancy of a dwelling
unit is shared by six or more unrelated adult individuals.
(a) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property.
(b) Boarding houses require a license and an annual on-site inspection
is required to confirm full compliance with all zoning and building
code requirements.
(c) Outdoor storage shall be restricted to rear yards and may include
storage of such things as motorized vehicles in assigned parking
spaces, bicycles, carry-in nonmotorized watercraft, outdoor
seating, and grills.
(d) Minimum required parking: One space per each bedroom for rent
within the dwelling unit.
(1) Cultivation: Operations primarily oriented to the on-site, outdoor
raising of plants for commercial purposes. Cultivation includes the
raising of trees as a crop to be replaced with more trees after
harvesting, such as in nursery or Christmas tree operations. The raising
of plants for consumption by farm animals is considered cultivation if
said plants are consumed by animals which are located off-site.
Regulations:
(a) Cultivation is not permitted on vacant, improved lots.
§ 5-3-6 MONROE CODE § 5-3-7
1-1:276
(b) Minimum required parking: One space per employee on the largest
work shift. [See § 5-7-11(19)(b) for surfacing requirements for
agricultural uses.]
(2) Husbandry. All operations primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/
or use of animals at an intensity of less than one animal unit per acre.
This includes horses, cattle, sheep, goats, llamas (and related species),
deer, antelope, swine, foul (including turkeys, ducks, geese, peacocks,
guinea hens, game birds, and five or more chickens), aquatic species
(including fish, shellfish, crustaceans, echinoderms, plants, and algae),
and any animals typically hunted or trapped. Apiaries that exceed the
maximum allowable quantity or volume of hives for residential apiaries
[§ 5-3-17(25)] are considered husbandry land uses. This excludes
animals typically kept as pets and commonly available at commercial
pet stores (e.g., domestic dogs and cats, fish, small rodents, reptiles,
amphibians, tropical/exotic birds).
Regulations:
(a) Any building housing animals shall be located a minimum of 300
feet from any residentially zoned property, and 100 feet from all
other lot lines.
(b) All outdoor animal containments (pastures, pens, and similar areas)
shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any residentially zoned
property.
(c) Minimum required parking: One space per employee on the largest
work shift. [See § 5-7-11(19)(b) for surfacing requirements for
agricultural uses.]
(3) On-site agricultural retail: The sale of agricultural products grown
exclusively on the site. The sale of products grown or otherwise
produced off-site shall not be permitted within on-site agricultural retail
operations and shall be regulated as a distinct land use. Packaging and
equipment used to store, display, package, or carry products for the
convenience of the operation or its customers (such as egg cartons,
baskets, containers, and bags) shall be produced off-site.
Regulations:
(a) No structure or group of structures shall exceed 500 square feet in
gross floor area.
(b) All structures shall meet all required setbacks for nonresidential
land uses.
(c) On-site agricultural retail uses, once discontinued for a period of
365 days, shall not be reestablished except with the granting of a
conditional use permit, and shall only be permitted in the RH-35
District.
§ 5-3-7 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-7
1-1:277
(d) Minimum required parking: One parking space shall be required
for every 200 square feet of product display area. [See
§ 5-7-11(19)(b) for surfacing requirements for agricultural uses.]
(4) Intensive agriculture: All operations primarily oriented to the on-site
raising and/or use of animals at an intensity equal to or exceeding one
animal unit per acre and/or agricultural activities requiring structures,
equipment and/or infrastructure specific to one operation rather than
to farming in general. Examples of such land uses include feed lots, hog
farms, poultry operations, aquaculture, and other operations meeting
this criterion.
Regulations:
(a) Intensive agricultural uses shall be located in an area which is
planned for agricultural use in the City's Comprehensive Plan.
(b) New intensive agricultural uses shall not be located in or adjacent
to an existing or platted residential subdivision.
(c) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and outdoor
animal containments (pastures, pens, and similar areas) shall be
located a minimum of 300 feet from all residentially zoned property
and 100 feet from all other lot lines.
(d) Intensive agricultural uses shall be completely surrounded by a
bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.0.
(e) Minimum required parking: One space per employee on the largest
work shift. [Notes: customer parking shall be provided based on
land use; see § 5-7-11(19)(b) for surfacing requirements for
agricultural uses.]
(5) Agricultural service: Operations pertaining to the sale, handling,
transport, packaging, storage, or disposal of agricultural equipment,
products, by-products, or materials primarily used or produced by
agricultural operations. Examples of such land uses include, but are not
limited to, agricultural implement sales, storage, or repair operations;
feed and seed stores; agricultural chemical dealers and/or storage
facilities; animal feed storage facilities; commercial dairies; and
agricultural waste disposal facilities [except commercial composting
uses, see § 5-3-15(2)].
Regulations:
(a) Agricultural service uses shall be located in an area which is
planned for agricultural use in the City's Comprehensive Plan.
(b) New agricultural service uses shall not be located in, or adjacent
to, an existing or platted residential subdivision.
§ 5-3-7 MONROE CODE § 5-3-7
1-1:278
(c) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and outdoor
animal containments (pastures, pens and similar areas) shall be
located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
(d) Once discontinued for a period of 365 days, agricultural service
uses shall not be reestablished except with the granting of a
conditional use permit.
(e) Minimum required parking: One space per employee on the largest
work shift. [Notes: customer parking shall be provided based on
land use; see § 5-7-11(19)(b) for surfacing requirements for
agricultural uses.]
(6) Community garden: Community garden areas for cultivation and
related activities divided into one or more plots to be cultivated by more
than one operator or member. These areas may be on public or private
lands.
Regulations:
(a) All garden areas, signs, and structures shall be located a minimum
of 10 feet all lot lines.
(b) A site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for
approval. Said site plan shall list the property owner, established
sponsoring organization and garden manager, and demonstrate
consideration for and indicate locations of structures, materials
storage, equipment storage, access for deliveries and pickups,
water availability, shaded rest area, and availability of public
parking.
(c) Accessory buildings.
1. The following structures are permitted in community gardens:
tool sheds, shade pavilions, restroom facilities with composting
toilets, planting preparation houses, benches, bike racks,
raised/accessible planting beds, compost bins, picnic tables,
seasonal farm stands, fences, garden art, rain barrel systems,
and children's play areas.
2. A combined total of 1,200 square feet of gross floor area of all
accessory structures on the property is permitted by right. For
lots larger than one acre, the maximum permitted combined
total of gross floor area of all accessory structures on the
property shall be increased by one square foot for every 100
square feet of lot area over one acre.
(d) Fences shall comply with the regulations in § 5-7-27.
(e) The applicant shall demonstrate adequate off-street parking
availability, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
§ 5-3-7 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-7
1-1:279
§ 5-3-8. Institutional land uses.
(7) Market garden: An area for cultivation and related activities divided
into one or more plots to be cultivated by more than one operator or
member. These areas may be on public or private lands, with on-site
sales of crops grown on-site permitted. Market gardens shall adhere to
the following listed regulations.
(a) All activity areas, signs, and structures shall be located a minimum
of 10 feet from all lot lines.
(b) A site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for
approval. Said site plan shall list the property owner, established
sponsoring organization, and garden manager, and demonstrate
consideration for and indicate locations of structures, materials
storage, equipment storage, access for deliveries and pickups,
water availability, shaded rest area, and availability of public
parking.
(c) Accessory buildings.
1. The following structures are permitted within market gardens:
tool sheds, shade pavilions, restroom facilities with composting
toilets, planting preparation houses, benches, bike racks,
raised/accessible planting beds, compost bins, picnic tables,
seasonal farm stands, fences, garden art, rain barrel systems,
and children's play areas.
2. A combined total of 1,200 square feet of gross floor area of all
accessory structures on the property is permitted by right. For
lots larger than one acre, the maximum permitted combined
total of gross floor area of all accessory structures on the
property shall be increased by one square foot for every 100
square feet of lot area over one acre.
(d) Seasonal farm stands shall be removed from the premises or stored
inside a building on the premises during that time of the year when
the garden is not open for public use.
(e) Fences shall comply with the regulations in § 5-7-27.
(f) Minimum required parking: One space per 300 square feet of retail
floor area.
(1) Indoor institutional: Indoor public and not-for-profit recreational
facilities (such as gyms, swimming pools, libraries, museums, and
community centers), government facilities, schools, churches, homeless
day shelters, hospitals and walk-in clinics, nonprofit clubs, nonprofit
fraternal organizations, convention centers, private institutional
businesses, and similar land uses.
Regulations:
§ 5-3-7 MONROE CODE § 5-3-8
1-1:280
(a) An off-street passenger loading area shall be provided if the
majority of the users will be children or senior citizens (as in the
case of a school, church, library, or similar land use).
(b) Minimum required parking: Generally, one space per three
expected patrons at maximum capacity; however, the following
specific requirements may apply:
1. Church: One space per five seats at the maximum seating
capacity in the main worship area. For benches, pews, and
other similar seating facilities, 30 inches of such seating shall
be counted as one seat for the purpose of this Title 5.
2. Community or recreation center: One space per 400 square
feet of gross floor area, or one space per three patrons at the
maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus one space per
employee on the largest work shift.
3. Funeral home: One space per five persons at the maximum
capacity, plus one space per employee on the largest work
shift.
4. Hospital: To be determined by Zoning Administrator, based on
parking study.
5. Library or museum: One space per 400 square feet of gross
floor area, or one space per three patrons at the maximum
capacity, whichever is greater, plus one space per employee on
the largest work shift.
6. School, elementary or middle: One space per two employees.
7. School, secondary: One space per two employees, plus 30% of
maximum student enrollment.
8. School, college or trade: To be determined by Zoning
Administrator, based on parking study.
(2) Outdoor open space institutional: Cemeteries, privately held
permanently protected green space areas, open grassed areas not
associated with any particular active recreational land use, and similar
land uses.
Regulations:
(a) Minimum required parking: No parking is required; however,
internal drives may be used for parking.
(3) Passive outdoor recreation: Recreational land uses located which
involve passive recreational activities, such as arboretums, natural
areas, wildlife areas, hiking trails, bike trails, cross country ski trails,
horse trails, picnic areas, picnic shelters, botanical gardens, fishing
areas, and similar land uses.
§ 5-3-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-8
1-1:281
Regulations:
(a) Minimum required parking: One space per four expected patrons
at maximum capacity for any use requiring over five spaces, or
where maximum capacity is not available, 10 spaces per use, plus
one space per employee on the largest work shift.
(4) Active outdoor recreation: Recreational land uses which involve active
recreational activities. Such land uses include tennis courts, basketball
courts, ball diamonds, football fields, soccer fields, neighborhood parks,
tot lots, outdoor swimming pools, swimming beach areas, fitness
courses, public golf courses, and similar land uses.
Regulations:
(a) Facilities using recreational facility night lighting and adjoining a
residentially zoned property shall install and continually maintain a
bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60. Said bufferyard shall be
located at the property line adjacent to said residentially zoned
property.
(b) All structures, paved areas, and active recreational improvements
such as sandboxes, tot lots, tennis courts, and baseball backstops
shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from any residentially zoned
property.
(c) Facilities which serve a regional or community-wide function shall
provide an off-street passenger loading area if the majority of the
users will be children or senior citizens.
(d) Minimum required parking: Generally, one space is required per
four expected patrons at maximum capacity for any use requiring
over five spaces; however, the following specific requirements
apply:
1. Athletic facilities: one space per employee on the largest work
shift, plus one space per four patrons (participants and
spectators) at maximum capacity.
2. Tot lots, fitness courses, and parks: no parking spaces
required.
3. The Zoning Administrator has the ability to require a parking
study to increase or reduce parking requirements for any
combination of the above uses.
(5) Essential services: The erection, construction, alteration, or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies and private utilities, of underground and overhead lines and
pipes for gas, electric, telephone, communications, cable television,
steam, public water supply, sanitary sewage collection, stormwater
detention or conveyance, or other comparable utilities. Essential
services include such above-surface facilities as poles, guide wires, fire
§ 5-3-8 MONROE CODE § 5-3-8
1-1:282
alarm boxes, water hydrants, lift stations, utility posts, police call
boxes, cabinets, vaults, and standpipes. Essential services do not
include larger utility facilities included under large-scale public
services.
Regulations:
(a) Essential services are exempt from density, intensity, and bulk
regulations.
(b) All structures shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any
residentially zoned property. Does not include landscaping or
stormwater detention facilities.
(c) Outdoor storage areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from
any residentially zoned property.
(d) The exterior of all buildings shall meet the requirements for
exterior materials of Chapter 7.
(e) Minimum required parking: None.
(6) Large-scale public services and utilities: Large-scale facilities such as
public works facilities and garages, wastewater treatment plants,
potable water treatment plants, public and/or private utility
substations, water towers, well houses, jails, prisons, and similar land
uses involving buildings and/or fenced enclosures. This does not
include uses listed under essential services.
Regulations:
(a) All structures shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
(b) Outdoor storage areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from
any residentially zoned property.
(c) The exterior of all buildings shall meet the requirements for
exterior materials of Chapter 7.
(d) All outdoor storage areas adjoining a residentially zoned property
shall install and continually maintain a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60. Said bufferyard shall be located at the property line
adjacent to said residentially zoned property.
(e) Minimum required parking: One space per employee on the largest
work shift, plus one space per company vehicle normally stored or
parked on the premises.
(7) Community living arrangement (one to eight residents): Facilities
provided for in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(i), including community living
arrangements for adults as defined in Wis. Stats. § 46.03(22),
community living arrangements for children as defined in Wis. Stats.
§ 48.743(1), foster homes as defined in Wis. Stats. § 48.02(6), and adult
§ 5-3-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-8
1-1:283
family homes and community-based residential facilities (CBRFs) as
defined in Wis. Stats. § 50.01(1g). Community living arrangements do
not include boarding houses, group daycare centers, nursing homes,
homeless shelters, hospitals, prisons, or jails. Community living
arrangement facilities are regulated depending upon their capacity
as provided for in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(i)1-5, provided any such
regulations do not violate federal or state housing or antidiscrimination
laws.
Regulations:
(a) No community living arrangement shall be established within
2,500 feet of any other such facility regardless of its capacity.
(b) The total capacity of all community living arrangements (of all
capacities) in the City shall not exceed 1% of the City's population.
The Zoning Administrator shall make this determination.
(c) Foster homes housing four or fewer children and licensed under
Wis. Stats. § 48.62 shall not be subject to Subsection (7)(a), above;
and shall not be subject to, or count toward, the total arrived at in
Subsection (7)(b), above.
(d) Each facility shall have a rear and side yard which is visually
screened from adjacent residential properties using a bufferyard
with a minimum opacity of 0.20.
(e) Minimum required parking: One off-street parking space per
employee on the largest work shift.
(f) Driveways shall be considered legal "stacked" parking spaces,
provided that each parking space is no less than eight feet in width
and 18 feet in depth. A driveway may contain one or more legal
parking spaces.
(8) Community living arrangement (nine to 15 residents): See description
under Subsection (7), above.
Regulations:
(a) No community living arrangement shall be established within
2,500 feet of any other such facility regardless of its capacity.
(b) The total capacity of all community living arrangements (of all
capacities) in the City shall not exceed 1% of the City's population.
(c) Foster homes housing four or fewer children and licensed under
Wis. Stats. § 48.62 shall not be subject to Subsection (7)(a), above;
and shall not be subject to, or count toward, the total arrived at in
Subsection (7)(b), above.
§ 5-3-8 MONROE CODE § 5-3-8
1-1:284
(d) Each facility shall have a rear and side yard which is visually
screened from adjacent residential properties using a bufferyard
with a minimum opacity of 0.20.
(e) Minimum required parking: One off-street parking space per
employee on the largest work shift.
(9) Community living arrangement (16+ residents): See description under
Subsection (7), above.
Regulations:
(a) No community living arrangement shall be established within
2,500 feet of any other such facility regardless of its capacity.
(b) The total capacity of all community living arrangements (of all
capacities) in the City shall not exceed 1% of the City's population.
(c) Foster homes housing four or fewer children and licensed under
Wis. Stats. § 48.62 shall not be subject to Subsection (7)(a), above;
and shall not be subject to, or count toward, the total arrived at in
Subsection (7)(b), above.
(d) The minimum lot size for each district shall apply, except that the
minimum lot area in square feet shall be increased 1,000 square
feet for each additional two residents over 15.
(e) Each facility shall have a rear and side yard which is visually
screened from adjacent residential properties using a bufferyard
with a minimum opacity of 0.20.
(f) Minimum required parking: One off street parking space per
employee on the largest work shift.
(10) Institutional residential: Residential development designed to
accommodate institutional residential land uses, such as convents,
monasteries, dormitories, fraternities, sororities, senior housing,
retirement homes, assisted living facilities, nursing homes, hospices,
convalescent homes, limited care facilities, rehabilitation centers,
homeless shelters (with or without meal service), and similar land uses
not considered to be community living arrangements under §§ 5-3-8(7)
through (9) of this Title 5 or under the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23.
Regulations:
(a) Project shall provide an off-street passenger loading area at a
minimum of one location within the development.
(b) Minimum required parking: The following specific parking
requirements may apply:
1. Assisted living facility or limited care facility: One space per
two dwelling units, plus one space per two employees on the
largest work shift.
§ 5-3-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-8
1-1:285
§ 5-3-9. Commercial land uses.
2. Nursing home or hospice: One space per four patient beds,
plus three spaces per four employees on the largest work shift.
A plan to manage parking during shift changes shall be
provided to the Zoning Administrator.
3. Monastery or convent: One space per three beds plus one
space per employee on the largest work shift.
4. Public or private dormitory: One space per three residents plus
one space per nonresident employee on the largest work shift.
5. Senior housing or retirement housing: One space per dwelling
unit.
(1) Office: Indoor offices where the primary function is the handling of
information or administrative services. Office uses do not typically
provide services directly to customers on a walk-in basis.
Regulations:
(a) Minimum required parking: One space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
(2) Personal or professional service: Indoor service land uses where the
primary function is the provision of services directly to an individual on
a walk-in or on-appointment basis. Examples of such uses include
establishments where customers make an appointment, such as
professional services, insurance or financial services, realty offices,
small-scale by-appointment medical offices and clinics, veterinary
clinics, barber shops, beauty shops, and related land uses including
ancillary on-site production of items used in the provision of such
services.
Regulations:
(a) Minimum required parking: One space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
(3) Indoor sales or service: The sale and/or display of merchandise or
equipment or nonpersonal or nonprofessional services, entirely within
an enclosed building. Includes general merchandise stores, grocery
stores, butchers, sporting goods stores, antique stores, gift shops,
laundromats, bakeries, copy and printing centers, photo processing
centers, and other uses meeting this definition. Includes product
storage, packaging, and shipping of goods sold on the premises.
Regulations:
(a) Minimum required parking: One space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
§ 5-3-8 MONROE CODE § 5-3-9
1-1:286
(4) Outdoor display: Land uses where the sale and display of merchandise
or equipment is conducted outside of an enclosed building on more than
a temporary basis. Examples include, but are not limited to, outdoor
garden centers, outdoor recreation equipment sales, monument sales,
flea markets, and manufactured and mobile housing sales. If the
permanent outdoor display area is less than 250 square feet and is
secondary to an indoor sales or service use, such use shall instead be
considered incidental outdoor display under § 5-3-17(16). Outdoor
Display on a temporary basis shall be regulated by temporary outdoor
sales under § 5-3-18(6).
Regulations:
(a) The outdoor display area shall be calculated as the area which
would be enclosed by an imaginary line that would completely
enclose all materials displayed outdoors in the smallest possible
rectangle.
(b) The facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all borders of the display area abutting
residentially zoned property.
(c) The display of items shall not be permitted in required setback
areas, landscape areas, or bufferyards, unless located in a parking
lot.
(d) Inoperable vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored in
a junkyard or salvage yard as defined under § 5-3-15(4), shall not
be displayed.
(e) In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by Subsection (4)(i), below. If the number
of provided parking stalls on the property is already less than the
requirement, such display area shall not further reduce the number
of parking stalls already present.
(f) Display areas shall be separated from any circulation area by a
minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly delimited by a
physical separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of
planters, or by a clearly marked paved area.
(g) Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or
off-site traffic visibility, including potential vehicle/vehicle and
vehicle/pedestrian conflicts. Signs, screening, enclosures,
landscaping, or materials being displayed shall comply with
requirements related to corner clearance, vision triangles,
crosswalks, drive aisle width, parking stall dimensions, fire lanes,
bike lanes, or similar requirements related to traffic and pedestrian
safety.
§ 5-3-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-9
1-1:287
(h) Outdoor display shall be permitted during the entire calendar year;
however, if goods are removed from the display area, all support
fixtures used to display the goods shall be removed within 10
calendar days of the goods' removal.
(i) Minimum required parking: One space per 1,000 square feet of
gross outdoor floor area.
(5) Artisan production shop: A building or portion thereof used by 10 or
fewer artists or artisans for the creation, preparation, display and sale
of unique (rather than mass-produced) individually crafted items
including artwork, jewelry, custom furniture, woodwork, sculpture,
glass, metal, pottery, leathercraft, hand-woven articles, and related
items.
Regulations:
(a) Minimum required parking: One space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
(6) Physical activity studio: All land uses which provide a facility for
training, instruction, and physical activity within an enclosed building.
Such activities often have operating hours which extend significantly
earlier or later than most other commercial land uses and often employ
amplified music to set training tempo. Examples of such land uses
include health or fitness centers, all forms of training studios (yoga,
dance, art, martial arts, gymnastics, etc.), and music schools.
Regulations:
(a) No customer entrance of any kind shall be permitted within 50 feet
of a residentially zoned property.
(b) The facility shall provide bufferyard with minimum opacity of 0.60
along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned
property if outdoor physical activity takes place [see § 5-8-4(5)].
(c) Minimum required parking: One space per every three persons at
the maximum capacity of the establishment.
(7) Commercial kitchen: A building or portion thereof used for the
preparation of food that can be rented or used as a classroom by
different organizations, businesses, or individuals. Products produced
on site may be sold off site.
Regulations:
(a) Shall comply with the requirements of the Health Code of Green
County and applicable state regulations.
(b) Minimum required parking: One space per every 300 feet of gross
floor area.
§ 5-3-9 MONROE CODE § 5-3-9
1-1:288
(8) Indoor commercial entertainment: Land uses which provide
entertainment services entirely within an enclosed building. Such
activities often have the potential to be associated with nuisances
related to amplified music, noise, lighting, trash, and operating hours
that extend significantly later than most other commercial land uses.
Examples of such land uses include, but are not limited to, restaurants,
taverns, small-scale alcoholic beverage production (as defined in
§ 5-1-22), theaters, bowling alleys, arcades, roller rinks, and pool halls.
Regulations:
(a) Customer entrances shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from
residentially zoned property.
(b) Minimum required parking: One space per every 300 feet of gross
floor area.
(9) Outdoor commercial entertainment: Land uses which provide
entertainment services partially or wholly outside of an enclosed
building. Such activities often have the potential to be associated with
nuisances related to amplified music, noise, dust, lighting, trash, and
operating hours that extend significantly later than most other
commercial land uses. Examples of such land uses include, but are not
limited to, outdoor eating and drinking areas, sand volleyball courts,
small-scale alcoholic beverage production (as defined in § 5-1-22),
outdoor assembly areas, outdoor swimming pools associated with
another principal land use, and food and/or beverage trucks, carts,
stands, trailers or similar facilities. Note that high attendance facilities
oriented to nonresident users or attendees and intensively lit,
tournament-oriented outdoor facilities are considered intensive outdoor
activity land uses under § 5-3-9(22).
Regulations:
(a) Customer entrances shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from
residentially zoned property.
(b) Activity areas shall not be located closer than 50 feet to a
residentially zoned property.
(c) Facility shall provide bufferyard with minimum opacity of 0.40
along all borders of the outdoor activity area abutting residentially
zoned property.
(d) Minimum required parking: One space for every three persons at
the maximum capacity of the establishment.
(10) Drive-through and in-vehicle sales or service: Land uses where sales
and/or services are conducted to persons in vehicles, or to vehicles
which may or may not be occupied at the time of such activity (except
vehicle repair and maintenance services). Such land uses often have
traffic volumes which exhibit their highest levels concurrent with peak
§ 5-3-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-9
1-1:289
traffic flows on adjacent roads. Examples of such land uses include,
but are not limited to, drive-in facilities, drive-through facilities, fuel
stations, and car washes.
Regulations:
(a) Clearly marked pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided for each
wall-in customer access to the facility.
(b) Drive-through windows shall not be located between the principal
building and the street right-of-way.
(c) The drive-through facility shall be designed so as to not impede or
impair vehicular and pedestrian traffic movement or exacerbate
the potential for pedestrian/vehicular conflicts.
(d) In no instance shall a drive-through facility be permitted to operate
in a manner that endangers the public safety, even if such land use
has been permitted under the provisions of this section.
(e) The setback of the outer edge of any overhead canopy or similar
structure shall be a minimum of 10 feet from all street rights-of-way
lines, or the required principal building setback, whichever is
greater; a minimum of 20 feet from all residentially zoned property
lines; and shall be a minimum of five feet from all other property
lines. The total height of any overhead canopy or similar structure
shall not exceed 25 feet per the measurement of roof height.
(f) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.60
along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
(g) Interior curbs shall be used to separate driving areas from exterior
fixtures such as fuel pumps, vacuums, menu boards, canopy
supports, and landscaped islands not part of an approved
stormwater management system. Said curbs shall be a minimum of
six inches high.
(h) Minimum stacking lane length for drive-through facilities shall be
as follows:
1. Automatic car wash: 100 feet in front of the car wash entrance
and 25 feet after the exit.
2. Establishments selling food and/or drink: 100 feet in front of
each order station, 55 feet between the order station and the
pick-up window, and 25 after the pick-up window.
3. All other uses: 55 feet in front of and 25 feet after each service
window.
(i) Minimum required parking: Refer to the parking requirements of
the other land use activities on the site such as indoor sales and
§ 5-3-9 MONROE CODE § 5-3-9
1-1:290
service land uses for a gas station/convenience store or office land
uses for a bank.
(11) Cheese slicing and packaging: Any business in which the principal
activity is the slicing and packaging of cheese, where no manufacturing
or processing occurs on-site.
Regulations:
(a) Minimum required parking: One space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
(12) Group daycare center (9+ children): Facilities which provide childcare
services for nine or more children. Such land uses may be operated in
conjunction with another principal land use on the same environs, such
as a church, school, business, or civic organization. In such instances,
group daycare centers are considered a separate principal use and
require review as such.
Regulations:
(a) Group daycare centers shall not be located within residential
buildings.
(b) The facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.50 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property.
(c) Minimum required parking: One space per 10 children at maximum
capacity, plus one space for each employee on the largest work
shift.
(13) Commercial animal boarding/daycare: Facilities providing short-term
and/or long-term animal boarding, including commercial kennels,
commercial stables, pet daycare, and animal shelters. Exercise yards,
fields, training areas, and trails associated with such land uses are
considered accessory uses and do not require separate consideration.
Regulations:
(a) Animal containment areas shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with
a minimum opacity of 0.70 along sides abutting residentially zoned
property.
(b) Each animal shall be provided with an indoor containment area.
(c) Minimum required parking: One space per every 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area.
(14) Bed-and-breakfast: Bed-and-breakfasts are places of lodging that
provide rooms for rent in the owner's personal residence, are occupied
by the owner at the time of rental, and where the only meal served to
guests is breakfast.
§ 5-3-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-9
1-1:291
Regulations:
(a) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.40 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property.
(b) The dwelling unit in which the bed-and-breakfast takes place shall
be the principal residence of the operator/owner and said operator/
owner shall live on the premises when the bed-and-breakfast
operation is active.
(c) The facility shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats.
§ 254.61 and Chapter ATCP 73 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
(d) Minimum required parking: One space per each bedroom in
addition to requirements for principal residents.
(15) Vacation rental home: A dwelling unit available for overnight, weekend
or weekly stays by paying guests, which may or may not be owneroccupied
for parts of the year. These uses are often referred to as
vacation rentals and include timeshare units. Where such units are
available for lease for periods of time longer than seven consecutive
nights, such use shall be considered tourist rooming houses, a type of
accessory use separately described and regulated under this chapter.
Also, not included within this land use category are: bed-and-breakfast,
commercial indoor lodging, or boarding house.
Regulations:
(a) Vacation rental homes shall only be located as a commercial land
use within a single-family dwelling unit as defined in § 5-3-6.
(b) The total number of days of operation within any calendar year
shall not exceed 180 days, which must be consecutive.
(c) Occupancy shall be limited to two persons per bedroom, plus an
additional two persons. At no time may the number of guests
exceed eight, regardless of the number bedrooms in the dwelling
unit.
(d) The maximum stay for any party other than the owner of the
premises shall be seven consecutive days.
(e) The appearance or use of the dwelling shall not be altered in a
manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential
character either by the use of colors, materials, construction,
lighting, signs, or the emission of sounds, odors, dust or vibrations
that carry beyond the premises.
(f) The availability of the vacation rental home to the public shall not
be advertised on-site.
§ 5-3-9 MONROE CODE § 5-3-9
1-1:292
(g) Minimum required parking: One space per each bedroom. All guest
vehicles shall be parked on site, within a legal paved parking space.
1. A driveway may contain one or more legal parking spaces.
Driveways shall be considered legal "stacked" parking spaces,
provided that each driveway parking space is no less than eight
feet in width and 18 feet in depth.
(16) Commercial indoor lodging: Facilities where overnight housing in
individual rooms or suites of rooms is provided, with each room or suite
having a private bathroom. Such land uses may provide in room or insuite
kitchens and may also provide indoor recreational facilities.
Restaurants, lounges, fitness centers, and other on-site facilities
available to nonlodgers are considered principal uses and therefore
require review as a separate land use.
Regulations:
(a) Customer entrances shall be located 50 feet from residentially
zoned property.
(b) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property.
(c) Minimum required parking: One space per room for rent, plus one
space for each employee on the largest work shift.
(17) Campground: Campgrounds include any facilities designed for
overnight accommodation of persons in tents, travel trailers, or other
mobile or portable shelters or recreational vehicles, including
recreational vehicle overnight stays in parking lots and other similar
locations not in campgrounds.
Regulations:
(a) Campgrounds shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.70 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property.
(b) Facility shall secure a County Health Department license.
(c) Minimum required parking: Two spaces per campsite.
(18) Indoor maintenance service: Facilities where maintenance and repair
service are provided and all operations are located entirely within an
enclosed building, including the repair of clocks, vacuum cleaners, and
small appliances. This shall not include vehicle sales or vehicle service
and repair land uses.
Regulations:
(a) Minimum required parking: One space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
§ 5-3-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-9
1-1:293
(19) Outdoor maintenance service: Facilities where maintenance and repair
service are provided and where all or any portion of the operation is
located outside of an enclosed building. This shall not include vehicle
sales or vehicle service and repair land uses.
Regulations:
(a) All outdoor activity areas shall be completely enclosed by a
minimum six-foot-high solid fence. Such enclosure shall be located
a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property and
shall be screened from such property by a bufferyard with a
minimum opacity of 0.60.
(b) Outdoor storage of unlicensed or inoperable vehicles is prohibited
outside fenced areas.
(c) Minimum required parking: One space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area, or one space per each employee on the largest shift,
whichever is less.
(20) Vehicle sales: The sale and display of vehicles for sale or rent outside of
an enclosed building. Such land uses also include an ancillary repair
shop associated with the vehicle display lot and sales building.
Regulations:
(a) The display of vehicles shall not be permitted in green space areas,
landscaped areas, or required bufferyards.
(b) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all borders of the display area abutting
residentially zoned property.
(c) Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or
off-site traffic visibility, including potential vehicle/vehicle and
vehicle/pedestrian conflicts.
(d) Inoperable vehicles or equipment or other items typically stored or
displayed in a junkyard or salvage yard shall not be permitted.
(e) Minimum required parking: One space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area plus one space per every 3,000 square feet of outdoor
display.
(21) Vehicle service and repair: Facilities where vehicle service and/or
repair is provided entirely within an enclosed building, including
unlicensed or inoperable vehicles used for spare parts.
Regulations:
(a) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all borders of the display area abutting
residentially zoned property.
§ 5-3-9 MONROE CODE § 5-3-9
1-1:294
(b) Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or
off-site traffic visibility, including potential vehicle/vehicle and
vehicle/pedestrian conflicts.
(c) Outdoor storage of unlicensed or inoperable vehicles is prohibited
outside areas fully screened by a solid fence. Outdoor storage of
other items typically stored or displayed in a junkyard or salvage
yard shall not be permitted.
(d) Minimum required parking: One space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
(22) Intensive outdoor activity: Land uses located on private or public
property that require intensive lighting and generate regional traffic
and noise beyond property lines. Intensive outdoor activity land uses
may include, but are not limited to, amusement parks, water parks,
fairgrounds, outdoor stadiums, go cart tracks, paint ball, race tracks,
ski hills, drive-in theaters, miniature golf, driving ranges, and
tournament-oriented athletic facilities. Where such facilities are on the
site of and accessory to a principal institutional land use, such facilities
shall be considered part of the principal institutional land use and not
an independent principal intensive outdoor activity land use.
Regulations:
(a) No intensive outdoor activity shall take place before 8:00 a.m. or
after 10:00 p.m. except as explicitly authorized an approved
conditional use permit.
(b) A bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.0 shall be provided along
all property abutting residentially zoned property and for any
facility requiring night lighting.
(c) Facilities serving a regional or community-wide function shall
provide an off-street passenger loading area if the majority of the
users will be children or senior citizens.
(d) Any activity area other than parking shall be set back a minimum of
100 feet from the property line.
(e) Minimum required parking: One space per every five expected
patrons at maximum capacity. The Zoning Administrator may
require a parking study to determine parking requirements.
(23) Adult-oriented entertainment business: An adult bookstore, adult
theater, adult massage parlor, adult sauna, adult entertainment center,
adult cabaret, adult health or sport club, adult steam room or
bathhouse facility, or any other business in which the primary business
activity is characterized by emphasis on matters depicting, describing,
or relating to nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or
sadomasochistic abuse.
§ 5-3-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-9
1-1:295
(a) Findings. The Common Council of the City of Monroe hereby finds
as follows:
1. The location, siting, design, construction and use of adultoriented
entertainment businesses can have adverse impacts
on the surrounding area.
2. Adult-oriented entertainment businesses can exert a
dehumanizing influence on persons attending places of
worship, children attending licensed daycare homes, persons
using public parks, and children and other persons attending
public schools.
3. Adult-oriented entertainment businesses can contribute to an
increase in criminal activity in the area where such businesses
are located, taxing local law enforcement services.
4. Adult-oriented entertainment businesses can significantly
contribute to the deterioration of residential neighborhoods
and can impair the value of the residential housing in the area
in which such businesses are located.
5. The concentration of adult-oriented entertainment businesses
in one area can have a substantially detrimental effect on the
area in which such businesses are concentrated and on the
overall quality of urban life.
6. A cycle of decay can result from the influx and concentration of
adult-oriented entertainment businesses. The presence of such
businesses is perceived by others as an indication that the area
is deteriorating, and the result can be devastating as other
businesses and residences move out of the vicinity. Declining
real estate values, which can result from the concentration of
such business, erode the City's tax base.
7. The City may enact zoning regulations to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City as
provided under Wis. Stats. § 62.23.
(b) Purpose.
1. The purpose of these regulations is to control through zoning
the location and operational characteristics of adult-oriented
entertainment businesses so as to minimize the detrimental
effect on the character of the City's residential neighborhoods
and commercial areas.
2. These regulations are intended to establish a reasonable
balance between the legitimate public purpose of protecting
the health, safety, and welfare of residents and businesses in
the City and the legally recognized rights of owners, operators,
and employees of adult-oriented entertainment businesses by
§ 5-3-9 MONROE CODE § 5-3-9
1-1:296
allowing such businesses to operate in locations and under
circumstances that minimize the adverse effects of such
businesses.
3. These regulations shall not impose a limitation on the content
of any communication materials, including sexually oriented
materials as protected by the First Amendment to the United
States Constitution.
(c) Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all adultoriented
entertainment businesses.
(d) Distance limitations. No adult-oriented entertainment business
shall:
1. Be operated or maintained within 300 feet of the boundary of
any of the following zoning districts: SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-7,
DR-8, TR-10, MR-15, MR-30, MH-7, and CMU.
2. Be operated or maintained within 300 feet of the Institutional
Zoning District or an institutional land use (per § 5-3-8).
3. Distance limitations set forth in this section shall be measured
in a straight line from the main public entrance of the adultoriented
entertainment business to the main public entrance to
the named use or, in the case of the named zoning districts,
from the main public entrance of the adult-oriented
entertainment business to the nearest boundary of the named
zoning district.
(e) Same use restrictions. No adult-oriented entertainment business
shall be located in the same building or upon the same property as
another such use.
(f) Sign limitations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, an adult-oriented entertainment business shall not be
permitted more than one business sign. Signs advertising or
promoting an adult-oriented entertainment business shall meet the
following criteria:
1. No sign shall display merchandise or pictures of the products
or entertainment on the premises in any area which can be
viewed from the sidewalk, street, or other public way, adjacent
to the building.
2. No sign shall be placed in any window. In addition to the
business sign, a one square foot informational sign may be
placed on the door to state hours of operation and admittance
to adults only.
3. No sign shall contain any flashing lights, moving elements, or
mechanically changing messages.
§ 5-3-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-9
1-1:297
§ 5-3-10. Mixed-use buildings.
4. No sign shall contain any depiction of the human form, or any
part thereof, nor shall it contain sexually explicit language.
5. No adult-oriented entertainment business may have any offpremises
business sign.
(g) Operating standards. All adult-oriented entertainment businesses
shall operate under the following:
1. No employee shall solicit business outside the building in
which the business is located.
2. No male or female person, while on the premises, shall expose
to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, anus, or anal
cleft. Full nudity is prohibited.
3. No person on the premises shall engage in sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse.
4. Nudity is prohibited for any employee of an adult-oriented
entertainment business where such person is in direct,
personal contact with another person.
(h) Building's exterior appearance. The building's exterior shall meet
the following criteria:
1. Colors shall be earth or neutral tones and primary accent
colors shall be within the same color family.
2. Stripes and geometric patterns are prohibited.
3. A color scheme which is directly inherent to a unique
recognized architectural style but not otherwise compliant
with this section may be reviewed and approved by the Plan
Commission.
4. The exterior shall be adequately maintained in good condition.
(i) Severability. If any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by
reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any other section,
subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof.
(1) Apartments with limited commercial: An apartment building that
contains one or more principal nonresidential land uses on the ground
floor.
Regulations:
§ 5-3-9 MONROE CODE § 5-3-10
1-1:298
(a) This land use shall comply with all of the bulk and density
requirements that apply to the most similar dwelling unit type in
§ 5-3-6.
(b) The principal commercial use shall be limited to the ground floor of
the building and shall consist of no more than 33% of the gross
floor area of the ground floor, or 5,000 square feet, whichever is
smaller.
(c) The commercial component of the building is limited to the
following land uses, but only if such uses are also permitted by
right or by conditional use permit in the applicable zoning district:
1. Office.
2. Personal or professional service.
3. Indoor sales or service.
4. Artisan production shop.
5. Indoor maintenance service.
(d) Minimum required parking: The parking requirements of each
individual land use shall apply.
(e) Apartments with limited commercial shall comply with the design
standards for multifamily uses. See § 5-7-5.
(2) Mixed-use building: A building that contains a mix of principal
commercial land uses and principal residential land uses.
Regulations:
(a) Ground-floor residential uses.
1. Residential uses shall not be located within the first 24 feet of
the ground floor as measured from the front of the building.
2. Residential uses shall comprise of no more than 30% of the
gross floor area of the ground floor.
3. In order to provide privacy for private dwelling units,
residential uses adjacent to an on-site parking lot shall have
steps, patios, terraces, lawns, knee walls, gardens and
landscaping, or similar features that provide separation of the
public walkway from private dwelling unit windows. Elevating
the unit several feet above ground level is encouraged.
(b) Minimum required parking: The parking requirements of each
individual land use shall apply.
(c) Mixed-use buildings shall comply with the design standards for
commercial uses and mixed-use buildings. See § 5-7-6.
§ 5-3-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-10
1-1:299
§ 5-3-11. Industrial land uses.
(3) Live/work building: A multiunit building, typically arranged in a
townhouse side-by-side format, in which each unit contains a
commercial use on the ground floor with a residential use on upper
floors, with both uses occupied by the same resident/business operator.
The commercial use is typically connected to the residential use with an
internal stair or elevator.
(a) The live/work building shall be the primary dwelling of the
occupant.
(b) The commercial component of the live/work building is limited to
the following land uses, but only if such uses are also permitted by
right or by conditional use permit in the applicable zoning district:
1. Office.
2. Personal or professional service.
3. Indoor sales or service.
4. Artisan production shop.
5. Indoor maintenance service.
(c) The residential and the commercial space shall be occupied by the
same tenant, and no portion of the live/work building shall be
rented or sold separately.
(d) Employees of the commercial use who are not residents of the
residential unit are permitted.
(e) The commercial use is subject to the regulations of the applicable
land use category in § 5-3-9.
(f) All uses are subject to the nonresidential density, intensity, and bulk
requirements of Chapter 2.
(g) Minimum required parking: The parking requirements of each
individual land use shall apply.
(h) Live/work buildings shall comply with the design standards for
commercial uses and mixed-use buildings. See § 5-7-6.
(1) Light industrial: Industrial facilities where all operations, with the
exception of loading, are conducted entirely within an enclosed
building. Such land uses are not associated with nuisances (such as
odor, noise, heat, vibration, and radiation) that are detectable at the
property line and do not pose a significant safety hazard (such as
danger of explosion). Examples include, but are not limited to,
manufacturing of clothing, furniture, cabinetry, electronic components,
and mass-produced arts and crafts. Industrial land uses may conduct
§ 5-3-10 MONROE CODE § 5-3-11
1-1:300
indoor sales as an accessory use provided that the requirements of
§ 5-3-9(3) are met.
Regulations:
(a) All activities, except loading and unloading, shall be conducted
entirely within the confines of a building.
(b) Retail sales of goods produced, packaged, or shipped on the
premises shall be considered incidental indoor sales, per
§ 5-3-17(17).
(c) Minimum required parking: One space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
(2) Heavy industrial: Industrial activities that may be wholly or partially
located outside of an enclosed building; may have the potential to
create certain nuisances that are detectable at the property line; and
may involve materials which pose a significant safety hazard. Examples
include, but are not limited to, meat product producers; paper, pulp or
paperboard producers; chemical and allied product producers (except
drug producers) including poison or fertilizer producers; petroleum and
coal product producers; asphalt, concrete or cement producers;
tanneries; stone, clay, or glass product producers; primary metal
producers; heavy machinery producers; electrical distribution
equipment producers; electrical industrial apparatus producers;
transportation vehicle producers; commercial sanitary sewage
treatment plants; railroad switching yards; recycling facilities not
involving the on-site storage of salvage materials; and large-scale
alcoholic beverage production (as defined in § 5-1-22).
Regulations:
(a) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.0 along all borders of the property abutting properties
which are not zoned HI.
(b) All outdoor activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet
from residentially zoned property.
(c) In no event shall the storage of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of Subsection (2)(d),
below. If the number of provided parking stalls on the property is
already less than the requirement, such storage area shall not
further reduce the number of parking stalls already present.
(d) Minimum required parking: One space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
(3) Production greenhouse: Any business in which the principal activity is
the growing and wholesaling of plants or plant byproducts such as
flowers, shrubbery, trees, and horticultural and floricultural products
§ 5-3-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-11
1-1:301
(not including fruits and vegetables) that are grown or stored within an
enclosed building or structure constructed chiefly of glass or glasslike
material, cloth, or other permanent material. Such uses also often
involve the seasonal display of plants and related products outdoors.
Regulations:
(a) In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of Subsection (3)(f),
below. If the number of provided parking stalls on the property is
already less than the requirement, such display area shall not
further reduce the number of parking stalls already present.
(b) Outdoor display areas of 250 square feet or less shall comply with
the requirements of incidental outdoor display under § 5-3-17(16).
Outdoor display greater than 250 square feet shall comply with the
requirements of outdoor display as a principal use under § 5-3-9(4).
(c) Outdoor storage and/or outdoor display areas shall be separated
from any vehicular parking or circulation area by a minimum of 10
feet. This separation shall be clearly distinguished by a physical
feature or barrier such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of
planters, or by a clearly marked paved area.
(d) Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or
off-site traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and traffic/
pedestrian conflicts.
(e) The facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.60 along all borders of outdoor display areas abutting
residentially zoned property.
(f) Minimum required parking: One space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
(4) Indoor food cultivation and farming: Any business in which the principal
activity is the production and wholesaling of plants or plant byproducts
including fruits and vegetables that are grown on-site within an
enclosed building or structure constructed chiefly of glass or glasslike
material, cloth, or other permanent material. Such uses also often
involve the seasonal display of plants and related products outdoors.
Indoor food production also includes the farming of aquatic organisms
(plants and animals) under controlled conditions, and which is located
entirely within an enclosed building and utilizes recirculating (closed)
system technology. Such operations may also incorporate aquaponics,
which is the symbiotic cultivation of plants and aquatic organisms in a
recirculating system.
Regulations:
§ 5-3-11 MONROE CODE § 5-3-11
1-1:302
(a) Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, storage, or materials
being displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either onsite
or off-site traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and
traffic/pedestrian conflicts.
(b) Site plans shall be provided which indicate the location of all
outdoor activity areas.
(c) Outdoor activity regulations.
1. No outdoor activity areas shall be located in bufferyard areas.
No materials shall be stacked or otherwise stored so as to be
visible over bufferyard screening elements.
2. All outdoor storage areas shall be located no closer to a
residentially zoned property than the required minimum
setback for buildings on the subject property.
3. Outdoor storage shall not be permitted in any landscaping
areas, bufferyard areas, or permanently protected green space
areas.
4. All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any
permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls, and/or
fencing. Such walls and fencing shall be a minimum of eight
feet in height and shall be designed to completely screen all
stored materials or products from view of nonindustrialized
areas at an elevation of five feet above the grade of all adjacent
properties and rights-of-way. Said walls or fencing shall be
screened from residentially zoned property by a bufferyard
with a minimum opacity of 0.80.
5. In no event shall the storage of items reduce or inhibit the use
or number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of Subsection (4)(j),
below. If the number of provided parking stalls on the property
is already less than the requirement, such storage area shall
not further reduce the number of parking stalls already
present.
6. Outdoor storage and/or outdoor display areas shall be
separated from any vehicular parking or circulation area by a
minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly
distinguished by a physical feature or barrier such as a
greenway, curb, fence, or line of planters, or by a clearly
marked paved area.
7. Outdoor display areas up to 250 square feet shall comply with
the requirements of incidental outdoor display under
§ 5-3-17(16). Outdoor display greater than 250 square feet
shall comply with the requirements of outdoor display as a
principal use under § 5-3-9(4).
§ 5-3-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-11
1-1:303
(d) On-site processing of seafood is permitted, provided the activity is
conducted entirely within an enclosed building and no odors are
detectable from the property line.
(e) The farming of aquatic plants and animals under controlled
conditions shall take place entirely within an enclosed building.
(f) Prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit, applicants wishing
to establish indoor aquaculture operations shall prepare a report
outlining the estimated average daily water usage and quantity of
wastewater discharge. Such report shall be reviewed and approved
by the City of Monroe Water and Waste Water Utilities.
(g) Indoor aquaculture operations shall be connected to the municipal
water and sanitary sewer system and all wastewater shall be
discharged to the municipal sanitary sewer system.
(h) The on-site retail sale of seafood or vegetables shall be considered
incidental indoor sales subject to the provisions of § 5-3-17(16),
provided the area devoted to sales does not exceed 25% of the total
area of the building(s) within which the operation is located. Retail
areas that exceed 25% of the total area of the building(s) within
which the operation is located shall be considered an indoor sales
and service principal land use.
(i) On-site composting shall be permitted, subject to the following
regulations:
1. Compost areas shall be fully screened on all four sides by a
combination of on-site buildings, solid fencing, and evergreen
landscaping.
2. Composting shall comply with all county, state, and federal
rules, regulations, and permitting requirements.
(j) Minimum required parking: One space per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
(5) Indoor food production and processing: Any business in which the
principal activity is the manufacturing, processing, and/or packing of
food products, components of food products, and the byproducts
thereof, including grain, cereal, dairy, egg, vegetable, fruit, oil, and
similar products. Production of meat, meat products, fish, and fish
products shall be considered heavy industrial land uses per Subsection
(2), above. Production and wholesaling of plants or plant byproducts
and aquatic farming shall be considered indoor food cultivation and
farming land uses per Subsection (4), above.
Regulations:
(a) All activities, except loading and unloading, shall be conducted
entirely within the confines of a building.
§ 5-3-11 MONROE CODE § 5-3-11
1-1:304
§ 5-3-12. Storage land uses.
(b) Minimum required parking: One space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
(1) Indoor storage and wholesaling: Land uses primarily oriented to the
receiving, holding, and shipping of packaged materials for a single
business or a single group of businesses. With the exception of loading
and parking facilities, such land uses are contained entirely within an
enclosed building. Examples of this land use include conventional
warehouse facilities, long-term indoor storage facilities, and joint
warehouse and storage facilities. Retail outlets associated with this use
shall be considered accessory uses per § 5-3-17(17).
Regulations:
(a) Minimum required parking: One space per 2,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
(2) Outdoor storage and wholesaling: Land uses primarily oriented to the
receiving, holding, and shipping of packaged materials for a single
business or a single group of businesses. Such a land use, in which any
activity beyond loading and parking is located outdoors, is considered
an outdoor storage and wholesaling land use. Examples of this land use
include, but are not limited to, storage yards, equipment yards, lumber
yards, and coal yards.
Regulations:
(a) All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any
permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls, and solid
fencing. Such walls and fencing shall be a minimum of eight feet in
height and shall be designed to completely screen all stored
materials from view from nonindustrialized areas. Said walls or
fencing shall be screened from residentially zoned property by a
bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.80.
(b) Outdoor storage areas accessory to a principal land use and
occupying 500 square feet or less shall be regulated as incidental
outdoor storage under § 5-3-17(18).
(c) The storage of items shall not be permitted in landscaping areas,
bufferyard areas, or green space areas.
(d) In no event shall the storage of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of Subsection (2)(g). If
the number of provided parking stalls on the property is already
less than the requirement, such storage area shall not further
reduce the number of parking stalls already present.
§ 5-3-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-12
1-1:305
§ 5-3-13. Transportation land uses.
(e) Materials being stored shall not interfere in any manner with either
on-site or off-site traffic visibility, including potential vehicle/vehicle
and vehicle/pedestrian conflicts.
(f) Inoperable vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored in
a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be stored under the provisions
of this land use.
(g) Minimum required parking: One space for every 10,000 square feet
of gross storage area, plus one space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
(3) Personal storage facility: Also known as "mini-warehouses," these land
uses are oriented to the indoor storage of items entirely within
partitioned buildings having an individual access to each partitioned
storage area.
Regulations:
(a) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.80 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property.
(b) Facility may include outdoor storage of recreational equipment
including recreational vehicles, camping trailers, ice shanties, and
recreational equipment stored in/on trailers. Any such outdoor
storage shall require conditional use approval. All outdoor storage
areas shall be completely enclosed by any permitted combination of
buildings, structures, walls, and solid fencing.
(c) Facilities without outdoor storage may use fencing no higher than
eight feet. Chain link fence slats and barb wire fences are
prohibited.
(d) Minimum required parking: One space for each employee on the
largest work shift. Parking for loading and unloading is permitted
in drive aisles.
(1) Transit center: A building, structure, and/or area designed and used for
the purpose of loading, unloading, or transferring passengers or
accommodating the movement of passengers from one mode of
transportation to another. Examples include, but are not limited to, bus
stations, train stations, and park and ride stations.
Regulations:
(a) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.0 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property.
§ 5-3-12 MONROE CODE § 5-3-13
1-1:306
(b) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas, except employee and passenger parking, shall be
located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines abutting
residentially zoned property.
(c) Minimum required parking: To be determined by Zoning
Administrator, based on parking study.
(2) Distribution center: Facilities oriented to the short-term indoor storage
and possible repackaging and reshipment of materials involving the
activities and products of a single user. Retail outlets associated with
this use shall be considered accessory uses per § 5-3-17(17).
Regulations:
(a) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property.
(b) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot
lines abutting residentially zoned property.
(c) In no instance shall activity areas be located within landscaping
areas, bufferyard areas, or green space areas.
(d) Minimum required parking: One space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
(3) Freight terminal: Land and buildings representing either end of one or
more truck carrier line(s) which may have some or all of the following
facilities: yards, docks, management offices, storage sheds, buildings
and/or outdoor storage areas, freight stations, and truck maintenance
and repair facilities, principally serving several or many businesses
requiring trans-shipment.
Regulations:
(a) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all property borders abutting residentially
zoned property.
(b) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot
lines abutting residentially zoned property.
(c) In no instance shall activity areas be located within landscaping
areas, bufferyard areas, or green space areas.
(d) Minimum required parking: One space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
(4) Airport: Transportation facilities providing takeoff, landing, servicing,
storage, and other services to any type of air transportation. Takeoffs
§ 5-3-13 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-13
1-1:307
and landings of any type of air vehicle (including ultralight aircraft,
hang gliders, parasails, and related equipment) within the jurisdiction
of this chapter shall occur only in conjunction with an approved airport.
Regulations:
(a) Airports shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property not otherwise
completely screened from activity areas by buildings or structures.
(b) Airports shall conform to the regulations of the Airport Overlay
Zoning Ordinance.3
(c) Minimum required parking: One space per each employee on the
largest work shift. A parking study shall be conducted to determine
passenger parking requirements.
(5) Heliport: An area designed to be used for the landing or takeoff of
helicopters including operations facilities, such as maintenance,
loading and unloading, storage, fueling, or terminal facilities.
Regulations:
(a) The heliport shall be located at least 200 feet from any residential
use or residentially zoned property, as measured in a straight line
from the closest point of the takeoff and landing area to the
property line of the closest residentially used or zoned property.
The application shall include an area map showing the distance
between the proposed takeoff and landing area and the nearest
residential property.
(b) The heliport shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and State.
(6) Off-site parking lot: Off-site parking lots include any areas used for the
temporary surface parking of vehicles which are fully registered,
licensed, and operable. See § 5-7-6 for additional parking regulations.
Regulations:
(a) Access and vehicular circulation shall be designed so as to
discourage cut-through traffic.
(7) Off-Site Structured Parking: Commonly referred to as a "parking ramp"
or "parking garage," off-site structured parking is a type of parking
structure for the temporary parking of vehicles which are fully
registered, licensed, and operable. Off-site structured parking is standalone,
multilevel parking area in which one or more levels are
supported above the lowest level. A parking structure may also include
underground parking spaces. Parking structures that are incorporated
3. Editor's Note: See § 5-6-5.
§ 5-3-13 MONROE CODE § 5-3-13
1-1:308
§ 5-3-14. Telecommunication land uses.
into the same building as a separate principal land use shall be
regulated as on-site structured parking under § 5-3-17(13). See § 5-7-6
for additional parking regulations.
Regulations:
(a) Parking structures may contain commercial uses on the groundfloor
level. Such uses shall be limited to those permitted by right or
by conditional use permit in the applicable zoning district.
(b) Parking structures must meet all applicable bulk requirements.
(c) Clearly marked pedestrian connections between the parking
structure and adjacent uses shall be provided.
(d) Screening or other improvements that shield parked vehicles from
view at each level of the parking structure shall be installed.
(e) Parking structures shall comply with the landscaping requirements
of Chapter 8.
(f) Exterior elevations shall be designed to minimize the use of blank
concrete facades and shall have an architectural treatment that is
compatible with the surrounding architectural context. Exterior
elevations are encouraged to be designed to replicate the regular
window pattern and other architectural elements of adjacent
buildings.
(1) Communication tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed
for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for communication
purposes such as cellular telephones or similar, including selfsupporting
lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. For
satellite dishes and antennas accessory to a principal use, see
§ 5-3-17(20) through § 5-3-17(22). Height shall be measured from
finished grade to the highest point on the tower or other structure,
including the base pad. This definition includes the mobile service
support structure, supports, and equipment buildings.
Regulations:
(a) Applicability. This land use shall not be regulated or permitted as
essential services or large-scale public services and utilities. This
section shall apply to the following:
1. New towers. All new towers in the City of Monroe shall be
subject to these regulations.
2. Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall not be required to
meet the requirements of this section, other than the
requirements of Subsection (1)(b) of this section.
§ 5-3-13 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-14
1-1:309
3. Towers shall be considered principal uses. A different use on
the same lot shall not preclude the installation of a tower on
such lot.
4. See § 5-3-17(22) for communication antennas, an accessory
land use typically associated with communication towers.
(b) Compliance with federal regulations. Towers shall be erected and
installed in accordance with the state electrical code adopted by
reference in § 10-31 et seq., National Electrical Safety Code,
Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation
Administration, and the instructions of the manufacturer. In cases
of conflict, the stricter requirements shall govern.
(c) Submittal and review procedure requirements and other
requirements specific to communication towers must be consistent
with Wis. Stats. § 66.0404.
(d) Permit required. A permit is required for all new communication
towers or modifications to existing communication towers. The
permit application shall contain all of the following information:
1. The name and business address of, and the contact individual
for, the applicant.
2. The location of the proposed or affected support structure.
3. The location of the proposed mobile service facility.
4. If the application is to substantially modify an existing support
structure, a construction plan which describes the proposed
modifications to the support structure and the equipment and
network components, including antennas, transmitters,
receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related
equipment associated with the proposed modifications.
5. If the application is to construct a new mobile service support
structure, a construction plan which describes the proposed
mobile service support structure and the equipment and
network components, including antennas, transmitters,
receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related
equipment to be placed on or around the new mobile service
support structure.
6. If an application is to construct a new mobile service support
structure, an explanation as to why the applicant chose the
proposed location and why the applicant did not choose colocation,
including a sworn statement from an individual who
has responsibility over the placement of the mobile service
support structure attesting that co-location within the
applicant's search ring would not result in the same mobile
service functionality, coverage, and capacity; is technically
§ 5-3-14 MONROE CODE § 5-3-14
1-1:310
infeasible; or is economically burdensome to the mobile service
provider.
(e) Placement requirements.
1. Towers and guyed wires shall comply with the setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district in which the
tower is located.
2. The placement of towers on the roof of existing buildings must
maintain a setback from residential zones or properties the
same as the building setback required for new buildings.
(f) Equipment buildings. Equipment buildings, including cabinets,
used in connection with commercial communication antennas will
be subject to the following conditions:
1. Any location and impact of the equipment buildings shall be
made as minimal as possible so as not to prevent the principal
use of the property.
2. Exterior storage of ground-mounted equipment or materials
shall not be permitted.
3. Equipment buildings or structures may be mounted on the roof
of a building provided that such building or structure is placed
as unobtrusively as possible (e.g., integrated into the roof
design) and/or is screened from view from adjacent roads and
properties.
4. Any ground-mounted equipment building used for accessory
equipment must either be screened from view from all adjacent
residential and commercial uses and potentially incompatible
municipal uses with a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
0.40, or the equipment building must be constructed with
similar materials, style, roof pitch, etc., to complement the
architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood.
5. All ground-mounted equipment buildings shall at a minimum
meet the required setbacks of a principal structure for the
underlying zoning district and shall meet all applicable
building code requirements.
(g) Height requirements.
1. Tower height shall be restricted to 200 feet. District height
restrictions shall not apply to commercial communication
towers.
2. Towers shall not encroach into airspace prescribed by FAR Part
77 and the most current regulations of the Airport Overlay
Zoning Ordinance.
§ 5-3-14 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-14
1-1:311
§ 5-3-15. Extraction and disposal land uses.
(h) Co-location. A proposed tower shall be structurally and electrically
designed to accommodate the applicant's antenna and comparable
antennas for two additional users. Towers shall be designed to
allow for future rearrangement of antennas and to accept antennas
mounted at varying heights.
(i) Advertising. No form of advertising or identification or sign is
allowed on the tower other than the customary manufacturer
identification plate.
(j) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially illuminated unless
required by the FAA or any other applicable authority.
(k) Fencing. A tower shall be enclosed by solid fencing not less than six
feet in height or a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.40 and
secured so that it is not accessible by the general public. Fence
design, materials and colors shall reflect the character of the
surrounding area.
(l) Abandonment.
1. The applicant shall provide a written agreement stating that if
the tower or transmitters are unused for a period exceeding
365 days, the applicant shall remove the tower or transmitters
upon request from the City.
2. Within 30 days of the date on which the tower use ceases, the
permit holder shall provide the commission written notice of
the cessation of use.
3. If unused facilities are not removed, the City may remove the
items at the expense of the property owner.
(1) Extraction: Land uses involving the removal of soil, clay, sand, gravel,
rock, minerals, peat, or other material in excess of that required for
approved on-site development or agricultural activities.
Regulations:
(a) The facility shall comply with all county, state, and federal
regulations and provide copies of all approved county, state, and
federal permits.
(b) The facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of
1.00 along all borders of the property.
(c) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage, and any other activity
areas shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines.
(d) Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration plans,
which shall include, at minimum, detailed grading and revegetation
§ 5-3-14 MONROE CODE § 5-3-15
1-1:312
plans, and a detailed written statement indicating the timetable for
such restoration after cessation of the use.
(e) Minimum required parking: One space per each employee on the
largest work shift.
(2) Composting: Land uses devoted to the collection, storage, processing,
and/or disposal of vegetation.
Regulations:
(a) Composting facilities shall comply with all county, state, and
federal regulations.
(b) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00
along all borders of the property occupied by nonagricultural land
uses.
(c) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage, and any other activity
areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
(d) No food scraps or other vermin-attracting materials shall be
processed, stored, or disposed of on-site.
(e) Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage, or
disposal of hazardous wastes as defined by state statutes in any
manner.
(f) Minimum required parking: One space for each employee on the
largest work shift.
(3) Recycling and waste disposal: Recycling facilities not involving the onsite
storage of salvage materials. Waste disposal facilities are any
facilities and/or areas used for the disposal of solid wastes including
those defined by Wis. Stats. § 289.01(33), but not including composting
operations.
Regulations:
(a) Recycling and waste disposal facilities shall comply with all county,
state, and federal regulations.
(b) Facility shall be surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 1.00 along all borders of the property.
(c) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage, and any other activity
areas shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines.
(d) Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage, or
disposal of hazardous materials as defined by state statutes in any
manner.
(e) Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration plans,
which shall include, at minimum, detailed grading and revegetation
§ 5-3-15 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-15
1-1:313
plans, and a detailed written statement indicating the timetable for
such restoration after cessation of the use.
(f) Minimum required parking: One space for each employee on the
largest work shift.
(4) Salvage or junkyard: Land or structure used for a salvaging operation
including, but not limited to, the above-ground, outdoor storage and/or
sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, and any other discarded
materials intended for sale or recycling; and/or the collection,
dismantlement, storage, or salvage of unlicensed and/or inoperable
vehicles intended for scraping or recycling. Recycling facilities
involving on-site outdoor storage of salvage materials are included in
this land use. This shall not include vehicle service and repair.
Regulations:
(a) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00
along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
(b) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot
lines.
(c) In no instance shall activity areas be located within a landscaping
or bufferyard areas.
(d) Shall not involve the storage, handling, or collection of hazardous
materials as defined by state statutes.
(e) Facility shall secure a salvage dealer license as required by the
State of Wisconsin.
(f) Minimum required parking: One space for every 20,000 square feet
of gross storage area, plus one space for each employee on the
largest work shift.
(5) Sand and Mineral Processing: Land or structure used for processing
sand or minerals, extracted on-site or transported to the site, that
removes the desired product from the mineral or enhances the
characteristics of the sand or mineral.
Regulations:
(a) Facility shall provide a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 1.00
along all property borders abutting residentially zoned property.
(b) All buildings, structures, outdoor storage, and any other activity
areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all roads and lot
lines.
(c) In no instance shall activity areas be located within a bufferyard
area.
§ 5-3-15 MONROE CODE § 5-3-15
1-1:314
§ 5-3-16. Energy production land uses and structures.
(d) Shall not involve the storage, handling, or collection of hazardous
materials as defined by state statutes.
(e) Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration plans,
which shall include, at minimum, detailed grading and revegetation
plans, and a detailed written statement indicating the timetable for
such restoration after cessation of the use.
(f) The facility shall comply with all county, state, and federal
regulations and be able to provide copies of all approved county,
state, and federal permits.
(g) Minimum required parking: One space for each employee on the
largest work shift.
(1) Large Wind Energy System: Equipment and associated facilities that
convert and then store or transfer energy from the wind into usable
forms of energy. Large wind energy systems have a total installed
nameplate capacity of more than 300 kW or that consist of individual
wind turbines that have an installed nameplate capacity of more than
100 kW each.
(a) This section provides the standards and procedures for issuance of
conditional use permits for wind energy systems, as defined in Wis.
Stats. § 66.0403(1)(m). The purpose of this section is to ensure any
proposed wind energy system complies with applicable provisions
of PSC 128, Wisconsin Administrative Code, as amended, and this
section.
(b) Large wind energy systems are a conditional use in all zoning
districts. The City will apply Wis. Stats. § 66.0401 and PSC Chapter
128 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, as amended, in the
evaluation of such requests.
1. No restriction shall be placed, either directly or in effect, on
the installation or use of a wind energy system, unless the
restriction satisfies one of the following conditions:
a. Serves to preserve or protect the public health or safety.
b. Does not significantly increase the cost of the system or
significantly decrease its efficiency.
c. Allows for an alternative system of comparable cost and
efficiency.
(2) Large solar energy system: Equipment and associated facilities that
directly convert and then transfer or store solar energy into usable
forms of thermal or electrical energy. Large solar energy systems are
the only a principal land use on a property and are designed primarily
to generate energy for commercial sale off-site.
§ 5-3-15 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-16
1-1:315
(a) Rooftop, ground-mounted, and building-mounted large solar
energy systems shall comply with the height limits and minimum
required yards for principal structures.
(b) Large solar system structures shall be finished in a rust-resistant,
nonobtrusive finish, and color that is nonreflective.
(c) All electrical connections shall be located underground or within a
building.
(d) No large solar energy system shall be lighted unless required by
the Federal Aviation Administration.
(e) Clearing of natural vegetation for the purposes of installing a large
solar energy system shall be limited to that which is necessary for
the construction, operation and maintenance of the large solar
energy system and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations, and ordinances.
(f) All access doors or access ways and electrical equipment shall be
lockable.
(g) Large solar energy systems shall require a building permit before
installation. Building permit applications shall include the following
information in addition to that required by the Building Code:
1. A site plan drawn to scale showing the location of the proposed
large solar energy system and per the requirements of
§ 5-10-31.
2. Elevations of the site drawn to scale showing the height,
design, and configuration of the large solar energy system and
the heights of all existing structures, buildings and electrical
lines in relation to property lines and their distance from the
large solar energy system.
3. A standard foundation design along with specifications for the
soil conditions at the site.
4. Specific information on the type, size, rated power output,
performance, and safety characteristics of the system,
including the name and address of the manufacturer, model,
and serial number.
5. A description of emergency and normal shutdown procedures.
6. A line drawing of the electrical components of the system in
sufficient detail to establish that the installation conforms to all
applicable electrical codes and this subsection.
7. Evidence that the provider of electrical service to the property
has been notified of the intent to install an interconnected
§ 5-3-16 MONROE CODE § 5-3-16
1-1:316
§ 5-3-17. Accessory land uses and structures.
electricity generator, except in cases where the system will not
be connected to the electricity grid.
8. Evidence of compliance with Federal Aviation Administration
requirements.
(h) The requirements of Wisconsin Statutes, including but not limited
to §§ 66.0401 and 66.0403, shall apply to all solar energy systems.
(i) Large solar energy systems are a conditional use in all zoning
districts. The City will apply Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0401 and 66.0403 of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code, as amended, in the evaluation
of such requests.
1. No restriction shall be placed, either directly or in effect, on
the installation or use of a solar energy system, unless the
restriction satisfies one of the following conditions:
a. Serves to preserve or protect the public health or safety.
b. Does not significantly increase the cost of the system or
significantly decrease its efficiency.
c. Allows for an alternative system of comparable cost and
efficiency.
(1) Residential accessory structure: Structures accessory to a residential
use including but not limited to structures used to shelter parked
passenger vehicles (including garages and carports), structures used to
store residential maintenance equipment of the subject property,
workshops, kennels, garden sheds, and pool houses.
Regulations:
(a) A residential accessory structure shall not exceed 864 square feet.
(b) No accessory structure or combination of accessory structures
shall occupy more than 30% of the gross area of any lot.
(c) See Chapter 2 for accessory structure maximum building heights.
(d) Detached garages are permitted in the rear yard and side yards
only.
(e) Garages on corner lots shall meet the required street side setback
for principal structures unless the property owner can demonstrate
that physical conditions of the lot require the garage to be placed in
a different location. Such alternate placement may be allowed as a
conditional use if the garage is a permitted accessory use in the
applicable zoning district and written approval of adjacent property
owners is submitted with a require for issuance of a conditional use
permit.
§ 5-3-16 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:317
(2) Recreational Facility: This land use includes all active outdoor
recreational facilities located on a private lot which are not otherwise
described in this article. Common examples include swing sets, tree
houses, play houses, basketball courts, tennis courts, swimming pools,
recreation-type equipment, and pavilions.
Regulations:
(a) All private recreation facilities and their attendant structures shall
comply with the bulk requirements for accessory structures.
(b) Materials and lighting at the property line shall comply with
§ 5-7-21.
(3) Landscape Feature: This land use includes features such as garden
ponds, mailboxes, statuary/art objects, little free libraries and similar
uses, clotheslines, seasonal decorations, arbors, trellises, fountains,
birdhouses, birdbaths, birdfeeders, lawn furniture, raised garden beds,
and similar landscaping containment materials, retaining walls, and
similar manmade lawn and landscaping elements as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
Regulations:
(a) Landscape features shall not exceed eight feet in height.
(b) The total footprint of a landscape feature shall not exceed six
square feet.
(c) There are no setback requirements for landscape features.
(4) Residential kennel: An enclosed structure designed for the keeping of
dogs that is accessory to a residential use.
Regulations:
(a) Outdoor containments for dogs shall be subject to the setback
requirements for accessory structures for the district in which they
are located.
(5) Home Occupation: Economic activities performed within a residential
dwelling unit. Examples include personal and professional services,
handicrafts, and retail conducted online. Home occupations are
intended to provide a means to accommodate a small home-based
family or professional business without the necessity of a rezoning from
a residential to a business district. Home occupations are limited to
low-intensity businesses and businesses with limited overlap of
customer visits.
Regulations:
(a) The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed
area of the dwelling unit or garage.
§ 5-3-17 MONROE CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:318
(b) The home occupation shall be conducted by a resident who uses the
location of the home occupation as their principal residence.
(c) No more than two clients shall be seen at any given time.
(d) No home occupations shall have outside employees or clients
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(e) There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation and no
exterior alterations which change the character of the structure as
a single-family dwelling unit.
(f) No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment
related to the operation of the home occupation shall be visible
outside any structure located on the premises.
(g) There shall be no adverse impact to the residential character of the
neighborhood due to the emission of noise, odor, smoke, dust, gas,
heat, vibration, electrical interference, traffic congestion, or other
nuisances resulting from the home occupation.
(h) The home occupation shall not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type that is not normally associated with
typical residential use in the neighborhood.
(i) The home occupation shall not involve any illegal activity.
(j) The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial
vehicles for more than five deliveries of materials to or from the
premises per day.
(k) No mechanical equipment or machinery shall be used other than is
usual, customary, and incidental to the residence for domestic or
hobby purposes.
(l) The percentage of the gross finished floor area that may be devoted
to the home occupation(s) shall not exceed 20% of the principal
structure, or 300 square feet, whichever is less.
(m) Home occupations shall be carried out only by members of the
immediate family residing on the premises and no more than two
nonresident employees.
(n) No structural alterations or construction involving features not
customarily found in dwellings are allowed.
(o) The home occupation shall not involve manufacturing; processing;
the sales or repair of large appliances, vehicles, or motors;
commodity or equipment rental; care, grooming, breeding, or
keeping of animals; or construction of equipment and machinery.
Restaurants, taverns, clubs, amusement or entertainment
establishments, or uses that dispatch persons other than the
§ 5-3-17 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:319
occupant of the residence or equipment from the premises, are not
permitted home occupations.
(p) Items shall not be sold or offered for sale on the premises. This
provision shall not apply to online sales.
(q) Minimum required parking: One space is required for each
nonresident employee. Employee parking in the driveway is
permitted.
(r) Compliance checklist: Notwithstanding the above, all who
undertake allowed home occupations shall complete and file a
compliance checklist, in a form as approved by the Plan
Commission and made available by the City Clerk, prior to
commencing the home occupation. This form shall be filed with the
City Clerk, who shall retain the form while the home occupation is
in use. The filed compliance checklist shall be reviewed by the
Zoning Administrator to determine compliance of the home
occupation with this chapter. Such form shall be signed by both the
owner and/or occupier of the premises on which the home
occupation takes place.
(6) In-home daycare: Occupied residences in which a licensed person or
persons provide childcare for four to eight children. The care of less
than four children is not subject to the regulations of this chapter. State
law reference: § 66.1017(1)(a), Wisconsin Statutes.
(7) Accessory dwelling unit: Residential dwellings located directly above
the ground floor of a building used for an office, commercial, or
institutional land use, or a residential dwelling unit located on the same
lot as a single-family dwelling unit, either in the same building as the
single-family dwelling unit or in a detached building.
Regulations:
(a) The number of occupants of the accessory dwelling unit shall not
exceed one family plus one roomer or two unrelated individuals.
(b) Additional entrances shall not be added to the front elevation of an
existing building but may be added to side or rear or street side
elevations.
(c) Accessory dwelling units shall adhere to the setback requirements
and standards for the underlying zoning district.
(d) Accessory dwelling unit entryways within a rear or side yard shall
be connected to a street frontage by a paved walkway or driveway.
(e) For accessory dwelling units located on the same lot as a singlefamily
dwelling unit, the following additional regulations shall
apply:
1. The principal building must be owner-occupied.
§ 5-3-17 MONROE CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:320
2. The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately from
the principal dwelling.
3. The maximum size of an accessory dwelling unit shall not
exceed 75% of the principal dwelling's floor area, up to a
maximum size of 700 square feet.
4. The appearance or character of the principal building must not
be significantly altered so that its appearance is no longer that
of a single-family dwelling.
5. The exterior finish material must match in type, size and
placement, the exterior finish material of the principal dwelling
unit.
6. The roof pitch must match the predominant roof pitch of the
principal dwelling unit or structure.
7. Exterior trim must match the trim used on the principal
dwelling unit.
8. Projecting eaves must match those of the principal dwelling
unit or structure.
9. Windows must match those in the principal dwelling unit in
both proportion (relationship of width to height) and
orientation (horizontal or vertical).
(8) In-family suite: An area within a dwelling unit that may contain
separate kitchen, dining, bathroom, laundry, living, and sleeping areas,
including exterior porches, patios, and decks. In addition to the
required internal physical connection, separate outdoor access or
separate access to the garage may be provided. However, external
entries serving as the primary or only access to the in-family suite are
prohibited.
Regulations:
(a) In-family suites may not be occupied by a nonfamily member.
(b) In-family suites shall be considered and regulated as part of a
single-family dwelling unit.
(c) The principal dwelling unit and the in-family suite shall together
appear as a single-family dwelling.
(d) A separate walled garage area or driveway is not permitted.
(e) A separate address for the in-family suite is not permitted.
(f) A separate utility connection or meters are not permitted.
(g) A physical all-weather connection between the main living area and
the in-family suite must be present. This required connection may
§ 5-3-17 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:321
not occur through an attic, basement, garage, porch, or other
nonliving area. A door may be used to separate the in-family suite
from the principal dwelling, but may not be locking, except that a
locking door may be used for the bedroom and bathroom doors of
the in-family suite.
(h) When an application is submitted for a building permit to
accommodate what is explicitly listed as, or could possibly serve as,
an in-family suite, the building plan shall be marked as "not a
separate dwelling unit or apartment," and a signed letter from the
applicant stating agreement with this condition shall be filed.
(9) Farm residence: A farm residence is a single-family detached dwelling
unit located on the same property as any of the principal agricultural
land uses listed in § 5-3-7.
(10) Migrant employee housing: Migrant employee housing include any
facility subject to the regulation of Wisconsin Statutes, § 103.90(3)(a).
Regulations:
(a) Migrant employee housing shall be surrounded by a bufferyard
with a minimum opacity of 0.60 along all property lines adjacent to
all properties in residential or mixed-use zoning districts.
(b) Migrant employee housing shall be an accessory use to an active
principal land use and under the same ownership.
(11) Nonresidential accessory structure: Structures primarily used to
shelter business vehicles or to store maintenance equipment of the
subject property.
Regulations:
(a) Three total structures shall be permitted by right.
(b) Structures up to 10,000 square feet of gross floor area are
permitted by right. Structures over 10,000 square feet or
structures larger than the principal structure may be allowed by
conditional use.
(c) See Chapter 2 for accessory structure maximum building heights.
(12) Residential stable: An accessory structure that is designed for the
keeping of equines for the private use of the occupants of the principal
dwelling and their guests, but in no event for hire.
Regulations:
(a) Outdoor containments for equines shall be located a minimum of 25
feet from any residentially zoned property.
(b) A minimum lot area of 175,000 square feet (four acres) is required
for a private residential stable.
§ 5-3-17 MONROE CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:322
(c) A maximum of one horse per two acres of fully enclosed (by fencing
and/or structures) area is permitted.
(d) The minimum permitted size of horse or similar animal stall shall
be 100 square feet.
(13) On-site parking lot: On-site parking lots are any areas located on the
same site as the principal land use which are used for the temporary
surface parking of vehicles which are fully registered, licensed, and
operable.
Regulations:
(a) Access and vehicular circulation shall be designed to prevent cutthrough
traffic.
(14) On-site structured parking. Structured parking which is accessory to a
principal land use such as apartments, office, and mixed-use buildings
and which is incorporated into the same building as the principal land
use. Stand-alone structured parking that is not integrated with another
land use shall be regulated as on-site structured parking, a principal
use under § 5-3-13(7). See § 5-7-6 for additional parking regulations.
Regulations:
(a) Off-site structured parking shall comprise no more than 50% of the
ground-floor level on the primary street frontage. Underground
parking that is partially above grade shall not count toward this
total.
(15) Company cafeteria: A food service operation which provides food only
to company employees and their guests.
Regulations:
(a) Company cafeterias shall meet state food service requirements.
(b) Company cafeterias shall be located on the same property as a
principal land use engaged in an operation other than food service.
(16) Incidental outdoor display: The sale and display of merchandise or
equipment outside of an enclosed building and is incidental to a
principal commercial or industrial land use.
Regulations:
(a) Incidental outdoor display land uses shall comply with all
regulations of § 5-7-22.
(b) The display area shall not be greater than or equal to 250 square
feet. Display area in excess of 250 square feet shall be considered
"outdoor display" as a principal use under § 5-3-9(4).
§ 5-3-17 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:323
(c) All outdoor display areas shall be located no closer to a
residentially zoned property than the required minimum setback
for buildings on the subject property.
(d) The display of items shall not be permitted in any landscaping
areas, bufferyard areas, or green space areas.
(e) In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirements applicable to the principal use. If the number of
provided parking stalls on the property is already less than the
requirement, display areas shall not further reduce the number of
parking stalls already present.
(f) Outdoor display areas shall be separated from any vehicular
parking or circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This
separation shall be clearly distinguished by a physical feature or
barrier such as a greenway, curb, fence, line of planters, or by a
clearly marked paved area.
(g) Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or
off-site traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and traffic/
pedestrian conflicts.
(17) Incidental indoor sales: Retail sales activity conducted exclusively
indoors which is incidental to a principal land use such as indoor
storage and wholesaling on the same site.
Regulations:
(a) The total area devoted to sales activity shall not exceed 25% of the
total area of the buildings on the property.
(b) Minimum required parking: Adequate parking, per the
requirements of § 5-3-9(3), shall be provided for customers. Said
parking shall be in addition to that required for the principal land
use.
(18) Incidental light industrial: Light industrial activities conducted
exclusively indoors which is incidental to a principal land use, such as
indoor sales or service, on the same site.
Regulations:
(a) The total area devoted to light industrial activity shall not exceed
15% of the total area of the buildings on the property, or 5,000
square feet, whichever is less.
(b) Minimum required parking: Per § 5-3-11(1).
(19) Incidental outdoor storage: Outdoor storage which is incidental to a
principal land use, such as indoor sales or service, on the same site.
§ 5-3-17 MONROE CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:324
Regulations:
(a) All open storage areas and open containers shall be fully screened
from view by a wall and a solid gate made of wood or similar
material. The exterior of the wall must match the materials and
color of the principal structure and shall be a minimum of eight feet
in height.
(b) The storage area shall not exceed 500 square feet. Storage area in
excess of 500 square feet shall be regulated as outdoor storage and
wholesaling under § 5-3-12(2).
(20) Satellite dish: A bowl-shaped antenna with which signals are
transmitted to or received from a communications satellite. This land
use applies to dishes for personal use and private use.
Regulations:
(a) In all districts, satellite dishes less than three feet in diameter may
be located anywhere on a lot, except the provided front yard or
provided street side yard or can be located on any principal or
accessory building.
(b) In the RH-35, SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-7, DR-8, TR-10, MR-15, MR-30,
and MH-7 Zoning Districts, satellite dishes three feet in diameter
and larger may only be located in rear yards or on the roof of a
detached structure, so long as the height of the detached structure
and the dish is equal to or less than the height of the principal
building.
1. In all other zoning districts, satellite dishes three feet in
diameter and larger may be erected on the roof of any principal
or accessory buildings, and in side, or rear yards; but shall not
be located in street or front yards.
(c) No advertising or graphic designs are permitted on satellite dishes
in any zoning district.
(d) In the event that a usable signal cannot be obtained by locating a
satellite dish in locations permitted by this Title 5, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may grant a variance to allow the placement of a
satellite dish in an alternate location.
(21) Personal antenna and towers: Devices used for the transmission or
reception of electromagnetic waves, external to or attached to the
exterior of any building. This definition includes the structure,
supports, and equipment buildings. This land use applies to antenna
and towers for personal use. Examples include an amateur radio
antenna or personal television antenna.
Regulations:
§ 5-3-17 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:325
(a) In the RH-35, SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, and SR-7 Zoning Districts, there
may only be one roof-mounted antenna and one tower per lot. In all
other districts, there may be one antenna for each dwelling unit or
business and one tower per lot.
(b) In all zoning districts, freestanding towers with antennas may not
be located in a provided front yard or street side yard, or closer to
the right-of-way than the closest edge of the principal building,
whichever is less.
(c) The minimum required setback for freestanding towers with
antennas shall be equal to the combined height of the tower and
antenna.
(d) Towers are restricted to 70 feet in height, and roof-mounted
antennas are restricted to 30 feet above the highest peak of the
roof.
(e) Guy wires shall not be anchored within a provided front yard or
provided street side yard, or closer to the right-of-way than the
closest edge of the principal building, whichever is less. Personal
antenna and towers shall be installed in such a manner as to
protect the public safety and to minimize the visual impact on
surrounding properties and from public streets.
(f) The attachment to an antenna or tower of any flag, decorative or
commercial sign, streamers, pennants, ribbons, spinners or
waving, fluttering, or revolving devices is prohibited.
(22) Communication antenna: Devices used for the transmission or
reception of electromagnetic waves, attached to a communication
tower, building, or alternative tower structure, including associated
equipment buildings/cabinets.
Regulations:
(a) Applicability.
1. A different use on the same lot shall not preclude the
installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.
2. This land use category includes the placement of new antennas
and equipment buildings used in conjunction with an existing
tower.
(b) General requirements.
1. Compliance with federal regulations. Towers shall be erected
and installed in accordance with the state electrical code
adopted by reference in § 10-31 et seq., National Electrical
Safety Code, Federal Communications Commission, Federal
Aviation Administration, and the instructions of the
§ 5-3-17 MONROE CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:326
manufacturer. In cases of conflict, the stricter requirements
shall govern.
2. Antennas shall not encroach into airspace prescribed by FAR
Part 77 and the most current regulations of the Airport Overlay
Zoning Ordinance.
3. Communication tower and commercial building: Antennas may
be placed on commercial communication towers, and
commercial, institutional, and industrial buildings.
4. Height requirements. Antenna height shall be restricted to 200
feet above grade when located on a commercial
communication tower. Antenna height shall be restricted to 20
feet above the height of the commercial building roof or
alternative tower structure when located on such structure.
Zoning district height restrictions shall not apply to antennas.
5. Alternative structures. Antennas may be placed on alternative
tower structures such as clock towers, bell steeples, light
poles, water towers, or similar structures.
6. Advertising. No form of advertising or identification, sign or
mural is allowed on the antenna other than the customary
manufacturer identification plate.
7. Stealthing requirements.
a. Antennas and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or
closely compatible with, the color of the supporting
structure so as to make the antenna and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
b. A wall-mounted antenna shall be as flush to the wall as
technically possible and shall not project above the wall on
which it is mounted unless it must for technical reasons.
The antenna and cables on roofs shall not be visible from
an adjacent public right-of-way.
(c) Equipment buildings. Equipment buildings, including cabinets,
used in connection with commercial communication antennas will
be subject to the following conditions:
1. Any location and impact of the equipment buildings shall be
made as minimal as possible so as not to prevent the principal
use of the property.
2. Exterior storage of ground-mounted equipment or materials
shall not be permitted.
3. Equipment buildings or structures may be mounted on the roof
of a building provided that such building or structure is placed
§ 5-3-17 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:327
as unobtrusively as possible (e.g., integrated into the roof
design) and surrounded by a bufferyard with a minimum
opacity of 0.40.
4. Any ground-mounted equipment building used for accessory
equipment must either be screened from view from all abutting
residential uses and potentially incompatible municipal uses
with a bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.40, or the
equipment building must be constructed with similar
materials, style, roof pitch, etc., to complement the
architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood.
5. All ground-mounted equipment buildings shall at a minimum
meet the required setbacks of a principal structure for the
underlying zoning district and shall be located in the side or
rear yards.
(d) Exceptions. Exceptions to the setbacks and height requirements
listed above may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals if
appropriate engineering data is submitted showing that failure
characteristics of the structure will not adversely impact abutting
property and the structure does not encroach into airspace
prescribed by FAR Part 77 and the Airport Overlay Zoning
Ordinance.
(23) Small wind energy system: A wind energy conversion system consisting
of a wind turbine, a tower and associated control or conversion
electronics which will be used primarily to reduce on-site consumption
of utility power. Small wind energy systems have a total installed
nameplate capacity of 300 kW or less and consist of individual wind
turbines that have an installed nameplate capacity of not more than 100
kW.
(a) This section provides the standards and procedures for issuance of
conditional use permits for wind energy systems, as defined in Wis.
Stats. § 66.0403(1)(m). The purpose of this section is to ensure any
proposed wind energy system complies with applicable provisions
of PSC 128, Wisconsin Administrative Code, as amended, and this
section.
(b) Small wind energy systems are a conditional use in all zoning
districts. The City will apply Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0401 and PSC
Chapter 128 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, as amended, in
the evaluation of such requests.
1. No restriction shall be placed, either directly or in effect, on
the installation or use of a wind energy system, unless the
restriction satisfies one of the following conditions:
a. Serves to preserve or protect the public health or safety.
§ 5-3-17 MONROE CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:328
b. Does not significantly increase the cost of the system or
significantly decrease its efficiency.
c. Allows for an alternative system of comparable cost and
efficiency.
(24) Small solar energy system: Equipment and associated facilities that
directly convert and then transfer or store solar energy into usable
forms of thermal or electrical energy. Small solar energy systems are
accessory to a principal land use on a property and are designed
primarily to generate energy for said principal land use.
Regulations:
(a) Small solar energy systems (rooftop, building-mounted, and
freestanding) are permitted as conditional uses in all zoning
districts as accessory structures.
(b) Freestanding small solar energy systems shall comply with the
requirements for accessory structures. Rooftop and buildingmounted
small solar energy systems shall comply with the height
limits and setbacks for primary structures.
(c) See Chapter 2 for specific bulk, density, and intensity requirements
for accessory structures in each district.
(d) Small solar energy systems are a conditional use in all zoning
districts. The City will apply Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0401 and 66.0403 of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code, as amended, in the evaluation
of such requests.
1. No restriction shall be placed, either directly or in effect, on
the installation or use of a solar energy system, unless the
restriction satisfies one of the following conditions:
a. Serves to preserve or protect the public health or safety.
b. Does not significantly increase the cost of the system or
significantly decrease its efficiency.
c. Allows for an alternative system of comparable cost and
efficiency.
(25) Residential apiary: The assembly of one or more colonies of honeybees
on a single residential lot.
(a) Hives may be located only on lots with an occupied residential
dwelling unit.
(b) No more than six hives shall be located on a lot.
(c) No hive shall exceed 20 cubic feet in volume.
§ 5-3-17 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:329
(d) No hive shall be located closer than three feet from any property
line.
(e) No hive shall be located closer than 10 feet from a public sidewalk
or 25 feet from a principal building on an abutting lot.
(f) A constant supply of water shall be provided for all hives.
(g) A flyway barrier at least six feet in height shall shield any part of a
property line that is within 25 feet of a hive. The flyway barrier
shall consist of a wall, fence, dense vegetation or a combination
thereof and it shall be positioned to transect both legs of a triangle
extending from an apex at the hive to each end point of the part of
the property line to be shielded.
(h) The owner, operator, or tenant shall obtain a conditional use permit
from the City.
(i) Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames,
which frames shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
(j) Hives shall be continuously managed to provide adequate living
space for their resident honeybees in order to control swarming.
(k) In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusual aggressive
behavior (such as such as stinging without provocation or attacking
without provocation), it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to
promptly implement appropriate actions to address the behavior. If
requeening is required, queens shall be selected from European
stock bred for gentleness and nonswarming characteristics.
(l) Fruit trees and other flowering trees located on the site of an
apiary shall not be sprayed, while in full bloom, with any substance
which is injurious to honeybees.
(26) Tourist rooming house. Includes all lodging places and tourist cabins
and cottages, other than hotels and motels, in which sleeping
accommodations are offered for pay to tourists and transients. It does
not include private boarding houses or rooming houses not
accommodating tourists or transients, or bed-and-breakfast
establishments regulated under ACTP 73. Where such units are
available for lease for periods of time less than seven consecutive
nights, such uses shall be considered vacation rental homes, a principal
use separately described and regulated under this chapter.
(a) Tourist rooming houses shall only be located as an accessory use
within a single-family dwelling unit as defined in § 5-3-6.
(b) The total number of days of operation within any calendar year
shall not exceed 180 days, which must be consecutive.
(c) The minimum rental period shall be a minimum of seven
consecutive days by any one party.
§ 5-3-17 MONROE CODE § 5-3-17
1-1:330
§ 5-3-18. Temporary uses.
All of the following temporary uses shall comply with § 5-10-29, standards
and procedures applicable to all temporary uses, except as otherwise
exempted in this chapter. Unless stated otherwise below, temporary uses
are limited to 30 days per calendar year. Certain temporary uses may be
extended in duration through the conditional use process.
(d) The maximum number of occupants shall not exceed the total
number licensed by the State of Wisconsin or two per bedroom plus
two additional occupants, whichever is less.
(e) The appearance or use of the dwelling shall not be altered in a
manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential
character either by the use of colors, materials, construction,
lighting, signs, or the emission of sounds, odors, dust or vibrations
that carry beyond the premises.
(f) The availability of the tourist rooming house to the public shall not
be advertised on-site.
(g) Minimum required parking: One space per each bedroom. All guest
vehicles shall be parked on site, within a legal paved parking space.
1. A driveway may contain one or more legal parking spaces.
Driveways shall be considered legal "stacked" parking spaces,
provided that each driveway parking space is no less than eight
feet in width and 18 feet in depth.
(1) Temporary moving container (residential): Portable storage containers
designed and used primarily for the temporary storage of household
goods and other such materials for use on a limited basis on residential
property.
Regulations:
(a) The container shall not exceed outside dimensions of 16 feet in
length, eight feet in width, and nine feet in height.
(b) The container shall be permitted on the property for up to 14 days
associated with each change of occupancy as defined by a recorded
change in property ownership or valid lease.
(c) The container cannot encroach on the public right-of-way,
neighboring property, sidewalk, or be placed in the street.
(d) The container must be placed on asphalt, concrete, or a similar
hard-paved surface.
(2) Temporary outdoor storage container (Nonresidential): Enclosed,
lockable storage containers such as shipping containers, semi-trailers,
storage pods, or other fully enclosed trailers for use on a limited basis
§ 5-3-17 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-18
1-1:331
on a nonresidential property. Other forms of temporary outdoor storage
containers are prohibited.
Regulations:
(a) The container must be placed on asphalt, concrete, or a similar
hard-paved surface.
(b) The container shall be permitted on the property for up to 30 days
per calendar year. Containers in place for more than 30 days per
calendar year shall be regulated as outdoor storage and
wholesaling under § 5-3-12(2) or incidental outdoor storage under
§ 5-3-17(19).
(3) Garage or Estate Sale (Auction). Any temporary display of used
household goods for sale on a property customarily used as a residence.
Such sales are also commonly referred to as "rummage sales" or "yard
sales."
Regulations:
(a) Garage or estate sales shall not exceed three days in duration and
shall not occur more than three in one calendar year.
(b) Permits are not required for garage or estate sales.
(c) Sales shall occur only during daylight hours.
(d) Signs are not permitted within the right-of-way including terrace
and shall comply with the regulations of Chapter 9.
(4) Farmer's market. Farmer's markets include the temporary or occasional
outdoor retail sales of farm produce, plants and flowers, bakery goods,
and/or crafts from vehicles or temporary stands located within a
parking lot.
Regulations:
(a) The facility shall have vehicular access to a collector or higher
classification street.
(b) Minimum required parking: Two spaces per vendor.
(5) Temporary farm product sales: This land use includes the temporary
outdoor display and sale of farm products, typically from a roadside
stand.
Regulations:
(a) Display shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation,
including vehicular sight distances.
(b) Sales and display activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
(c) Minimum required parking: Two spaces per vendor.
§ 5-3-18 MONROE CODE § 5-3-18
1-1:332
(6) Temporary outdoor sales: Includes the display of any items outside the
confines of a building but not in a public right-of-way, which is not a
permitted or conditional use or a special event otherwise regulated by
the Municipal Code. Examples of this land use include, but are not
limited to, sidewalk sales, seasonal garden shops, tent sales, Christmas
tree sales, and fireworks sales. Food and/or beverage trucks, carts,
stands, or trailers are regulated as outdoor commercial entertainment
under § 5-3-9(9).
Regulations:
(a) Temporary outdoor sales uses that exceed 90 days per calendar
year shall require a conditional use permit.
(b) Display shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation,
including vehicular sight distances.
(c) If subject property is located adjacent to a residential zoning
district, sales and display activities shall be limited to daylight
hours.
(d) The user shall provide a layout of the activities to the Zoning
Administrator for approval prior to any event or sales activity.
(e) Minimum required parking: None.
(7) Temporary outdoor assembly: Includes any organized outdoor assembly
of 75 to 250 persons such as outdoor weddings, wedding receptions, or
tent meetings.
Regulations:
(a) Temporary outdoor assembly uses that exceed three days per
calendar year shall require a conditional use permit.
(b) Activities shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation,
including vehicular sight distances.
(c) If the subject property is adjacent to a residentially zoned property,
activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
(8) Temporary on-site construction storage: Includes any structure or
outdoor storage area designed for the on-site storage of construction
equipment and/or materials for an active construction project.
Regulations:
(a) Temporary On-Site Construction Storage shall cease upon the
expiration of the building permit associated with the active
construction project. Projects requiring temporary on-site
construction storage to continue beyond the expiration date of the
building permit shall require a conditional use permit.
§ 5-3-18 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-3-18
1-1:333
(b) Projects requiring temporary on-site construction storage to
continue for more than 365 days shall require a conditional use
permit.
(c) The storage area shall be limited to a maximum area not to exceed
10% of the property's gross site area.
(9) Temporary contractor's project office. Includes any structure
containing an on-site construction management office for an active
construction project.
Regulations:
(a) The temporary contractor's project office land use shall be removed
upon the expiration of the building permit associated with the
active construction project. Projects requiring the office to be in
place beyond the expiration date of the building permit shall
require a conditional use permit.
(b) The office shall not be used for sales activity.
(10) Temporary on-site real estate sales office. Includes any building which
serves as an on-site sales office for a development project.
Regulations:
(a) Temporary on-site real estate sales office uses that exceed 90 days
per calendar year shall require a conditional use permit.
(b) The office shall be removed or converted to a permitted land use
within 10 days of the completion of sales activity.
(11) Temporary relocatable building: Includes any manufactured building
that serves as a temporary building for less than six months.
Regulations:
(a) Facilities serving for more than six months shall be considered
conditional uses and are subject to the general standards and
procedures presented in § 5-10-28.
(b) The structure shall be limited to a maximum area not to exceed
10% of the property's gross site area.
(12) Temporary shelter structure: These shelters are typically supported by
poles, have a fabric or plastic roof and/or sides, and may be used for
short-term, temporary storage of vehicles and other personal property.
This does not include camping tents or permanent residential accessory
structures.
(a) Temporary shelter structures to be in place beyond seven days
shall require a conditional use permit.
§ 5-3-18 MONROE CODE § 5-3-18
1-1:334
Chapter 5-4
BULK REGULATIONS
§ 5-4-1. Purpose.
This chapter regulates the location and bulk of buildings in both residential
and nonresidential developments in order to protect and enhance the
desired community character of the City of Monroe. The provisions of this
chapter interact closely with the density and intensity provisions described
in Chapter 2. Any nonconforming situation (lot, use, structure, and/or site)
shall adhere to the provisions of Chapter 5.
§ 5-4-2. Bulk standards.
(13) Temporary vehicle sales. Includes the sale of personal vehicles and
equipment on trailers such as ATVs, snowmobiles, motorcycles horse
trailers, campers, etc.
Regulations:
(a) No more than one vehicle or trailer shall be for sale on any property
at any given time.
(b) Vehicles or trailers for sale must be licensed.
(c) Vehicles or trailers for sale must be owned by one of the following:
1. The property owner or lessee.
2. An employee of the property owner or lessee, only during the
hours in which the employee is working.
(d) Vehicles or trailers for sale must be parked in a legal parking space
or a residential driveway. Vehicles or trailers for sale shall not be
parked on a lawn or other landscaped area.
(1) All structures shall comply with the requirements listed for each zoning
district in Chapter 2.
(2) All lots shall abut upon a public street. Refer to additional standards for
lots and blocks in Title 6: Subdivision Regulations.
(3) Where the Airport Overlay Zoning Ordinance requires heights less than
the maximum height permitted by this Title 5, the lesser height
requirement shall apply. Exceptions to this requirement shall be
administered by the City of Monroe.
(4) On lots fronting two nonintersecting streets, a front yard must be
provided on at least one of the streets.
§ 5-3-18 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-4-2
1-1:335
§ 5-4-3. Exceptions to maximum height regulations.
The maximum height regulations listed for residential and nonresidential
uses and accessory structures in each zoning district in Chapter 2 are the
maximum permitted heights for all buildings and structures, except those
exempted by this section.
§ 5-4-4. Yard setback adjustments.
(5) On lots fronting three or more streets, on sharply curved streets, or lots
where Figure 5-1-22b does not apply, the determination of the yards
and appropriate setbacks shall be made by the Zoning Administrator.
(1) The following are permitted to exceed the maximum height regulations
within any district where permitted: church spires; belfries; cupolas;
penthouses and domes (not used for human occupancy); public
monuments; stage towers or scenery lofts; water towers; fire and hose
towers; tanks; utility poles; flag poles; chimneys; cooling towers;
exhaust pipes; ventilators; skylights; telecommunications towers and
antennas; satellite dishes; elevator bulkheads, grain elevators, feed
mills, grain and seed mixing bins, concrete mixing bins, and other
necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above roof level;
and similar features. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
prevent the erection above the building height limit of a parapet wall or
cornice for ornament (and without windows) extending above such
height limit not more than five feet. Such features, however, shall be
erected only to such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose
they are to serve and subject to the Wisconsin state building code,
except as prohibited by the Airport Overlay Zoning Ordinance.
(1) Lot size and minimum yard dimensions. No lot, yard, court, parking
area, or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make
the area or dimension less than the minimum required by this chapter.
If an existing yard is less than the minimum required, it shall not be
reduced further, except where exempted by the provisions of this
section.
(2) Front yard setback adjustments.
(a) Decrease of front yard setback.
1. In the SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-7, DR-8, TR-10, MR-15, MR-30,
MH-7, NMU, SMU, and UMU Districts, a front yard setback
may be reduced to the mean of the setbacks of the immediately
adjoining lots that are on both sides of the subject lot. The
following rules apply in calculating the mean setback (see
Figure 5-4-4):
a. Only the front yard setbacks on five or fewer adjoining
lots, which are contiguous to each other in either direction
§ 5-4-2 MONROE CODE § 5-4-4
1-1:336
of the subject lot and which are on the same side of the
street as each other on the same block, may be used.
b. Where a lot is vacant, the minimum front yard setback of
the zoning district for the proposed use will be applied to
the vacant lot and factored into the averaging calculation.
c. Outliers, defined as yards with a setback that is equal to or
greater than twice that of the next largest setback among
the adjoining lots and thus which do not fit the established
pattern of front yard setbacks, shall be excluded in
calculating the mean front yard setback, as determined by
the Zoning Administrator.
d. In residential districts, the minimum front yard and street
side yard setback on any lot shall be at least 10 feet. The
minimum setback for an attached or detached accessory
building facing the front yard or street side yard shall be at
least 20 feet.
Figure 5-4-4: Front Yard Averaging Example
(b) Increase of front yard setback.
1. In the SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-7, DR-8, TR-10, MR-15, MR-30,
MH-7, NMU, SMU, and UMU Districts, blocks with mean front
yard setback more than five feet over the minimum required
front yard setback shall be increased to the mean of the
adjoining same type of principal structures on said block or
street. This regulation is intended to preserve and maintain the
character of established neighborhoods that are typified by
front yard setbacks substantially in excess of the minimum
required front yard setback.
2. Outliers, defined as yards with a setback that is equal to or less
than half that of the next smallest setback among the adjoining
lots and thus which do not fit the established pattern of front
yard setbacks, shall be excluded in calculating the mean front
yard setback, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
§ 5-4-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-4-4
1-1:337
§ 5-4-5. Projections into required yards.
The minimum setback requirements of each zoning district establish the
minimum required yards for all uses, except those exempted by the
provisions of this section.
(3) Street side yard setback adjustments (for Corner Lots). On corner lots
in the SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-7, DR-8, TR-10, MR-15, MR-30, MH-7, NMU,
SMU, and UMU Districts, the street side yard setback may be reduced
to 10 feet, as may be necessary to attain a thirty-foot buildable width.
The required interior side yard setback must be maintained.
(4) Interior side yard setback adjustments.
(a) Bufferyards. In instances where the required bufferyard width (per
Chapter 8) exceeds the minimum required side setback width, the
minimum required bufferyard width shall prevail. Absolutely no
intrusions of a building or structure are permitted within the
required bufferyard, with the exception of utility boxes/cabinets
and other accessory landscape features exempt from the setback
requirements of this Title 5.
(b) Small lots. On lots under separate ownership on the effective date
of this Title 5 and less than 50 feet in width, the side yard may be
reduced to 10% of the lot width but not less than three feet.
(5) Rear yard setback adjustments.
(a) Bufferyards. In instances where the required bufferyard width (per
Chapter 8) exceeds the minimum required rear setback width, the
minimum required bufferyard width shall prevail. Absolutely no
intrusions of a building or structure are permitted within the
required bufferyard, with the exception of utility boxes/cabinets
and other accessory landscape features exempt from the setback
requirements of this Title 5.
(b) Small lots. On lots under separate ownership on the effective date
of this Title 5 and less than 100 feet in depth, the rear yard may be
reduced to 20% of the lot depth.
(1) With the exception of fences, accessory landscape features, and the
permitted projections described in this section, no principal or
accessory structures shall be permitted within any portion of a front or
street side yard.
(2) Permitted projections into all required yards.
(a) For residential buildings, the ordinary projection of sills, belt
courses, cornices, gutters, eaves, overhangs, ornamental features,
pilasters, lintels, bay windows, chimneys, and flues, provided they
do not extend more than two feet into the required yards.
§ 5-4-4 MONROE CODE § 5-4-5
1-1:338
(b) Flag poles, sidewalks located at least three feet from a vehicle
parking/circulation area, landscaping (including lawn and
vegetation), posts, or other similar amenities when accessory to a
residential use.
(c) Additions (including vertical additions, additional floors, and
architectural features), balconies, terraces, covered porches, or
similar appurtenances not extending beyond the setback of the
existing facade, may be located in the provided or required yard
setback, whichever more permissive. If the addition is a frontloaded
garage or front-loaded garage addition, the minimum
setback when facing the front yard or street side yard shall be at
least 20 feet. In no instance shall any new encroachment be within
five feet of an adjacent structure or three feet of a property line.
See Figure 5-4-5.
(d) Fences meeting the requirements of § 5-7-27.
Figure 5-4-5: Permitted Addition in Required Yards
Note: Building additions must meet the design standards of
Chapter 7.
(e) Handicap accessible ramps.
1. Handicap ramps or other devices required to make reasonable
accommodation under the Fair Housing Act or the Americans
with Disabilities Act are to be permitted in any required
setbacks, provided that the maximum encroachment into a
required setback is the minimum dimension required by the
Wisconsin Commercial Building Code or Wisconsin Uniform
Dwelling Code for accessible ramps and that no other location
is feasible outside the required setbacks. Only temporary and
removable ramps shall be permitted to encroach into the
required setbacks.
2. Handicap ramp permit. Handicap ramps proposed for
placement within required setback areas shall secure a
handicap ramp permit from the Zoning Administrator prior to
construction. An application for a permit shall include a written
§ 5-4-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-4-5
1-1:339
statement explaining the reasons for the placement of the
handicap ramp. The Zoning Administrator may also require a
statement from a physician verifying the need for a handicap
ramp.
3. Aesthetic treatments. Handicap ramps must have dense
landscaping or skirting covering the lower open portion of the
ramp, shall be kept in good repair, and shall include landscape
treatments buffering the handicap ramp from adjacent
properties.
4. Handicap ramp removal. When a handicap ramp is placed
within the required setback, the Zoning Administrator may
periodically require verification of the continual need for the
handicap ramp. When it has been determined the handicap
ramp is no longer needed, the Zoning Administrator may order
its immediate removal.
(f) Any other provisions identified elsewhere in this chapter
(landscape features, tents, and other features where specific
setbacks are established).
(3) Permitted projections into required front yards.
(a) All of the permitted projections listed under Subsection (2) above.
(b) In the SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-7, DR-8, TR-10, and NMU Zoning
Districts, the minimum front setback requirement may be reduced
in order to accommodate open porches (i.e., covered and
unenclosed), awnings, or canopies. Refer to the bulk requirements
listed for each zoning district in Chapter 2.
(c) Uncovered entry platforms and steps necessary to comply with
current ingress and egress regulations provided they do not extend
more than four feet into the front yard setback and are no more
than six feet wide. Steps from the platform may extend into the
front setback area for the distance needed to meet minimum
building code requirements for risers and treads. Replacement
steps for porches may be as wide as the steps being replaced and
may extend into the front setback area for the distance needed to
meet minimum building code requirements for risers and treads.
These exceptions apply only to the SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-7, DR-8,
TR-10, and NMU Zoning Districts.
(d) Yard lights and ornamental lights for residential lots, provided that
they comply with the illumination requirements of § 5-7-25 and
provided they do not locate closer than five feet from the front or
street side property line.
(e) Basketball backboard structures, provided that a minimum setback
of 15 feet is maintained from the front lot line and the minimum
driveway setback is maintained for all other lot lines.
§ 5-4-5 MONROE CODE § 5-4-5
1-1:340
(4) Permitted Projections into Required Street Side Yards (for Corner Lots).
(a) All of the permitted projections listed under Subsection (2) above.
(b) In the SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-7, DR-8, TR-10, and NMU Zoning
Districts, the minimum street side setback requirement may be
reduced in order to accommodate open porches (i.e., covered and
unenclosed), awnings, or canopies. Refer to the bulk requirements
listed for each zoning district in Chapter 2.
(c) Yard lights and ornamental lights for residential lots, provided that
they comply with the illumination requirements of § 5-7-25 and
provided they do not locate closer than five feet from the front or
street side property line.
(5) Permitted projections into required interior side yards.
(a) Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies
opening upon fire towers may project into a side yard not more
than 3 1/2 feet when so placed as not to obstruct light and
ventilation.
(b) Uncovered entry platforms and steps necessary to comply with
current ingress and egress regulations provided they do not extend
more than four feet into the interior side yard setback and are no
more than six feet wide. Steps from the platform may extend into
the front setback area for the distance needed to meet minimum
building code requirements for risers and treads. Replacement
steps for porches may be as wide as the steps being replaced and
may extend into the front setback area for the distance needed to
meet minimum building code requirements for risers and treads.
These exceptions apply only to the SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-7, DR-8,
TR-10, and NMU Zoning Districts.
(c) Uncovered patios and decks on single-family and two-family
dwelling units not to exceed one foot above the established grade
and shall not be nearer than three feet from the adjacent side lot
line.
(6) Permitted projections into required rear yards.
(a) Attached terraces, uncovered porches, patios, decks, steps, stoops,
or similar appurtenances to single-family and two-family residential
buildings which do not extend more than one foot above the
established grade, provided they do not locate closer than 20 feet
to the rear lot line.
(b) Recreational equipment accessory to a residential use, provided a
five-foot setback is maintained for all lot lines.
(c) Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies
opening upon fire towers may project into a rear yard not more
§ 5-4-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-4-5
1-1:341
Chapter 5-5
NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
§ 5-5-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations for the following
nonconforming situations created legally prior to the effective date of this
Title 5: nonconforming uses, nonconforming and substandard lots,
nonconforming structures, and other nonconforming sites.
§ 5-5-2. Nonconforming uses.
than three feet when so placed as not to obstruct light and
ventilation.
(7) Permitted Projections in the Planned Development District (PD): Per
approved Specific Implementation Plan.
(1) Definition. A nonconforming use is an active and actual use of land or
structures, or both; legally established prior to the effective date of this
Title 5 or subsequent applicable amendments thereto which has
continued the same use to the present, and which would not be
permitted under the current terms of this Title 5.
(2) Continuance of a nonconforming use.
(a) Any nonconforming use lawfully existing upon the effective date of
this Title 5 may be continued at the size and in a manner of
operation existing upon such date, except as specified in this
section.
(b) Any legal use under the previous Zoning Ordinance which is made
nonconforming by this Title 5 may apply for a conditional use
permit to be granted legal conforming status.
(c) If a parcel or lot contains an existing nonconforming use, the
addition of a new conforming use on that parcel or lot shall require
a conditional use permit, subject to the standards, criteria, and
procedures prescribed by § 5-10-28, in order to ensure
compatibility with the existing nonconforming use. Whether uses
are compatible shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(d) In the absence of a conditional use permit granting it legal
conforming status, a nonconforming use shall be discontinued
before a new conforming use may be added to the parcel.
(3) Modification of a nonconforming use.
(a) Except as permitted in Subsection (2)(b), below, a structure
containing a nonconforming use shall not be expanded or changed
to another nonconforming use, unless such modification would
§ 5-4-5 MONROE CODE § 5-5-2
1-1:342
make the nonconforming use have a more desirable effect in terms
of implementing the purpose of this Title 5 (as determined by the
Zoning Administrator). If such a modification occurs, said use shall
not be modified back to the original nonconforming use, or to any
other nonconforming use which does not better accomplish the
purpose of this Title 5.
(b) A nonconforming nonresidential use which is not served by public
sanitary sewer and/or public water may be permitted to expand if
said facilities are not available within 1,000 feet of the subject
property, and upon the granting of a conditional use permit per the
requirements of § 5-10-28.
(c) No nonconforming use or structure containing a nonconforming
use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the
lot, parcel, site and/or structure than was occupied upon the
effective date of this Title 5.
(4) Discontinuance of a nonconforming use.
(a) When any nonconforming use of any structure or land is
discontinued for a period of 365 days, or is changed into a
conforming use, any future use of said structure or land shall be in
complete conformity with the provisions of this Title 5.
1. A nonconforming use that has been discontinued for a period of
365 days or more may be reestablished through the granting of
a conditional use permit, provided that the nonconforming use
is permitted by right in a zoning district that is less intensive
than the zoning district of the subject property, as determined
by the Plan Commission.
(b) The property owner has the burden to prove that the
nonconforming use has been continuously maintained over time.
Potential forms of documentation include but are not limited to
utility bills; tax records; business licenses; listing in telephone,
business, or City directories; advertisements in dated publications;
building, land use, or development permits; insurance policies;
leases; dated aerial photos; insurance maps that identify use or
development such as Sanborn Maps; or land use and development
inventories prepared by a government agency.
(5) Ordinary maintenance and repairs of a structure and land containing a
nonconforming use.
(a) The ordinary maintenance and repairs made to a structure or land
containing or related to a nonconforming use is permitted.
Ordinary maintenance and repairs are defined as follows:
1. The repair or replacement of doors, windows, nonbearing
walls, fixtures, heating and air conditioning components,
§ 5-5-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-5-2
1-1:343
§ 5-5-3. Nonconforming and substandard lots.
wiring, plumbing, siding, roofing, or other nonstructural
components.
2. Overlaying an off-street parking and/or loading lot, which shall
mean adding a layer of asphalt or concrete to an existing offstreet
parking and/or loading lot.
3. Resurfacing the asphalt or concrete of the off-street parking,
loading facilities, and/or access drives without exposing the
base course and overlaying such area.
(b) In no instance shall said maintenance and repairs exceed, over the
life of the structure, 50% of the present equalized assessed value of
said structure or property prior to said repairs, in accordance with
Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(h).
(1) Definition. A nonconforming or substandard lot is a lot legally
established prior to the effective date of this Title 5 or subsequent
applicable amendments thereto which would not be permitted under
the current terms of this Title 5.
(2) Applicability: The following section shall apply to all lots in the City
except in the following circumstances:
(a) The lot did not legally exist as of the effective date of this Title 5.
(b) The lot is subject to a court order to the contrary of this section.
(3) Blanket conforming status.
(a) Blanket conforming status for any and all requirements of this Title
5 is hereby automatically granted to all nonconforming or
substandard lots in their configuration existing or as finally
approved as of the effective date of this Title 5. This subsection
ensures that lots approved and created prior to the adoption of this
Title 5 do not encounter difficulty because the lots would otherwise
be considered nonconforming or substandard.
(b) After the effective date of this Title 5, no lot shall be created which
does not meet the density, intensity, and bulk requirements of the
zoning district, except any lot located within a subdivision platted
prior to the effective date of this Title 5 may return to its originally
platted dimensions and configurations.
(4) New development: A lot of record existing upon the effective date of
this Title 5 in any zoning district, which does not meet the minimum lot
area, width, and frontage requirements for the zoning district, may be
utilized for new or modified development, provided that such
development complies with all of the density, intensity, and bulk
regulations for that zoning district.
§ 5-5-2 MONROE CODE § 5-5-3
1-1:344
§ 5-5-4. Nonconforming structures.
(5) Except for outlots that received variances prior to the effective date of
this Title 5, this section shall not apply to outlots without access to a
public right-of-way that existed prior to the effective date of this Title 5,
as they are not intended for development.
(1) Definition. A nonconforming structure is a structure legally established
prior to the effective date of this Title 5 or subsequent applicable
amendments thereto which would not be permitted under the current
terms of this Title 5. Parking, loading, access drives, and other paved
areas are included in the definition of structure.
(2) The following section shall apply to all structures in the City except in
the following circumstances:
(a) The structure did not legally exist as of the effective date of this
Title 5.
(b) The structure is subject to legal proceedings.
(c) The structure is subject to a court order to the contrary of this
section.
(d) Where the requirements of this section conflict with federal, state
and City floodplain, wetland and shoreland-wetland regulations.
1. Where there are conflicts between or among regulations within
this section and other regulations such as floodplain, wetland,
and shoreland regulations, the regulations that are more
restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements
shall prevail.
(3) Blanket conforming status.
(a) Blanket conforming status for any and all requirements of this Title
5 is hereby automatically granted to any structure lawfully existing
upon the effective date of this Title 5. After said date, structures
may not be enlarged, expanded, or extended without bringing the
enlargement, expansion, or extension into compliance with the
provisions of this Title 5, or unless a variance is granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals under § 5-10-41.
(b) This subsection is intended to eliminate the new and/or continued
classification of structures as nonconforming subject to the
requirements of this Title 5. This provision addresses two different
situations:
1. Any structure erected prior to the original adoption of zoning
by the City of Monroe that does not meet some or all of the bulk
or intensity requirements of this Title 5.
§ 5-5-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-5-4
1-1:345
2. In some instances, this Title 5 establishes new bulk or intensity
requirements that existing legal structures under the previous
Zoning Ordinance do not meet.
(c) This section therefore ensures that owners of such structures
legally established prior to the effective date of this Title 5 do not
encounter difficulty because the structures would otherwise be
considered nonconforming.
(4) Continuation. Any structure or building lawfully existing upon the
effective date of this Title 5 may be continued at the size and in a
manner of operation existing upon such date, except as hereafter
specified.
(5) Unsafe conditions. Nothing in this Title 5 shall preclude the Building
Inspector from remedial or enforcement actions when a nonconforming
structure or building is declared unsafe.
(6) Ordinary maintenance and repairs.
(a) The ordinary maintenance and repairs made to a nonconforming
structure is permitted.
(b) For the purposes of this section, "ordinary maintenance and
repairs" are defined as follows:
1. The repair or replacement of doors, windows, nonbearing
walls, fixtures, heating and air conditioning components,
wiring, plumbing, siding, roofing, or other nonstructural
components.
2. Overlaying an off-street parking and/or loading lot, which shall
mean adding a layer of asphalt or concrete to an existing offstreet
parking and/or loading lot.
3. Resurfacing the asphalt or concrete of the off-street parking,
loading facilities, and/or access drives without exposing the
base course and overlaying such area.
(7) Alterations.
(a) For the purposes of this section, "alterations" shall be defined as
being one or more of the following:
1. Adding, removing, changing, or rearranging the supporting
members of an existing structure, such as load-bearing walls,
columns, beams, girders, trusses, or interior partitions.
2. Pulverizing and/or removing asphalt or concrete from off-street
parking and loading facilities and/or access drives to the extent
of exposing the base course, whether or not repaving of such
area occurs.
§ 5-5-4 MONROE CODE § 5-5-4
1-1:346
3. Full-depth reclamation and mix and mill in-place processes
that pulverize the parking facility surface and blend it on-site
with the existing aggregate base.
4. For the purposes of this section, "size" is defined as the site
coverage, physical dimension, volume, height, length, width, or
gross floor area.
(b) A nonconforming structure may be altered provided that the
nonconforming structure does not encroach any further into the
established nonconforming yard setbacks or required yard
setbacks.
(c) A record shall be kept which lists the nonconforming structure,
their assessed value, and the cost of those alterations which have
been permitted. Such records shall be cumulative and track the
cost of the alterations for the lifetime of the structure.
(8) Additions.
(a) For the purposes of this section, "additions" shall be defined as any
expansions that increase the size of a building or structure.
(b) Additions made to nonconforming structures shall be permissible
in required setbacks subject to the following:
1. The addition shall not encroach any further into the
established nonconforming yard setbacks or required yard
setbacks.
2. The addition shall conform to all other requirements of the
district in which it is located.
(c) Additions shall meet all other provisions of this Title 5, including,
but not limited to, maximum lot coverage, off-street parking and
loading facilities, and landscaping standards.
(9) Relocation.
(a) For the purposes of this section, "relocation" shall be defined as any
repositioning of a structure on its site or moving any structure to
another site.
(b) No structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other
location on the same or any other site unless the structure complies
with all of the provisions of this Title 5.
(c) If a structure is relocated to a new site, it shall also comply with all
other provisions of this Title 5, including, but not limited to,
maximum lot coverage, off-street parking and loading facilities, and
landscaping standards.
(10) Destruction and reconstruction. A damaged, destroyed, or removed
structure may be restored to the size, location, design and use that it
§ 5-5-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-5-4
1-1:347
§ 5-5-5. Other nonconforming sites.
had immediately before the damage, destruction, or removal occurred
without any limits on the costs of the repair, reconstruction, or
improvement if either Subsection (10)(a) or (b), below, apply. The
burden of proof in regard to the location, dimensions, configuration,
and exterior building materials of the damaged or removed structure
shall be upon the property owner to demonstrate prior to the issuance
of a building permit.
(a) The structure was damaged or destroyed by violent wind,
vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, infestation, or other act
identified by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7) on or after March 2, 2006.
(b) The structure was damaged, destroyed, removed, or partially
removed by other means on or after the effective date of this Title
5.
(11) Intentional removal and replacement.
(a) If any portion of a structure is intentionally removed by the
property owner, the replacement structure must meet the
requirements of this chapter, unless a variance is granted under
§ 5-10-41.
(b) Legal, nonconforming garages, decks, and porches may be
replaced in their entirety to the previous footprint, floor area, and
height, provided that all of the following requirements are met:
1. That the proposed garage/deck/porch replacement does not
encroach further into required setback(s) than the current
legal, nonconforming structure.
2. That the proposed garage/deck/porch replacement does not
locate closer to an existing residence on an adjacent parcel
than the sum of the required garage/deck/porch setback on the
subject property and the required house setback on said
adjacent parcel.
3. That precautions (determined on a case-by-case basis by the
Building Inspector) are taken to reduce the possibility of fire
damage to nearby structures.
(1) Definition. A nonconforming site is a site legally established prior to the
effective date of this Title 5 or subsequent applicable amendments
thereto which would not be permitted under the current terms of this
Title 5 because it does not meet the building and site design
requirements of this Title 5. Such building and site design components
may include one or more of the following:
(a) Bulk, intensity, and density requirements.
(b) Exterior building materials requirements.
§ 5-5-4 MONROE CODE § 5-5-5
1-1:348
(c) Exterior building design requirements.
(d) Number of parking spaces required.
(e) Parking, loading, access drive and other paved area design
requirements.
(f) Landscaping requirements.
(g) Bufferyard requirements.
(h) Fencing requirements.
(i) Lighting requirements.
(2) Blanket conforming status.
(a) Blanket conforming status for any and all requirements of this Title
5 is hereby automatically granted to all development sites in their
configuration existing or as finally approved as of the effective date
of this Title 5.
(b) After the effective date of this Title 5, additional site development
that would result in the enlargement, expansion, or extension of
uses, structures or other development per Subsection (1)(a)
through (i), above, will not be allowed to occur without such
additional site development being in full compliance with the
provisions of this Title 5.
(c) This subsection is intended to prevent the creation of
nonconforming sites related to the building and site design
requirements of this Title 5.
(d) This subsection ensures that sites approved prior to the effective
date of this Title 5 do not encounter difficulty because they would
otherwise be considered nonconforming.
(3) New development. All new buildings, structures, parking areas, and
parking stall counts, including reconstructions, shall comply with all
site design requirements of this Title 5, including the components of
Subsection (1)(a) through (i), above, for the new or reconstructed
portion of the development.
(4) Conformance required where possible. On nonconforming lots where
the site configuration and undeveloped area are sufficient to comply
with site design requirements, any change that would make compliance
with the site design requirements of this Title 5 impossible shall not be
permitted, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(5) Resurfacing of nonconforming paved areas. When nonconforming
paved areas are resurfaced, the paved area shall be brought into
conformance with the visibility requirements of § 5-7-10, and driveways
shall be relocated to meet the required distance from intersections and
driveways per § 5-7-9(6) and (7). If space is available to reduce the
§ 5-5-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-5-5
1-1:349
Chapter 5-6
OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 5-6-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish overlay zoning districts wherein
certain additional requirements are superimposed on the underlying
standard zoning districts set forth in Chapter 2 of this Title 5. Each overlay
district is intended to address a special land use circumstance beyond
those addressed by the underlying zoning district. Special requirements
include protections against natural hazards, protections of valued natural
and cultural resources, special design guidelines, and measures to ensure
compatibility with airport flight operations. Any nonconforming situation
(lot, use, structure, and/or site) shall adhere to the provisions of Chapter 5.
§ 5-6-2. How to use this chapter.
A given property may lie within one or more overlay zoning district based
on its geographic location. The provisions of this chapter are intended to
be consulted before issuance of any building permit, site plan approval,
conditional use permit, zoning permit, zoning change, or land division to
ensure the intended use meets all of the requirements of any applicable
overlay district, in addition to the underlying standard zoning district.
For each overlay district established in this chapter, a definition of the
resource or geographic area is provided, followed by the specific purposes
of the protective regulations governing the resource or geographic location,
the method of delineating the boundaries of the overlay district, and the
development regulations.
degree of other nonconformities present on the site, the Zoning
Administrator shall determine the manner and degree to which each
site nonconformities shall be brought into conformance, specifically to
improve public safety and/or reduce public nuisances.
(6) On nonconforming lots where the site configuration and undeveloped
area are not sufficient to comply with all site design requirements, but
space is available to reduce the degree of one or more nonconformities,
the Zoning Administrator shall determine the manner and degree to
which each site nonconformities shall be brought into conformance,
specifically to improve public safety and/or reduce public nuisances.
(7) Creation of additional nonconformity prohibited. Enlargements,
expansions, or extensions that would result in creation of one or more
nonconformities or increase the degree of existing nonconformities
with the site development standards of this Title 5 shall not be
permitted.
§ 5-5-5 MONROE CODE § 5-6-3
1-1:350
§ 5-6-3. Overlay zoning districts.
For the purpose of this Title 5, the following overlay zoning districts are
hereby established.
AP-O Airport Overlay
FP-O Floodplain Overlay
HP-O Historic Preservation Overlay
§ 5-6-4. Map of overlay zoning districts.
Except where otherwise indicated in this chapter, the overlay zoning
districts are represented on the Official Zoning Map, adopted and from time
to time amended by the City of Monroe.
§ 5-6-5. (AP-O) Airport Overlay Zoning District.
§ 5-6-6. (FP-O) Floodplain Overlay Zoning District.
(1) Intent. The intent of this overlay district is to regulate and restrict the
height of structures and vegetation in the vicinity of the Monroe
Municipal Airport, to promote public safety, welfare and convenience,
to increase safety in airport operations, to protect persons and property
within the area, and protect the municipal investment in the airport
facilities.
(2) Applicability. This district overlays other zoning districts, and its
regulations further restrict provisions of the underlying district.
(3) Principal, accessory, and temporary uses permitted by right or as
conditional use. Same as for the underlying district except that no use
shall create electrical interference with radio communication between
the airport and aircraft, or make it difficult for pilots to distinguish
between airport lights and others, or result in glare in the eyes of pilots
using the airport, or impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or
otherwise endanger the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft.
(4) Density, intensity, and bulk regulations. Same as for the underlying
zoning district, except that no structure shall be constructed, altered or
located, or permitted to remain after such construction, alteration or
location, and that no trees shall be allowed to grow to a height in excess
of the height limit indicated on the Airport Overlay Zoning Ordinance.
(1) Intent, purpose and general provisions.
(a) Statutory authorization: This section is adopted pursuant to the
authorization in §§ 62.23 and 87.30 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) Finding of fact: Uncontrolled development and use of the
floodplains and rivers of the City would impair the public health,
safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base.
§ 5-6-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:351
(c) Statement of purpose: This section is intended to regulate
floodplain development to protect life, health and property,
minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects,
minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers, minimize business interruptions and other economic
disruptions, minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain,
minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the
floodplain, discourage the victimization of unwary land and
homebuyers, prevent increases in flood heights that could increase
flood damage and result in conflicts between property owners; and
discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the
floodplain.
(d) Title: This section shall be known as the Floodplain Zoning Code for
Monroe, Wisconsin.
(e) General provisions:
1. Areas to be regulated. This section regulates all areas within
the limits of the City that would be covered by the regional
flood or base flood.
2. Official maps and revisions.
a. The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as
floodplains or A-Zones on the following maps and the
revisions in the City of Monroe floodplain appendix: Flood
Insurance Rate Map, panel numbers 055045C0175G,
55045C0281G, 55045C0282G, 55045C0283G,
55045C0284G, 55045C0301G, 55045C0302G, and
55045C0303G, dated May 18, 2009; with corresponding
profiles that are based on the Flood Insurance Study,
number 55045CV000A, dated May 18, 2009; and
b. Any change to the base flood elevations in the Flood
Insurance Study or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map shall
be reviewed and approved by the department and FEMA
before it is effective. No changes to regional flood
elevations on non-FEMA maps shall be effective until
approved by the department.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a file containing
these maps and revisions. If more than one map or revision
is referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
3. Establishment of districts. The regional floodplain areas are
divided into four districts as follows:
a. The floodway district (FW) is the channel of a river or
stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the
channel required to carry the regional floodwaters.
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:352
b. The flood fringe district (FF) is that portion of the
floodplain between the regional flood limits and the
floodway.
c. The general floodplain district (GFP) is those areas that
have been or may be covered by floodwater during the
regional flood.
d. The flood storage district (FSD) is that area of the
floodplain where storage of floodwaters is calculated to
reduce the regional flood discharge.
4. Locating floodplain boundaries. Discrepancies between
boundaries on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map and actual
field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in
Subsection (1)(e)4.a. or b. of this subsection. If a significant
difference exists, the map shall be amended according to
Subsection (10). The Zoning Administrator can rely on a
boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a
land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is required.
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for
documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the
basis upon which the district boundary was determined and for
initiating any map amendments required under this section.
Disputes between the Zoning Administrator and an applicant
over the district boundary line shall be settled according to
Subsection (9)(d) and the following criteria:
a. If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile
elevations shall determine the district boundary. The
regional flood or base flood elevations shall govern if there
are any discrepancies.
b. Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the
boundary shall be determined by the map scale, visual onsite
inspection and any information provided by the
department.
5. Removal of lands from floodplain. Compliance with the
provisions of this section shall not be grounds for removing
land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet
above the regional flood or base flood elevation, the fill is next
to land outside the floodplain, and the map is amended under
Subsection (10). To remove flood insurance requirements, the
property owner must contact FEMA to request a letter of map
change.
6. Compliance. Any development or use within the areas
regulated by this section shall be in compliance with the terms
of this section, and other applicable local, state, and federal
regulations.
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:353
7. Municipalities and state agencies regulated. Unless
specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and
counties are required to comply with this section and obtain all
necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if
§ 13.48(13) of the Wisconsin Statutes applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state
highways and bridges by the Wisconsin department of
transportation are exempt when § 30.2022 of the Wisconsin
Statutes applies.
8. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
a. This section supersedes all the provisions of any City
zoning code enacted under § 62.23 or 87.30 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, which relate to floodplains except that
where another City zoning code is more restrictive than
the provisions contained in this section, that code shall
continue in effect to the extent of the greater restrictions,
but not otherwise.
b. This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair
any deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this
section imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
section shall prevail.
9. Interpretation. The interpretation and application of the
provisions of this section shall be held to be minimum
requirements liberally construed in favor of the City and shall
not be considered a limitation on or repeal of any other powers
granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of this
section is required by a standard in Chapter NR 116 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code, and where the chapter
provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light
of the Chapter NR 116 standards in effect on the date of the
adoption of this section or in effect on the date of the most
recent text amendment to this section.
10. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection
standards in this section are based on engineering experience
and scientific research. Larger floods may occur, or the flood
height may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
section does not imply or guarantee that nonfloodplain areas or
permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood
damage. Nor does this section create liability of, or a cause of
action against, the City, or any officer or employee thereof, for
any flood damage that may result from reliance on this section.
11. Severability. Should any portion of this section be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this section shall not be affected.
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:354
12. Annexed areas. The Green County floodplain zoning provisions
in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and
shall be enforced by the City for all annexed areas until the
City adopts and enforces a code which meets the requirements
of Chapter NR 116 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code and
the national flood insurance program. These annexed lands are
described on the City's Official Zoning Map. Green County
floodplain zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for
administering this section and are on file in the office of the
Zoning Administrator. All plats or maps of annexation shall
show the regional flood elevation and the location of the
floodway.
13. General development standards. The building inspector shall
review all permit applications to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage; be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities
designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding. Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with
the standards set forth in this subsection. All subdivision
proposals, including mobile home parks, shall include regional
flood elevation and floodway data for any development that
meets the subdivision definition of this section.
(2) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
A-ZONES — Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map
which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be
numbered or unnumbered A-Zones. The A-Zones may or may not be
reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a
given area.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of
a flood insurance study and depicted on a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
BULKHEAD — A geographic line along a reach of navigable water
that has been adopted as a City code and approved by the department
under § 30.11 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and which allows limited filling
between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high-water mark,
except where such filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this
section.
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:355
CAMPGROUND — Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained,
intended or used for sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four
or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a
camping area.
CAMPING UNIT — Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet
in area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a
camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, tent or other
mobile recreational vehicle.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certification that the construction
and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor
of a structure are in compliance with all of the provisions of this section.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and
banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water.
CRAWLWAY — An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a
building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to
plumbing and electrical utilities.
DECK — An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides but
has a permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DEPARTMENT — The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any artificial change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or
alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair
of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any
structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the
placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site
preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or
equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private
sewage systems or water supply facilities.
DRY LAND ACCESS — A vehicular access route which is above the
regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the
floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface
above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and
relief vehicles.
ENCROACHMENT — Any fill, structure, equipment, building, use or
development in the floodway.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land, divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which
the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before
the effective date of this section. At a minimum, this would include the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:356
EXPANSION TO MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes
installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site
grading, or the pouring of concrete pads.
FEMA — The federal agency known as the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that administers the National Flood Insurance
Program.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — A map designating approximate
flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered
A-Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations.
This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects
of the national flood insurance program until superseded by a flood
insurance study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP — A map of a community on which
the federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special flood
hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community. This map can only be amended by FEMA.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — A technical engineering examination,
evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It
provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood
and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations
and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated
as numbered and unnumbered A-Zones. Flood insurance Rate Maps
that accompany the flood insurance study form the basis for both the
regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of
the following conditions: a) the overflow or rise of inland waters; b)
the rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
or c) the sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level
in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
FLOOD PROFILE — A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations
of land surface elevations along a stream or river.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation of two feet of
freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the
regional flood.
FLOOD STORAGE — Those floodplain areas where storage of
floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the
regional flood discharge.
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:357
FLOODFRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway
which is covered by floodwaters during the regional flood and
associated with standing water rather than flowing water.
FLOODPLAIN — Land which has been or may be covered by floodwater
during the regional flood, It includes the floodway and the flood fringe
and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory
purposes.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — Policy and procedures to insure wise
use of floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation,
education, and administration and enforcement of floodplain
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN ZONING VARIANCE — An authorization by the Board of
Appeals for the construction or maintenance of a building or structure
in a manner which is inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses)
contained in this section.
FLOODPROOF — Any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities
and contents of buildings subject to flooding, to reduce or eliminate
flood damage.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
FREEBOARD — A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified
number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates
for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated,
including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of
bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization,
loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the
river or stream bed.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE — Any structure or portion thereof used or
designed for human habitation.
HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — Damage that could result from
flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant
economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is either: a) listed
individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register; b) certified
or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district; c) individually listed on a state
inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior;
or d) individually listed on City's inventory of historic places in
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:358
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the Interior in states
without approved programs.
INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT — A calculated upward
rise in the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than 0.01 foot,
based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions
which are directly attributable to development in the floodplain but
not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as
roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and
discharge.
LAND USE — Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved
real estate.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to
be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
required utilities. "Manufactured home" includes a mobile home but
does not include a mobile recreational vehicle.
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — See "recreational vehicle" in
§ 5-1-22 of this Title 5.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations referenced to
mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning
regulations adopted by the City and includes any later improvements
to such structures. To determine flood insurance rates, it includes
any structures for which the start of construction commenced on or
after the effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map or
after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any later
improvements to such structures.
NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM — Elevations referenced to
mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW — Any development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters such that this development alone or with any
future development will cause an increase in regional flood eight.
OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP — Those maps, adopted and
made part of this section, as described in Subsection (1)(e)2., which has
been approved by the department and FEMA.
OPEN SPACE USE — Those uses having a relatively low flood damage
potential and not involving structures.
ORDINARY HIGHWATER MARK — The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:359
of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other
easily recognized characteristic.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage treatment and disposal system
serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field
located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative
sewage system approved by the department of safety and professional
services, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption
field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure, or a
system located on a different parcel than the structure.
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Those utilities using underground or overhead
transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and
distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and
storm sewer.
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Base floodwaters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special
flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base
flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
REGIONAL FLOOD — A flood determined to be representative of large
floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood
with a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, and if depicted on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the regional
flood elevation is equivalent to the base flood elevation.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include
the installation of streets or walkways, nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
SUBDIVISION — Has the meaning set forth in § 6-1-3 of this Code.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the equalized
assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred.
WATER SURFACE PROFILE — A graphical representation showing the
elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:360
a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow. A water surface profile
of the regional flood is used in regulating floodplain areas.
WATERSHED — The entire region contributing runoff or surface water
to a watercourse or body of water.
WELL — An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of
its intended use.
(3) General standards applicable to all floodplain districts.
(a) Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses:
1. No floodplain development, except as provided in Subsection
(3)(a)3. of this section, shall be allowed in floodplain areas
which will:
a. Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other
development, increasing regional flood height; or
b. Increase regional flood height due to flood storage area
lost, which equals or exceeds 0.01 foot.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined
the proposed development will obstruct flow or increase
regional flood heights 0.01 foot or more, based on the officially
adopted Flood Insurance Rate Map or other adopted map,
unless the provisions of Subsection (3)(a)3 are met.
3. Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than 0.01 foot
may only be permitted if amendments are made to this section,
the official Floodplain Zoning Maps, floodway lines and water
surface profiles, under Subsection (10). Any such alterations
must be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the department.
(b) Watercourse alterations:
1. No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a
mapped floodplain shall be issued until the Zoning
Administrator has notified in writing all adjacent
municipalities, the department and FEMA regional offices and
required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal
permits. The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.
2. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after
the date of the watercourse alteration or relocation, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting
appropriate technical or scientific data under National Flood
Insurance Program guidelines that shall be used to revise the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, risk premium rates and floodplain
management regulations as required.
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:361
(c) Development under Chapters 30 and 31 of the Wisconsin Statutes:
Development which requires a permit from the department, under
Chapters 30 and 31 of the Wisconsin Statutes, such as docks, piers,
wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be
allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to
the floodway lines, water surface profiles, base flood elevations
established in the flood insurance study, or other data from the
officially adopted Flood Insurance Rate Map, or other floodplain
zoning maps or this section are made, under § 5-6-6(10).
(d) Public or private campgrounds: Public or private campgrounds
shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the
following provisions:
1. The campground is approved by the Wisconsin Department of
Health Services.
2. A land use permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning
Administrator.
3. The character of the river system and the elevation of the
campground are such that a seventy-two-hour warning of an
impending flood can be given to all campground occupants.
4. There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the
campground that offers the minimum notice required under
this subsection to all persons in the campground. This
procedure shall include a written agreement between the
campground owner, the City Emergency Government
Coordinator and the Chief of Police which specifies the flood
elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel
responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning
systems to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk
parties, and the methods and personnel responsible for
conducting the evacuation.
5. This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at
which time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated by
the officials identified in Subsection (3)(d)4., to remain in
compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of
the Wisconsin Department of Health Services and all other
applicable regulations.
6. Only camping units are allowed.
7. The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground
for more than 180 consecutive days, at which time the camping
unit must be removed from the floodplain for a minimum of 24
hours.
8. All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days
shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:362
operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at the
campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a
camping unit for a period not to exceed 180 days and shall
ensure compliance with all the provisions of this section.
9. The City shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the
campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of
this section.
10. All camping units that remain in place for more than 180
consecutive days must meet the applicable requirements in
either § 5-6-6(4) or 5-6-6(5), for the floodplain district in which
the structure is located.
11. The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all
entrances warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for
evacuation when a flood warning is issued.
12. All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse
collection, electrical service, natural gas lines, propane tanks,
private sewage systems and wells, shall be properly anchored
and placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
(4) Floodway District (FW).
(a) Applicability: This section applies to all floodway areas on the
Official Floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified under
Subsection (6)(d).
(b) Permitted uses: The following open space uses are allowed in the
floodway district and the floodway areas of the general floodplain
district, if they are not prohibited by any other code; they meet the
standards in Subsection (4)(c) and (4)(d); and all permits or
certificates have been issued according to Subsection (9)(b):
1. Agricultural uses, such as farming, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
2. Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading
areas, parking areas and airport landing strips.
3. Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis
courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming
areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and
fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to
the fill limitations of Subsection (4)(c)4.
4. Uses or structures accessory to open space uses or classified
as historic structures that comply with Subsection (4)(c) and
(4)(d) of this section.
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:363
5. Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with
Subsection (4)(c)4.
6. Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or
wharves, dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and
river crossings of transmission lines, and pipelines that comply
with Chapters 30 and 31 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
7. Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with
Subsection (4)(c)3.
(c) Standards for developments in floodway areas:
1. General:
a. Any development in floodway areas shall comply with
Subsection (3) and have a low flood damage potential.
b. Applicants shall provide the following data to determine
the effects of the proposal according to Subsection (3)(a):
i. A cross-section elevation view of the proposal,
perpendicular to the watercourse, showing if the
proposed development will obstruct flow; or
ii. An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on
regional flood height.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit
application if the project will increase flood elevations
upstream or downstream 0.01 foot or more, based on the
data submitted for Subsection (4)(c)1.b.
2. Structures: Structures accessory to permanent open space
uses or functionally dependent on a waterfront location may be
allowed by permit if the structures comply with the following
criteria:
a. The structure is not designed for human habitation and
does not have a high flood damage potential;
b. The structure must be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement;
c. The structure's mechanical and utility equipment must be
elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection
elevation; and
d. The structure must not obstruct the flow of floodwaters or
cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of
the regional flood.
3. Public utilities, streets and bridges: Public utilities, streets and
bridges may be allowed by permit, if:
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:364
a. Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood
protection elevation; and
b. Construction meets the development standards of
Subsection (3)(a).
4. Fills or deposition of materials: Fills or deposition of materials
may be allowed by permit, if:
a. The requirements of Subsection (3)(a) are met;
b. No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a
permit is issued by the department pursuant to Chapter 30
of the Wisconsin Statutes, and a permit under Section 404
of the federal Water Pollution Control Act, amendments of
1972 (33 U.S.C. § 1344) has been issued, if applicable, and
the other requirements of this section are met;
c. The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion
by riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading;
and
d. The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
(d) Prohibited uses: All uses not listed as permitted uses in Subsection
(4)(b) are prohibited, including the following uses:
1. Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage
potential, or those not associated with permanent open space
uses;
2. Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive,
injurious to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant,
fish or other aquatic life;
3. Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in
the adjoining districts;
4. Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines
that are removed before flooding and systems associated with
recreational areas and department-approved campgrounds
that meet the applicable provisions of local codes and Chapter
SPS 383 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code;
5. Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable
water, except those for recreational areas that meet the
requirements of local codes and Chapters NR 811 and NR 812
of the Wisconsin Administrative Code;
6. Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
7. Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those
permitted under § NR 110.15(3)(b) of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code; or
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:365
8. Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those
permitted under § NR 110.15(3)(b) of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code; or
9. Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to
service existing or proposed development located outside the
floodway which complies with the regulations for the floodplain
area occupied.
(5) Flood Fringe District (FF):
(a) Applicability: This section applies to all flood fringe areas shown on
the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps and those identified under
Subsection (6)(d).
(b) Permitted uses: Any structure, land use, or development is allowed
in the flood fringe district if the standards in Subsection (5)(c) are
met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other code or
regulation and all permits or certificates specified in this Title 5.
(c) Standards for development in flood fringe areas: Subsection (3)(a)
shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to
the use requested:
1. Residential uses: Any habitable structure, including a
manufactured home, which is to be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, or moved into the flood fringe area,
shall meet or exceed the following standards:
a. The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement
or crawlway, shall be at or above the flood protection
elevation on fill. The fill shall be one foot or more above the
regional flood elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond
the limits of the structure. The department may authorize
other floodproofing measures if the elevations of streets or
sewer lines make compliance impractical.
b. The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the
regional flood elevation if it is floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation. No basement or crawlway floor is
allowed below the regional flood elevation.
c. Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a
structure to land outside of the floodplain, except as
provided in Subsection (5)(c)1.d.
d. In developments where street or sewer line elevations
make compliance with Subsection (5)(C)1.c. impractical,
the City may permit new development and substantial
improvements where access roads are at or below the
regional flood elevation, if:
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:366
i. The City has written assurance from police, fire and
emergency services that rescue and relief will be
provided to the structure(s) by wheeled vehicles
during a regional flood event; or
ii. The City has a natural disaster plan approved by
Wisconsin Emergency Management and the
department.
2. Accessory structures or accessory uses:
a. Except as provided in Subsection (5)(c)2.b., an accessory
structure which is not connected to a principal structure
may be constructed with its lowest floor at or above the
regional flood elevation.
b. An accessory structure which is not connected to the
principal structure and which is less than 600 square feet
in size and valued at less than $10,000 may be constructed
with its lowest floor no more than two feet below the
regional flood elevation if it is subject to flood velocities of
no more than two feet per second and it meets all of the
provisions of Subsection (4)(c)2a. through d. and
Subsection (5)(c)5.
3. Commercial uses: Any commercial structure which is erected,
altered or moved into the flood fringe area shall meet the
requirements of Subsection (5)(c)1. Subject to the
requirements of Subsection (5)(c)5, storage yards, surface
parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower
elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life
and property.
4. Manufacturing and industrial uses: Any manufacturing or
industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the
flood fringe area shall be protected to the flood protection
elevation using fill, levees, floodwalls, or other floodproofing
measures in Subsection (9)(f). Subject to the requirements of
Subsection (5)(c)5, storage yards, surface parking lots and
other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an
adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
5. Storage of materials: Materials that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human,
animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the
flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with
Subsection (9)(f). Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure
that such materials will not enter the water body during
flooding.
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:367
6. Public utilities, streets and bridges: All public utilities, streets
and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with
comprehensive floodplain development plans; and
a. When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would
endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities
are considered essential, construction of substantial
improvements to such facilities may only be permitted if
they are floodproofed in compliance with Subsection (9)(f)
to the flood protection elevation.
b. Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at
lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood
forces to the regional flood elevation.
7. Sewage systems: All on-site sewage disposal systems shall be
floodproofed, under Subsection (9)(f), to the flood protection
elevation and shall meet the provisions of all local codes and
Chapter SPS 383 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
8. Wells. All wells shall be floodproofed, under Subsection (9)(f),
to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions
of Chapters NR 811 and NR 812 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
9. Solid waste disposal sites: Disposal of solid or hazardous waste
is prohibited in flood fringe areas.
10. Deposition of materials: Any deposited material must meet all
the provisions of this section.
11. Manufactured homes.
a. Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks shall
provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood
damage, and prepare, secure approval, and file an
evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and escape
routes, with local emergency management authorities.
b. In manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement
homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes
shall:
i. Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection
elevation; and
ii. Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move
laterally during a flood.
c. Outside of manufactured home parks, including expansion
to manufactured home parks and all single units outside of
manufactured home parks, all new, replacement and
substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:368
the residential development standards for the flood fringe
in Subsection (5)(c)1.
12. Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles
that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or are not
fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the
elevation and anchoring requirements in Subsection (5)(c)11.b
and c. A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if
it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only
by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.
(6) General Floodplain District (GFP).
(a) Applicability: The provisions for this district shall apply to all
floodplains for which flood profiles are not available or where flood
profiles are available but floodways have not been delineated.
Floodway and flood fringe districts shall be delineated when
adequate data is available.
(b) Permitted uses: Under Subsections (6)(d), it shall be determined
whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or flood
fringe area. Those uses permitted in Subsections (4)(b) and (5)(b)
are allowed within the general floodplain district, according to the
standards of Subsection (6)(c), if all permits or certificates required
under Subsection (9)(b) have been issued.
(c) Standards for development in the general floodplain district: Once
it is determined according to Subsection (6)(d) that a proposed use
is located within a floodway, the provisions of Subsection (4) shall
apply. Once it is determined according to Subsection (6)(d) that a
proposed use is located within the flood fringe, the provisions of
Subsection (5) shall apply. All provisions of the remainder of this
section apply to either district.
(d) Determining floodway and flood fringe limits: Upon receiving an
application for development within the general floodplain district,
the Zoning Administrator shall:
1. Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial
photograph or a plan which shows the proposed development
with respect to the general floodplain district limits, stream
channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a
legal description of the property, fill limits and elevations,
building floor elevations and floodproofing measures.
2. Require the applicant to furnish any of the following
information considered necessary by the department to
evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and flood
flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway
boundaries:
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:369
a. A typical valley cross-section showing the stream channel,
the floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, the
cross-sectional area to be occupied by the proposed
development, and all historic high-water information;
b. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size,
location and layout of all proposed and existing structures
on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply,
and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent
information;
c. Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or
flow line of the stream;
d. Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement,
storage, water supply and sanitary facilities.
3. Transmit one copy of the information described in Subsection
(6)(d)2.a and b to the department regional office along with a
written request for technical assistance to establish regional
flood elevations and, where applicable, floodway data. Where
the provisions of Subsection (9)(b)2.c apply, the applicant shall
provide all required information and computations to delineate
floodway boundaries and the effects of the project on flood
elevations.
(7) Flood storage district:
(a) General: The flood storage district delineates that portion of the
floodplain where storage of floodwaters has been taken into
account and is relied upon to reduce the regional flood discharge.
The district protects the flood storage areas and assures that any
development in the storage areas will not decrease the effective
flood storage capacity which would cause higher flood elevations.
(b) Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all areas within
the flood storage district (FSD), as shown on the Official Floodplain
Zoning Maps.
(c) Permitted uses. Any use or development which occurs in a flood
storage district must meet the applicable requirements in
Subsection (5)(c).
(d) Standards for development in flood storage districts:
1. Development in a flood storage district shall not cause an
increase equal or greater than 0.01 of a foot in the height of the
regional flood.
2. No development shall be allowed which removes flood storage
volume unless an equal volume of storage as defined by the
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:370
pre-development ground surface and the regional flood
elevation shall be provided in the immediate area of the
proposed development to compensate for the volume of
storage which is lost (compensatory storage). Excavation
below the groundwater table is not considered to provide an
equal volume of storage.
3. If compensatory storage cannot be provided, the area may not
be developed unless the entire area zoned as flood storage
district is rezoned to the flood fringe district. This must include
a revision to the floodplain study and map done for the
waterway to revert to the higher regional flood discharge
calculated without floodplain storage, as per Subsection
(10)(a) of this section.
4. No area may be removed from the flood storage district unless
it can be shown that the area has been filled to the flood
protection elevation and is next to other lands lying outside of
the floodplain.
(8) Nonconforming uses:
(a) General:
1. Applicability: If these standards conform to § 62.23(7)(h) of the
Wisconsin Statutes, they shall apply to all modifications or
additions to any nonconforming use or nonconforming
structure and to the use of any structure or premises which
was lawful before the passage of this section or any
amendment thereto.
2. The lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not
in conformity with the provisions of this section may continue
subject to the following conditions:
a. No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or a
nonconforming structure shall be permitted unless they
comply with this section.
i. The words "modification" and "addition" include, but
are not limited to, any alteration, addition,
modification, structural repair, rebuilding or
replacement of any such use, structure, accessory
structure or accessory use.
ii. Ordinary maintenance repairs are not considered an
extension, modification or addition; these include
painting, decorating, paneling and the replacement of
doors, windows and other nonstructural components
and the maintenance, repair or replacement of private
sewage or water supply systems or connections to
public utilities. Ordinary maintenance repairs do not
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:371
include any costs associated with the repair of a
damaged structure.
iii. The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200
square feet and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of
a principal structure is not an extension, modification
or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over
a portion of the deck to provide safe ingress and
egress to the principal structure.
b. If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming
structure is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is
no longer permitted and any future use of the property,
and any structure or building thereon, shall conform to the
applicable requirements of this section.
c. The City shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming
uses and nonconforming structures, their present
equalized assessed value, the cost of all modifications or
additions which have been permitted, and the percentage
of the structure's total current value those modifications
represent.
d. No modification or addition to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use,
which over the life of the structure would equal or exceed
50% of its present equalized assessed value, shall be
allowed unless the entire structure is permanently
changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use
in compliance with the applicable requirements of this
section. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for
residential and commercial uses in compliance with
Subsection (5)(c)1. The costs of elevating a nonconforming
building or a building with a nonconforming use to the
flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50%
provisions of this subsection.
e. Except as provided in Subsection (8)(a)2.f of this section, if
any nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially
damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt
unless the use and the structure meet the current section
requirements. A structure is considered substantially
damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its predamaged
condition equal or exceeds 50% of the
structure's present equalized assessed value.
f. For nonconforming buildings that are damaged or
destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or
reconstruction of any such nonconforming building may be
permitted to restore it after the nonflood disaster, if the
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:372
nonconforming building will meet all of the minimum
requirements under applicable FEMA regulations (44 CFR
Part 60), or the regulations promulgated thereunder.
g. A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure, the alteration will
comply with Subsection (4)(c)1., flood-resistant materials
are used, and construction practices and floodproofing
methods that comply with Subsection (9)(f) are used.
(b) Floodway areas:
1. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any
nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use in a floodway area, unless such
modification or addition:
a. Has been granted a permit or floodplain zoning variance
which meets all the requirements of this section;
b. Meets the requirements of Subsection (8)(a);
c. Will not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional
flood height;
d. Any addition to the structure shall be floodproofed, under
Subsection (9)(f), by means other than the use of fill, to the
flood protection elevation; and
e. If any part of the foundation below the flood protection
elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
i. The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered
architect or engineer to allow for the efficient entry
and exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A
minimum of two openings must be provided with a
minimum net area of at least one square inch for every
one square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part
of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above
the adjacent grade;
ii. The parts of the foundation located below the flood
protection elevation must be constructed of floodresistant
materials;
iii. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection
elevation; and
iv. The use must be limited to parking or limited storage.
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:373
2. No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an onsite
sewage disposal system, except where an addition has
been ordered by a government agency to correct a hazard to
public health, shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any
replacement, repair or maintenance of an on-site sewage
disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable
requirements of this code and Chapter SPS 383 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
3. No new well, or modification to a well, used to obtain potable
water shall be allowed in a floodway area. Any replacement,
repair or maintenance of a well in a floodway area shall meet
the applicable requirements of this code and Chapters NR 811
and NR 812 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(c) Flood fringe areas:
1. No modification or addition shall be allowed to any
nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has
been granted a permit or floodplain zoning variance by the
City, and the modification or addition shall be placed on fill or
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in compliance
with the standards for that particular use in Subsections (5)(c)
and (9)(f), except where Subsection (8)(c)2 applies.
2. Where compliance with the provisions of Subsection (8)(c)1
would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the
structure will not be used for human habitation or be
associated with a high flood damage potential, the Board of
Appeals, using the procedures established in Subsection (9)(d),
may grant a floodplain zoning variance from those provisions
of Subsection (8)(c)1, for modifications or additions, using the
criteria listed in this subsection. Modifications or additions
which are protected to elevations lower than the flood
protection elevation may be permitted if:
a. No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for
residential or commercial structures;
b. Human lives are not endangered;
c. Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be
installed;
d. Flood depths will not exceed two feet;
e. Flood velocities will not exceed two feet per second; and
f. The structure will not be used for storage of materials as
described in Subsection (5)(c)6.
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:374
3. If neither the provisions of Subsection (8)(c)1 or (8)(c)2 can be
met, one addition to an existing room in a nonconforming
building or a building with a nonconforming use may be
allowed in the floodfringe, if the addition:
a. Meets all other regulations and will be granted by permit
or floodplain zoning variance;
b. Does not exceed 60 square feet in area; and
c. In combination with other previous modifications or
additions to the building, does not equal or exceed 50% of
the present equalized assessed value of the building.
4. All new private sewage systems, or addition to, replacement,
repair or maintenance of a private sewage system shall meet
all the applicable provisions of all local codes and Chapter SPS
383 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
5. All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or
maintenance of a well shall meet the applicable provisions of
this section and Chapters NR 811 and NR 812 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(d) Flood storage areas:
1. No modifications or additions shall be allowed to any
nonconforming structure in a flood storage area unless the
standards outlined in Subsection (7)(d) are met.
(9) Administration:
(a) General. The Zoning Administrator shall administer the provisions
of this section.
(b) Zoning Administrator:
1. The Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties and
powers:
a. Advise applicants of the provisions of this section, assist in
preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure
that the regional flood elevation for the proposed
development is shown on all permit applications.
b. Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this section and issue certificates of
compliance where appropriate.
c. Inspect all damaged floodplain structures and perform a
substantial damage assessment to determine if substantial
damage to the structures has occurred.
d. Keep records of all official actions such as:
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:375
i. All permits issued, inspections made, and work
approved.
ii. Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional
flood elevations for floodplain development.
iii. Records of water surface profiles, floodplain zoning
maps and codes, nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures including changes, appeals,
floodplain zoning variances and amendments.
iv. All substantial damage assessment reports for
floodplain structures.
e. Submit copies of the following items to the department
regional office:
i. Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions
on floodplain zoning variances, appeals for map or text
interpretations, and map or text amendments.
ii. Copies of any case-by-case analyses, and any other
information required by the department including an
annual summary of the number and types of floodplain
zoning actions taken.
iii. Copies of substantial damage assessments performed
and all related correspondence concerning the
assessments.
f. Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this
section to the City Plan Commission and City Attorney for
prosecution. Copies of the reports shall also be sent to the
department regional office.
g. Submit copies of text and map amendments and biennial
reports to the FEMA regional office.
2. Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before
any new development or any repair or change in the use of a
building or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may
be initiated. Application to the Zoning Administrator shall
include:
a. General information:
i. Name and address of the applicant, property owner
and contractor.
ii. Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification.
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:376
b. Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be
submitted with the permit application form and shall
contain:
i. Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
ii. Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any
abutting navigable waterways;
iii. Location of any structures with distances measured
from the lot lines and street center lines;
iv. Location of any existing or proposed on-site private
sewage systems or private water supply systems;
v. Location and elevation of existing or future access
roads;
vi. Location of floodplain and floodway limits as
determined from the Official Floodplain Zoning Maps;
vii. The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings
and any fill using vertical datum from either the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum or the North
American Vertical Datum studies;
viii. Data sufficient to determine the regional flood
elevation in the National Geodetic Vertical Datum or
the North American Vertical Datum at the location of
the development and to determine whether or not the
requirements of Subsection (4) or (5) are met; and
ix. Data to determine if the proposed development will
cause an obstruction to flow or an increase in regional
flood height or discharge according to Subsection
(3)(a). This may include any of the information noted
in Subsection (4)(c)1.
c. Data requirements to analyze developments.
i. The applicant shall provide all survey data and
computations required to show the effects of the
project on flood heights, velocities and floodplain
storage, for all subdivision proposals, and other
proposed developments exceeding five acres in area
or where the estimated cost exceeds $125,000. The
applicant shall provide:
a) An analysis of the effect of the development on the
regional flood profile, velocity of flow and
floodplain storage capacity;
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:377
b) A map showing location and details of vehicular
access to lands outside the floodplain; and
c) A surface drainage plan showing how flood
damage will be minimized.
ii. The estimated cost of the proposal shall include all
structural development, landscaping, access and road
development, utilities, and other pertinent items, but
need not include land costs.
d. Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this
section shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
3. Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used,
and no building which is constructed, altered, added to,
modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a
certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator,
except where no permit is required, subject to the following
provisions:
a. The certificate of compliance shall show that the building
or premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform
to the provisions of this section.
b. Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with
the application for a permit.
c. If all section provisions are met, the certificate of
compliance shall be issued within 10 days after written
notification that the permitted work is completed.
d. The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a
registered professional engineer or registered land
surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing
elevations are in compliance with the permit issued.
Floodproofing measures also require certification by a
registered professional engineer or registered architect
that floodproofing measures meet the requirements of
Subsection (9)(f).
4. Other permits. The applicant must secure all necessary
permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including those
required by the U.S. army corps of engineers under Section
404 of the federal Water Pollution Control Act, amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
(c) City Plan Commission.
1. The City Plan Commission shall:
a. Oversee the functions of the office of the Zoning
Administrator; and
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:378
b. Review and advise the council on all proposed
amendments to this section, maps and text.
2. The City Plan Commission shall not:
a. Grant floodplain zoning variances to the terms of the
Section in place of action by the Board of Appeals; or
b. Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by
the Council.
(d) Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals, created under
§ 62.23(7)(e) of the Wisconsin Statutes, is hereby authorized or
shall be appointed to act for the purposes of this section. The Board
of Appeals shall exercise the powers conferred by Wisconsin
Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The Zoning
Administrator may not be the secretary of the Board of Appeals.
1. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall:
a. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the Zoning Administrator or any other
administrative official in the enforcement or
administration of this section.
b. Hear and decide disputes concerning the district
boundaries shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
c. Hear and decide, upon appeal, floodplain zoning variances
from the standards of this section.
2. Appeals to the Board of Appeals.
a. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any
person aggrieved, or by any officer, department or board
of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning
Administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal
shall be taken within 30 days unless otherwise provided by
the rules of the Board of Appeals, by filing with the official
whose decision is in question, and with the Board of
Appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the
appeal. The official whose decision is in question shall
transmit to the Board of Appeals all records regarding the
matter appealed.
b. Notice and hearing for appeals including floodplain zoning
variances.
i. Notice. The Board of Appeals shall:
a) Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:379
b) Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin
Statutes, specifying the date, time, place and
subject of the hearing; and
c) Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in
interest and the department regional office at
least 10 days in advance of the hearing.
ii. Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent.
The Board of Appeals shall:
a) Resolve boundary disputes according to
Subsection (9)(d)3.
b) Decide floodplain zoning variance applications
according to Subsection (9)(d)4.
c) Decide appeals of permit denials according to
Subsection (9)(d).
c. Decision: The final decision regarding the appeal or
floodplain zoning variance application shall:
i. Be made within a reasonable time.
ii. Be sent to the department regional office within 10
days of the decision.
iii. Be a written determination signed by the chairperson
or secretary of the Board of Appeals.
iv. State the specific facts which are the basis for the
Board of Appeal's decision.
v. Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed, in
whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of
jurisdiction or grant or deny the floodplain zoning
variance application.
vi. Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing
the hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the
case of a floodplain zoning variance, clearly stated in
the recorded minutes of the Board of Appeals
proceedings.
3. Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by
the Board of Appeals in hearing disputes concerning floodplain
district boundaries as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning
Map:
a. Where a floodplain district boundary is established by
approximate or detailed floodplain studies, the flood
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:380
elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the
boundary. If none exist, other evidence may be examined.
b. In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present
arguments and technical evidence to the Board of Appeals.
c. Where it is determined that the boundary is incorrectly
mapped, the Board of Appeals should inform the Zoning
Administrator or the person contesting the boundary
location to petition the council for a map amendment
according to Subsection (10).
4. Floodplain zoning variance.
a. The Board of Appeals may, upon appeal, grant a floodplain
zoning variance from the standards of this section if an
applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
i. Literal enforcement of the section provisions will
cause an unnecessary hardship;
ii. The hardship is due to adoption of this section and
unique property conditions, not common to adjacent
lots or premises. In such case the section or map must
be amended;
iii. The floodplain zoning variance is not contrary to the
public interest; and
iv. The floodplain zoning variance is consistent with the
purpose of this section in Subsection (1)(c).
b. In addition to the criteria in Subsection (9)(d)4.a, to qualify
for a floodplain zoning variance under FEMA regulations,
the following criteria must be met:
i. The floodplain zoning variance may not cause any
increase in the regional flood elevation;
ii. Floodplain zoning variances can only be granted for
lots that are less than 1/2 acre and are next to existing
structures constructed below the regional flood
elevation; and
iii. Floodplain zoning variances shall only be granted
upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, shall be
the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause
increased risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not
increase costs for rescue and relief efforts and shall
not be contrary to the purpose of the section.
c. A floodplain zoning variance shall not:
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:381
i. Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the
zoning district.
ii. Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic
gain or loss.
iii. Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
iv. Damage the rights or property values of other persons
in the area.
v. Allow actions without the amendments to this section
or map(s) required in Subsection (10)(a).
vi. Allow any alteration of a historic structure, including
its use, which would preclude its continued
designation as a historic structure.
d. When a floodplain zoning variance is granted, the Board of
Appeals shall notify the applicant in writing that it may
increase flood insurance premiums and risks to life and
property. A copy shall be maintained with the floodplain
zoning variance record.
(e) To review appeals of permit denials.
1. The City Plan Commission or Board of Appeals shall review all
data related to the appeal. This may include:
a. Permit application data listed in Subsection (9)(b)2.
b. Floodway/flood fringe determination data in Subsection
(6)(d).
c. Data listed in Subsection (4)(c)1.b. where the applicant
has not submitted this information to the Zoning
Administrator.
d. Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to
the Board of Appeals with the appeal.
2. For appeals of all denied permits; the Board of Appeals shall:
a. Follow the procedures of Subsection (9)(d);
b. Consider City Plan Commission recommendations; and
c. Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
3. For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation,
the Board of Appeals shall:
a. Uphold the denial where the Board of Appeals agrees with
the data showing an increase in flood elevation. Increases
equal to or greater than 0.01 foot may only be allowed
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:382
after amending the flood profile and map and all
appropriate legal arrangements are made with all
adversely affected property owners.
b. Grant the appeal where the Board of Appeal agrees that
the data properly demonstrates that the project does not
cause an increase equal to or greater than 0.01 foot
provided no other reasons for denial exist.
(f) Floodproofing.
1. No permit or floodplain zoning variance shall be issued until
the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing
measures will protect the structure or development to the flood
protection elevation.
2. Floodproofing measures shall be designed to:
a. Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and
impact forces and other regional flood factors;
b. Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
c. Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and
lateral movement; and
d. Insure that structural walls and floors are watertight to the
flood protection elevation, and the interior remains
completely dry during flooding without human
intervention.
3. Floodproofing measures could include:
a. Reinforcing walls and floors to resist rupture or collapse
caused by water pressure or floating debris.
b. Adding mass or weight to prevent flotation.
c. Placing essential utilities above the flood protection
elevation.
d. Installing surface or subsurface drainage systems to
relieve foundation wall and basement floor pressures.
e. Constructing water supply wells and waste treatment
systems to prevent the entry of floodwaters.
f. Putting cutoff valves on sewer lines or eliminating gravity
flow basement drains.
(g) Public information.
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:383
1. Where useful, marks on structures may be set to show the
depth of inundation during the regional flood at appropriate
locations within the floodplain.
2. All available information in the form of maps, engineering data
and regulations shall be readily available and should be widely
distributed.
3. All legal descriptions of property in the floodplain should
include information relative to the floodplain zoning
classification when such property is transferred.
(10) Amendments:
(a) General. The Council may change or supplement the floodplain
zoning district boundaries and this section in the manner provided
by law. Actions which require an amendment include, but are not
limited to, the following:
1. Any change to the Official Floodplain Zoning Map, including
the floodway line or boundary of any floodplain area.
2. Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles
and floodplain zoning maps.
3. Any fill in the floodplain which raises the elevation of the filled
area to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and
is next to land lying outside the floodplain.
4. Any fill or floodplain encroachment that obstructs flow,
increasing regional flood height 0.01 foot or more.
5. Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning code required by § NR
116.05 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, or otherwise
required by law, or for changes by the City.
6. All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter
floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the
flood fringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a flood
insurance rate map requires prior approval by FEMA.
(b) Procedures. Amendments to this section may be made upon
petition of any interested party according to the provisions of
§ 62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes. Such petitions shall include all
necessary data required by Subsections (6)(d) and (9)(b)2.
1. Copies of any proposed amendment shall be referred to the
City Plan Commission and judiciary and ordinance review
committee for recommendation to the council and public
hearing. Copies of the proposed amendment and notice of the
public hearing shall be submitted to the appropriate district
office of the department for review before the hearing. The
§ 5-6-6 MONROE CODE § 5-6-6
1-1:384
§ 5-6-7. (HP-O) Historic Preservation Overlay Zoning District.
amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of
§ 62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
2. No amendment to the maps or this section shall become
effective until reviewed and approved by the department.
3. All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs
flow, increasing regional flood height 0.01 foot or more, shall
obtain flooding easements or other appropriate legal
arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and
notify local units of government before the amendment can be
approved by the Council.
4. For amendments in areas with no water surface profiles, the
City Plan Commission or Board of Appeals shall consider data
submitted by the department, the Zoning Administrator's
visual on-site inspections and other available information.
(11) Enforcement and penalties: A person who violates any provision of this
section shall upon conviction be subject to a Class 1 forfeiture. Each
day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every
violation of this section is a public nuisance and the creation may be
enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of the
City, the state, or any citizen thereof under § 87.30 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(1) Purpose: It is hereby declared a matter of public policy that the
protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of improvements or
sites of special character or special architectural, historic value is a
public necessity and is required promote the health, prosperity, safety
and welfare of the people. The purpose of this overlay district is to:
(a) Protect, enhance, and preserve improvements, sites and districts
which represent or reflect elements of Monroe's cultural, social,
economic, political and architectural history.
(b) Safeguard Monroe's historic, prehistoric and cultural heritage, as
embodied and reflected in such historic structures, sites and
districts.
(c) Stabilize and improve property values and enhance the visual and
aesthetic character of Monroe.
(d) Protect and enhance Monroe's attraction to residents, tourists, and
visitors, and support and stimulate business and industry in the
City.
(2) Land use regulations. Refer to the underlying zoning district.
(3) See § 5-7-8 for design standards applicable to the Historic Preservation
Overlay District.
§ 5-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-6-7
1-1:385
Chapter 5-7
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 5-7-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to indicate the standards and minimum
requirements for group and large developments, vehicle access, bicycle
and pedestrian access, visibility, off-street parking and traffic circulation,
off-street loading, exterior lighting, exterior storage, fencing, and outdoor
recreational space within the jurisdiction of this Title 5.
§ 5-7-2. Group and large development standards.
(4) See § 5-10-32 for procedures for design review in the Historic
Preservation Overlay District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards that
ensure group developments and large developments are properly
located and are compatible with the surrounding area and the overall
community character of the City of Monroe.
(2) Definitions.
(a) Group development.
1. Any development located on one lot and comprised of any
single instance or any combination of the following
development types:
a. Any multifamily residential building with nine or more
residential units.
b. Two or more principal structures on the same lot, whether
currently serving a single use or more than one use.
c. Any addition of principal buildings that increases the total
number of principal structures on the same lot to two or
more.
2. Common examples of group developments include shopping
centers, apartment or condominium complexes with nine or
more total units, and office centers where there are two or
more principal buildings.
(b) Large development.
1. Any new development containing any single structure or
combination of structures on one or more contiguous lots or
building sites on which the total combined gross floor area of
all new development exceeds 50,000 square feet.
§ 5-6-7 MONROE CODE § 5-7-2
1-1:386
2. Common examples of large developments include big-box
commercial uses.
(3) Exceptions. The following situations are exempt from the requirements
of this section.
(a) Structures within City parks.
(b) Development in the following zoning districts:
1. Planned Development District.
2. Business Park District.
3. Light Industrial District.
4. Heavy Industrial District.
5. Extraction Zoning District.
(c) Nonresidential buildings where it can be demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator that any principal building
can be subsequently subdivided with a lot and yards conforming to
the requirements of this Title 5.
(4) Review and approval.
(a) All group developments and large developments require a
conditional use permit, regardless of whether individual use(s)
within the development are permitted by right within the
applicable district. See § 5-10-28 for conditional use review and
approval procedure.
(b) Uses permitted in a group development and/or large development
include any land use that is either a permitted by right land use or a
use allowed by conditional use permit within the applicable zoning
district.
(c) Land uses permitted by right in the applicable zoning district shall
be permitted by right within an approved group and/or large
development, subject to the provisions of this section, unless
otherwise restricted by the conditions of approval imposed during
the conditional use approval for the group development and/or
large development as a whole.
(d) Land uses allowed by conditional use permit within the applicable
zoning district shall be allowed within the group development and/
or large development only with conditional use approval for that
land use category. The consideration of the conditional use for the
group development and/or large development may occur in
conjunction with the review for additional conditional land uses.
(e) The detailed land use regulations in Chapter 3 that pertain to each
proposed land uses shall also apply within a group development
§ 5-7-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-2
1-1:387
and/or large development, as will all other applicable provisions of
this Title 5.
(5) Changes to an approved group and/or large development.
(a) Following initial issuance of a conditional use permit for the group
development and/or large development, all subsequent changes
determined to be significant by the Zoning Administrator to site
design and building design (including addition of structures,
additions to structures, and expansions of parking or storage areas)
in the group development and/or large development shall require
an amendment to the approved conditional use permit regardless
of individual land use(s).
(b) Changes to individual land uses within a group development and/or
large development listed as permitted by right uses within the
applicable zoning district are allowed without amendment to the
group development and/or large development conditional use
permit, unless said conditional use permit placed restrictions on
change of use.
(c) Changes to individual land uses within a group development and/or
large development listed as conditional uses within the applicable
zoning district shall be allowed only by amendment to the
conditional use permit, regardless of whether or not said use
entails modifications to the building and/or site layout in the group
development and/or large development.
(6) Standards applicable to group developments and large developments.
(a) Land uses and development shall comply with the applicable
requirements of this Title 5, including, but not limited to, density,
intensity, bulk, setback, and building separation requirements;
building and site design standards; landscaping and green space
requirements; access, parking, loading requirements; and signage
requirements.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate how the proposed development
relates to each of the following criteria:
1. Complements the design and layout of nearby buildings and
developments.
2. Enhances, rather than detracts from, the desired character of
the surrounding area.
(c) Architectural quality. All buildings within the group and/or large
development shall be of compatible with one another in terms of
architectural quality and design, as determined by the Plan
Commission.
(7) General layout and future divisibility of group developments.
§ 5-7-2 MONROE CODE § 5-7-2
1-1:388
(a) Development located within a group development shall be located
so as to comply with the intent of this Title 5 regarding setbacks of
structures and buildings from lot lines. Building envelopes shall be
depicted on the site plan required for review of group
developments. The use of this approach to designing group
developments will facilitate the subdividing of group developments
in the future (if such action is desired).
(8) Roadway connections. All nonresidential projects shall have direct
access or access through an easement to an arterial or collector level
street, or to a local street if no other access is available, as deemed
appropriate by the City.
(9) Parking. Parking lots and parking structures should not visually
dominate the development site and should enhance the City's aesthetic
qualities and natural surroundings. Parking facilities should be
designed and landscaped with increased emphasis on pedestrianways
that provide public connectivity to and through the site. The visual
impacts of parking lots shall be mitigated through measures such as
landscaping, screening, or situating parking areas away from the front
of buildings.
(a) Parking lot designs in which the number of spaces exceeds the
minimum number of parking spaces by 25% or more shall be
allowed according to the regulations of § 5-7-11(7).
(b) Bicycle parking shall be provided in accordance with § 5-7-13.
(10) Outdoor display areas. Exterior display areas shall be permitted only
where clearly depicted on the approved site plan. All exterior display
areas shall be separated from motor vehicle routes by a minimum of five
feet or by a physical barrier visible to drivers and pedestrians.
(11) Outdoor storage uses and areas. Exterior storage structures or uses,
including the parking or storage of vehicles, trailers, equipment,
containers, crates, pallets, merchandise, materials, forklifts, trash,
recyclables, and all other items shall be permitted only where clearly
depicted and labeled on the approved site plan. Outdoor storage uses
and areas shall meet the screening requirements of § 5-7-26.
(12) Operations. No delivery, loading, unloading, trash removal or
compaction activity shall be permitted between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. unless sound barriers are provided that effectively reduce
noise emissions from such operations to a level of 45 db or lower, as
measured at the lot line of any adjoining property.
(13) Sidewalks. Sidewalks on site shall:
(a) Link the site to existing public sidewalks and pedestrian trails.
§ 5-7-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-2
1-1:389
(b) Be provided along the full length of any structure where it abuts a
parking lot and along the full length of any part of the site that
abuts a public street.
(c) Be located at least six feet from the facade of any building to
provide planting beds for foundation landscaping, except where
features such as arcades or entryways are part of the facade.
(14) On-site pedestrian walkways. On-site pedestrian walkways shall:
(a) Connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited
to, public sidewalks, street crossings and building entrances.
Where considered appropriate by the Plan Commission to enhance
their attractiveness, such walkways shall feature adjoining
landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds,
ground covers or other suitable landscaping elements.
(b) Include weather protection features such as awnings or arcades at
all customer entrances.
(c) Be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of durable
low-maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks or scored
concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort as well as the
attractiveness of the walkways.
(15) Landscaping. Landscaping shall meet the standards in Chapter 8.
(16) Lighting. On-site exterior lighting shall meet the standards in § 5-7-25.
(17) Signage. Signage shall meet the standards in Chapter 9. Exterior
signage should provide for modest, coordinated, and complimentary
exterior sign locations, configurations, and color throughout the site
and should not be visually dominating. All freestanding signage within
the development should complement signage affixed to structures
within the site. The Plan Commission may require that signs for
multiple businesses within the development be integrated and
consolidated into one or more sign structures.
(18) Additional Rules Applicable to Large Developments [as defined in
Subsection (2)(b), above].
(a) Size limitation. A large development may exceed 150,000 square
feet in size only if the general development plan includes the
following written findings:
1. That the proposed development exceeding 150,000 square feet
in size is reasonably necessary to accomplish the applicant's
business plan.
2. That the proposed development includes features in its design
that mitigate, to the extent reasonably possible, adverse
impacts resulting from its size and a summary of the particular
§ 5-7-2 MONROE CODE § 5-7-2
1-1:390
design features that will be used to mitigate such adverse
impacts.
3. That the proposed development can reasonably be expected to
produce economic benefits for the City and its citizens which
exceed the benefits that can be expected to accrue if the
development is less than 150,000 square feet in size.
(b) Building placement and site layout. Building placement and
orientation shall facilitate appropriate land use transitions and
appropriate traffic flow to adjoining roads and neighboring
commercial areas and neighborhoods and must forward community
character objectives as described in the City's Comprehensive
Plan.
(c) Central features and community space. Each large development
shall contribute to the establishment or enhancement of
community and public spaces by providing at least two of the
following, each of which shall have direct access to the public
sidewalk network, and such features shall be constructed of
materials that are not inferior to the principal materials of the
building and landscape:
1. Patio or seating area.
2. Pedestrian plaza with benches.
3. Transportation center.
4. Window shopping walkway.
5. Outdoor playground area.
6. Kiosk area, water feature.
7. Clock tower.
8. Such deliberately shaped area or a focal feature or amenity
that, in the judgment of the Plan Commission, adequately
enhances such community and public spaces.
(d) Compatibility report. The City may require a written compatibility
report citing adequate evidence that the proposed building and
overall development project shall be compatible with the City's
Comprehensive Plan and any detailed neighborhood or special area
plan for the area. The Compatibility Report shall specifically
address one or more of the following items:
1. Compatibility report narrative. The City may require a
narrative describing how the proposed development meets the
building placement and site layout requirements of Subsection
(b), above.
§ 5-7-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-2
1-1:391
2. Traffic impact analysis. The City may require that a traffic
impact analysis (TIA) be completed in accordance with the
most current revision of the Traffic Impact Analysis Guidelines
published by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. It
shall be conducted by a third party agreed upon by both the
applicant and City at the applicant's expense. Such traffic
impact analysis shall require the following components:
a. A demonstration that vehicle access shall be designed to
accommodate peak on-site traffic volumes without
disrupting traffic on public streets or impairing pedestrian
safety. This shall be accomplished through adequate
parking lot design and capacity; access drive entry throat
length; design, location, and number of traffic control
devices; and sidewalks.
b. Where the traffic impact analysis indicates that a project
may cause off-site public roads, intersections, or
interchanges to function below a level of service C, the
City may deny the application, require a size reduction in
the proposed development, and/or require the developer
to construct and/or pay for required off-site improvements
to achieve a level of service C for a planning horizon of a
minimum of 10 years assuming full buildout of the site.
c. The City has the option to require a trip generation study
in lieu of a full traffic impact analysis.
3. Transportation demand management. The City may require
that a transportation demand management plan (TDM) be
completed in accordance with Wisconsin Department of
Transportation requirements for content and format.
(e) Small area plan. The City may require that a detailed small area
plan be submitted and approved by the Plan Commission and
Common Council. The detailed small area plan shall be prepared
for all areas within 1,320 feet of the subject property (as measured
from the outer perimeter of the subject property or group of
properties proposed for development), and any other nearby lands
as determined by the Plan Commission to be part of the defined
neighborhood or area. The detailed small area plan shall contain
the following specific elements, drawn to scale:
1. Demonstration that the proposed small area plan is in harmony
with the land use, multimodal transportation, utility,
stormwater management, community character provisions of
the City's Comprehensive Plan.
2. Proposed land use with specific zoning districts and existing
land uses, if present.
§ 5-7-2 MONROE CODE § 5-7-2
1-1:392
3. Complete transportation network, including pedestrian and
bicycle facilities and transit routes and stops, where
applicable.
4. Conceptual stormwater management facilities.
5. Proposed public facility sites, including parks, schools,
conservation areas, public safety facilities and public utility
facilities.
6. Proposed community character themes, including building
materials, landscaping, streetscaping, and signage.
7. Transitional treatments such as berms and/or landscaping
between areas with differing land uses or character.
(f) Economic impact analysis. The City may require an analysis of the
economic impact of the proposed large development funded by the
applicant and prepared by a qualified professional. At a minimum,
the economic impact analysis shall contain:
1. A comprehensive list of assumptions used in completing the
study. A draft of such assumptions shall be presented to the
Planning Commission for review and the Planning Commission
may direct that modifications be made to the assumptions and
redirect the focus of the study.
2. A description of the market area for the proposed large
development.
3. An evaluation of the potential economic impacts of the
proposed large development on the City's business districts.
4. The anticipated change in sales tax and property tax revenues
within the City resulting from development of the large
development. If as a result of the large development it is
anticipated that a reduction in sales tax or property tax
revenues generated from any other properties or businesses in
the City will occur, the anticipated reductions shall be
identified and separately analyzed.
5. The projected net costs and long-term benefits to the City
related to necessary improvements to public services and
infrastructure.
(g) Municipal services impact. A municipal services impact analysis of
the proposed large development funded by the applicant and
prepared by a qualified professional that identifies and analyzes
each anticipated impact of the development on municipal services,
including sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water, fire protection and
police protection services.
§ 5-7-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-2
1-1:393
§ 5-7-3. Exterior building design standards.
(h) Independent review of impacts. The Plan Commission shall have
authority to accept or reject any impact analysis presented by the
applicant. If determined necessary by the Plan Commission and
authorized by the Common Council, the applicant shall provide
adequate funding to the City to hire one or more consultants,
selected by the Plan Commission, having appropriate education,
training and experience to complete and present any impact study
and analysis required by this section or to review the analysis
presented by the applicant.
(i) Analysis of vacated large-scale retail store. If the applicant knows
or has reason to believe that an occupant of the proposed large
development will relocate from an existing location in the City, then
the applicant shall provide to the Plan Commission an analysis of
the anticipated short- and long-term reuses of the existing building
that will be vacated. An applicant shall be considered to have
reason to believe that an anticipated occupant of the proposed
large development will relocate from an existing location if, before
recommendation by the Plan Commission, a written or oral
commitment to relocate to the development has been made by such
anticipated occupant even if there remain one or more unsatisfied
contingencies related to such commitment. Approval of the
proposed large development may be conditioned on one or more of
the following:
1. Reuse. Reasonable assurances that a productive use of a
vacated site will be made within a reasonable period and that
such reuse will continue for an extended period.
2. Redevelopment. If a vacated site is not capable of productive
reuse, reasonable assurances that such site will be
redeveloped within a reasonable period.
(j) Reuse of site. The application shall address in detail how the
applicant intends to assure reuse of the site in the case that the
applicant abandons the development. The Plan Commission may
require that the development be designed and developed to include
features that enhance the flexibility of the site and structures (such
as partitions or multiple entryways) so as to facilitate reuse by
multiple tenants if the building or development is abandoned.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the design and
materials used for the exterior of buildings and structures within the
City so as to maintain and enhance the attractiveness and values of
property in the community. This is further intended to support the
creation of a pedestrian-oriented urban environment that emphasizes
architectural and urban design principles of human scale and visual
interest. Additionally, this chapter is intended to ensure the
development of structures that maintain a long-lasting appearance;
§ 5-7-2 MONROE CODE § 5-7-3
1-1:394
withstand the effects of time and exposure to the elements; resist
damage in areas with high vehicular and pedestrian traffic and in areas
where larger equipment that could cause damage is commonly used;
that maintain a consistent character of development based on land use
and zoning district particular to each development; and that contribute
to the long-term economic and social vitality of the City of Monroe.
(2) Applicability.
(a) New construction. The requirements of this section shall apply to
all structures and buildings within the City constructed after the
effective date of this Title 5.
(b) Additions.
1. All additions shall match or be substantially similar to the
design and materials of the existing building.
2. Additions to buildings constructed after the effective date of
this Title 5 shall comply with the standards of this section.
3. Buildings constructed prior to the effective date of this Title 5.
a. If additions to an existing building(s) constructed prior to
the effective date of this Title 5 are less than or equal to
50% of the existing floor area of the building (measured
cumulatively from adoption of this Title 5), the standards
contained herein shall not apply but shall be regulated per
Subsection (2)(b)1, above.
b. If additions to an existing building(s) constructed prior to
the effective date of this Title 5 are greater than 50% of
the existing floor area of the building (measured
cumulatively from adoption of this chapter), the standards
contained herein shall apply.
(c) Alterations. For buildings constructed prior to the effective date of
this Title 5, alterations that do not impact the floor area of the
building shall comply with the standards of this section or shall
match or be substantially similar to the existing building design
and materials. Ordinary repairs and maintenance are not
considered alterations.
(d) Exceptions and appeals.
1. Exceptions. Exceptions to the building design standards set
forth in this section may be granted by the Zoning
Administrator to permit substitute building materials or
construction of comparable quality or design when it can be
demonstrated that the provisions of this section are infeasible
and that the granting of such exception is in keeping with the
purpose of this section. Decisions rendered by the Zoning
Administrator may be appealed to the Plan Commission.
§ 5-7-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-3
1-1:395
2. Appeals. Any person affected by a decision of the Zoning
Administrator may petition for a hearing before the Plan
Commission.
3. Variances. The Plan Commission is authorized to grant
variances from the strict application of the building design
standards within this section when it is claimed that the intent
of the standards in this section have been incorrectly
interpreted, do not apply, or their enforcement causes
unnecessary hardship.
a. The procedure for the granting of variances by the Plan
Commission shall be the same as that required for
variances in § 5-10-41, with the exception that the Plan
Commission shall serve the role of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
b. When taking action, the Plan Commission shall make
findings as described in § 5-10-41(6)(a).
(e) Design standards by land use. Beyond the rules in this section,
additional building design standards apply to the following land
uses:
1. Single- and two-family uses (§ 5-7-4).
2. Multifamily uses (§ 5-7-5).
3. Commercial uses and mixed-use buildings (§ 5-7-6).
4. Industrial uses (§ 5-7-7).
(f) Beyond the rules in this section, additional building design
standards may apply to:
1. Group and large developments (§ 5-7-2).
2. Conditional use permits (§ 5-10-28).
3. Planned development districts (§ 5-10-33).
4. Historic Preservation Overlay District (§ 5-6-7).
(3) Review and approval. Through the building permit and/or site plan
review process, the City of Monroe shall be responsible and have
authority to hear, review, and act upon all proposed exterior
architectural plans for all proposed development.
(4) Exterior building materials. The four classes of building materials
referenced in this Title 5 have the following meanings:
(a) Class I materials include brick; brick veneer; stone; stone veneer;
glass (curtain/storefront); stucco; and fiber cement siding.
§ 5-7-3 MONROE CODE § 5-7-3
1-1:396
§ 5-7-4. Design standards for single- and two-family uses.
(b) Class II materials include split-face or decorative block; EIFS; wood
or wood composite siding; and seamless metal siding.
(c) Class III materials include architectural/decorative metal panels;
residential aluminum siding; vinyl siding; brick panels; and stone
panels.
(d) Class IV materials include smooth-face or non-decorative block,
concrete panels (tilt-up or precast); asphaltic siding; metal siding
with seams; poly-roofing siding; nondecorative metal panels;
corrugated metal; nondecorative wood (plywood, chipboard, etc.)
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to maintain the basic
architectural quality of residences within the community, to minimize
architectural and building construction practices that may detract from
the character and appearance of the neighborhood as a whole, and to
ensure compatible design between existing and new homes. These
standards apply to all single- and two-family structures within the City
of Monroe, with the exception of mobile homes defined in § 5-3-6(8).
(2) Existing buildings: windows and doors.
(a) Existing window openings on the front facade including gables or
the first 20 feet of the side facade (extending from the front facade
plane) shall be maintained and not be closed or filled (totally or
partially), except as provided for in Subsection (2)(a)3, below.
1. If standard-sized replacement windows cannot fit into an
existing window opening, a ten-percent variation in the heightto-
width proportion for replacement windows is permitted.
2. Window relocation is permitted on a side facade if the
replacement window is located within the first 20 feet of the
side facade (extending from the front facade plane) and is
identical or similar to the existing window in terms of size and
style.
3. Existing windows on side facades may be closed or filled if such
windows are located in rooms or areas of the home not
typically expected to contain windows such as bathrooms,
closets, mechanical rooms, and stairwells.
(b) No existing window or door openings on any facade or gable end
shall be boarded up. Temporary closure shall be permitted for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
(c) Existing door openings on the front facade or the first 20 feet of the
side facades shall not be closed or filled. Temporary closure shall
be permitted for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 5-7-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-4
1-1:397
1. Door openings may be relocated but shall remain on the same
facade or another facade fronting a public street.
(3) Existing buildings: porches, balconies, decks, and patios.
(a) Porches may be constructed on any facade of a structure.
1. A minimum of 25% of the porch area shall be open or contain
translucent window and door openings so that no more than
75% of the porch area is enclosed by solid walls.
(b) Balconies and patios shall be constructed only on a building's rear
or interior side facades, with the following exceptions:
1. Lots with public alley frontage and double-fronted-through-lots
shall be exempt from this requirement.
2. Balconies and patios are permitted on a secondary street
frontage of a corner lot if the patio faces a park or other
neighborhood amenity.
(c) Porches, decks, and patios and shall be constructed in cedar,
cypress, redwood, or appropriate composite materials such as
wood sawdust or mineral composite/high-density polyurethane
plastic (HDPE), plastic, and pressure-treated lumber. Porches,
decks, and patios may be constructed in decorative metal, wrought
iron, metal cable, or glass, if in keeping with the architectural style
of the building, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(d) Porches, decks, and patios that can be viewed from a public street
shall include elements such columns, posts, railings, and spindles/
balusters.
1. Elements constructed in pressure-treated lumber shall be
painted or stained after a curing period of no greater than 18
months.
2. Spindles or balusters shall not be secured to the outside face of
the deck or other supports, including, but not limited to, rails,
rim joists, beams, or columns.
a. Fasteners that connect vertical components (spindles,
balusters, posts, etc.) to horizontal components (top or
bottom rails) shall be concealed so that they are not visible
from the public right-of-way.
(e) In order to conceal the exposed edge of the deck, decks that can be
viewed from a public street shall incorporate landscaping, lattice,
or a wooden board (or other flat piece of material) against the front
of the deck platform that covers the edges of the deck floorboards.
(f) Patios shall be constructed using brick, brick or stone pavers, or
concrete.
§ 5-7-4 MONROE CODE § 5-7-4
1-1:398
1. Water-permeable pavers are permitted.
2. Landscape treatments and berms may be used to elevate a
patio to meet rear or side entrance grades.
(4) Existing buildings: changes and additions.
(a) Changes to existing buildings. For the purposes of this section, a
change to an existing principal structure is considered any
alteration or demolition to the materials, wall plane, and/or
architectural features of any front or side facade.
(b) Exterior materials. The exterior materials used for new additions
and changes shall be the same materials or combination of
materials as used on the original building.
1. New additions and changes may be constructed using
alternative exterior materials if said materials are
complementary to the existing materials and tie the addition/
change and the original house together. Some material
contrast is permitted, but the difference between new and
original materials shall be subtle. For example, if the original
house is sided with wood clapboard, then fiber cement or vinyl
siding of a similar size and width would be suitable for an
addition.
2. The color(s) of materials used for new additions and changes
shall match or be complementary to the color(s) of the original
structure.
3. Exterior patchwork, repair, or reconstruction that results in a
multitextured or multicolored effect or an appearance not
consistent with the overall design character of the original
structure is not permitted.
4. Standing seam metal roofs shall be coated.
(c) Orientation. Additions to a principal structure and other changes
that extend the building's footprint shall be placed on a rear facade,
or side facade if rear is not practical, in order to have a minimal
impact on the overall scale and character of the original house.
1. New additions may be built with or without a setback from the
front wall plane of the original house.
2. An addition that extends beyond the front wall plane (or the
street side wall plane on a corner lot) of the original house is
permitted, provided there is a lack of sufficient space in the
house's rear or interior side yard, and provided the addition's
overall design matches or complements the original home's
design.
(d) Height and footprint.
§ 5-7-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-4
1-1:399
1. Additions and changes that increase the building's height shall
not be taller than the principal structure's dominant or highest
roof ridgeline and shall not overpower the principal structure's
overall scale and massing, except as provided below.
a. An exception to the height standard can be made if the
addition conforms and is compatible with the principal
structure's overall architectural style and roof shapes and
becomes an integral part of the structure's overall building
form and design.
2. The footprint of an addition shall not be more than 50% of the
principal structure's existing footprint.
(e) Facades.
1. Changes and additions that create blank walls on any front or
side facade are not permitted.
2. A front facade must have a minimum of 25% of its wall space
devoted to window or door openings.
3. A street side or first 20 feet of the side facade (extending from
the front facade plane) must have a minimum of 15% of its wall
space devoted to window or door openings.
a. This design standard shall not apply if said wall area is
part of an attached garage.
(5) New construction: principal structures on infill sites.
(a) Setbacks. Front yard setbacks for new principal structures shall be
consistent and align with the prevailing building setbacks found
along the block and surrounding neighborhood, as follows:
1. The front yard setback of a new principal structure on an infill
site shall be determined by the existing front yard setbacks of
the principal buildings on the two properties abutting the
subject property's side yards. The front yard setback shall be
no greater than the largest setback of said abutting properties
and shall be no less than the smallest setback of said abutting
properties.
a. If either or both said abutting properties are vacant, the
minimum front yard setback of the zoning district of the
subject property shall be used.
b. If a new residential building is being constructed adjacent
to an existing nonresidential use, the front yard setback of
the new residential building shall be no greater than the
setback of the abutting residential property, or no less
than the minimum front yard setback of the zoning district
of the subject property, whichever is less.
§ 5-7-4 MONROE CODE § 5-7-4
1-1:400
c. If a new residential building is being constructed between
two existing nonresidential uses, the minimum front yard
setback of the zoning district of the subject property shall
be used.
(b) Exterior materials.
1. The exterior materials used on the front and side facades shall
be visually compatible with those used on other buildings on
the block and in the surrounding neighborhood.
2. Modern materials may be used provided they are suitable to
the style and overall design of the principal structure.
3. Exterior patchwork or reconstruction that results in a
multitextured or multicolored effect or an appearance not
consistent with the overall design character of the structure is
not permitted.
4. Standing seam metal roofs shall be coated.
(c) Orientation.
1. A new principal structure, front facade, and primary entrance
shall be oriented to the primary street.
2. On corner lots, the principal structure may be oriented to the
side street provided it meets the requirements for facades
under Subsection (f), below.
3. Front entrances shall be identified by a stoop, entrance
platform (with or without stairs), or porch. Full front and
wraparound porches that incorporate the front entrance are
also permitted.
(d) Height. The height of a new principal structure shall be compatible
with those of surrounding buildings.
1. The height of a new principal structure shall not exceed the
height of the tallest single-family or two-family dwelling
immediately adjacent to the subject property by more than one
story.
(e) Porches, decks and patios. Porches, decks, and patios for new
construction on infill sites shall meet the regulations for existing
buildings in Subsection (3), above.
(f) Facades. Designs that result in blank walls on any front or side
facade are not permitted and shall meet the regulations for existing
buildings as outlined in Subsection (4)(f), above.
1. The requirement that the minimum first 20 feet of the side
facade (extending from the front facade plane) to have a
minimum of 15% of its wall space devoted to window or door
§ 5-7-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-4
1-1:401
§ 5-7-5. Design standards for multifamily uses.
These standards apply to all multifamily buildings and structures
constructed after the effective date of chapter. These standards also apply
to apartments with limited commercial land uses.
openings shall not apply if said wall area is part of an attached
garage.
(6) New construction: principal structures in new neighborhoods (non-infill
sites).
(a) Exterior materials.
1. New single-family and two-family dwelling units shall be clad
in Class I, Class II, or Class III materials.
2. Class IV materials are prohibited.
3. Standing seam metal roofs shall be coated.
(b) Orientation.
1. A new principal structure's front facade and primary entrance
shall be oriented to the primary street.
2. On corner lots, the principal structure may be oriented to the
side street provided it meets the requirements for facades
under Subsection (d), below.
3. Front entrances shall be identified by a stoop, entrance
platform (with or without stairs), or porch. Full front and
wraparound porches that incorporate the front entrance are
also permitted.
(c) Porches, decks and patios. Porches, decks, and patios shall meet
the regulations for existing buildings in Subsection (3), above.
(d) Facades. Designs that result in blank walls on any front or side
facade, are not permitted and shall meet the regulations for
existing buildings as outlined in Subsection (4)(f), above.
1. The requirement that the minimum first 20 feet of the side
facade (extending from the front facade plane) to have a
minimum of 15% of its wall space devoted to window or door
openings shall not apply if said wall area is part of an attached
garage.
(1) Exterior materials. Multifamily buildings shall be clad in Class I, II or III
materials. Class IV materials are prohibited.
(a) Materials of comparable quality may be substituted for any class of
material or be used as a decorative element if the material can be
§ 5-7-4 MONROE CODE § 5-7-5
1-1:402
removed or replaced with a permitted exterior material, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(b) Standing seam metal roofs shall be coated.
(2) Building entrance.
(a) The primary entrance shall be on the front facade facing the street.
(b) The primary entrance shall be covered a minimum of three feet
from the door. Recessed entries shall be deemed to meet this
requirement.
(c) Exterior entry doors for individual units shall be residential in style
and shall include frame and panel (real or decorative).
(d) Exterior entry doors for multiple units may be residential (as
described above) or commercial in style (glass).
(3) Facade articulation.
(a) Facade lengths shall not be greater than 40 feet without
articulation such as:
1. Recesses or projections that step back or project a portion of
the main facade plane.
2. Recesses or projections of upper floors from the ground floor
facade plane.
3. Vertical division using different textures or materials.
4. Division of the facade into individual units through the use of
windows, entrances, arcades, porches, decks, balconies,
lighting, etc.
5. Roof form variation such as the inclusion of dormers, change in
roof lines, or change in roof type.
(b) On facades facing the street, windows and/or doors shall be
required in order to promote a visual connection to the street.
1. The total area of windows and doors, including trim, shall
comprise a minimum of 20% of the total facade area, excluding
gables.
(4) Wall details, trim, and windows.
(a) Exterior windows shall be appropriate to the architectural
character of the building.
(b) All facade openings shall be articulated or appropriately trimmed
through the use of materials such as lintels, sills, surrounds,
shutters, etc.
§ 5-7-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-5
1-1:403
(c) Natural wood shall be painted or stained unless it is cedar, redwood
or other naturally weather-resistant species intended to be
exposed.
(d) Pressure-treated lumber shall be painted or stained after a curing
period of no greater than 18 months.
(5) Patios, decks, and balconies.
(a) Ground-level patios and decks facing the street shall be bordered
with landscape treatments. Covered porches are exempt from this
requirement.
(b) Exterior stairs leading to a deck or balcony are not permitted on
the front or street side of a building. On corner lots, exterior stairs
shall be permitted on the interior side facade.
(c) Exterior corridors shall be covered by the building roof, shall be
located within the footprint of the building foundation, and shall
not be visible from the street.
(d) Upper-story decks and balconies shall be cantilevered, supported
by vertical columns, or supported from above.
(6) Mechanical and exterior building systems.
(a) Drainage pipes on exterior walls shall match or be complementary
to the color of the roof and wall onto which they are mounted.
(b) Air intakes and exhaust vents for high-energy gas appliances and
meters shall not be permitted on any facade that faces a public
street, unless they are screened or match the color of the facade on
which they are located.
(c) Building-mounted equipment.
1. Window-mounted air conditioning units shall not be permitted
in any window that faces a public street.
a. When no alternative is available, units shall be masked
(painted, encased, etc.) in order to blend into the
building's exterior finish and shall be flush-mounted so as
not to project beyond the main plane of the facade more
than necessary.
2. Building-mounted equipment installed on the facade visible
from an adjacent public right-of-way or residential district
must be disguised with screening that is:
a. Architecturally compatible with the primary structure to
which the equipment is attached. Screening materials
shall be identical to or substantially similar to the
materials used on the building facade to which the
equipment is attached.
§ 5-7-5 MONROE CODE § 5-7-5
1-1:404
§ 5-7-6. Design standards for commercial uses and mixed-use
buildings.
These standards apply to all commercial and structures constructed after
the effective date of chapter. These standards also apply to mixed-use
buildings and live/work units.
b. Incorporated as part of the building wall and/or flushmounted
so as not to project beyond the main plane of the
facade.
c. Consistent with the color of the structure to which the
equipment is attached.
(d) Roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted equipment shall be
screened, preferably by parapet walls. Other acceptable screen
types shall be:
1. Architecturally compatible with the primary structure to which
the equipment is attached. Screening materials shall be
identical to or substantially similar to the materials used on the
building facade to which the equipment is attached.
2. Consistent with the color of the structure to which the
equipment is attached.
3. Designed to be an integral part of the building's architectural
design and give the impression that it is something other than
a mechanical screen.
(e) See § 5-7-26(6) for screening requirements for ground-mounted
mechanical systems.
(7) Wall- or roof-mounted lighting.
(a) Full cutoff light fixtures are required.
(b) The design, color, height, location, and light quality of all onbuilding
light fixtures shall be consistent throughout the entire site,
unless the building is divided into individual components; in such
case, all on-building light fixtures shall be consistent within each
individual component.
(c) All entrances shall be lit after sunset. The minimum illumination at
each entrance shall be 1.0 footcandles.
(1) Orientation.
(a) Buildings are encouraged to be oriented so that the front facade
faces the road with the highest traffic volumes.
(b) Facades facing the road with the highest traffic volumes shall be
designed to have the appearance of a front facade and shall include
windows, doors and/or other architectural components typically
§ 5-7-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-6
1-1:405
associated with front facades, as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
(c) Service or loading areas shall not be permitted between the
building and the public street.
(d) Drive-through windows shall not be located between the building
and the public street.
(2) Facade articulation.
(a) Facade lengths shall not be greater than 70 feet without
articulation such as:
1. Division of the facade into individual components (i.e.,
storefronts, distinct uses) through the use of architectural
elements such as porches, balconies, windows, covered
entrances, arcades, awnings, marquees, lighting, signage, etc.
2. Recesses or projections that step back or project a portion of
the main facade plane.
3. Recesses or projections of upper floors from the ground floor
facade plane.
4. Vertical division using different textures or materials.
5. Roof form variation such as the inclusion of dormers, change in
roof lines, or change in roof type.
(b) Buildings shall be designed to provide interest and variety. Flat,
unadorned walls shall be avoided. Each facade of a building shall
include at least one design element to break up the flatness of
blank walls and shall at a minimum include varied materials or
colors, change in texture, expressed joints and details, or surface
relief.
1. Additional elements used to break up the facade may include
balconies, lintels, sills, headers, belt courses, reveals, pilasters,
windows, chimneys, and other ornamental features as deemed
appropriate by the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Exterior materials. Commercial buildings shall be predominately clad in
Class I materials. Class II and Class III materials may be used as
accents and trim not to exceed 50% of the total building facade. Class
IV materials are prohibited.
(a) Rear building elevations not facing a public street or public parking
lot shall be exempt from this requirement.
(b) Materials of comparable quality may be substituted for any class of
material or be used as a decorative element if the material can be
removed or replaced with a permitted exterior material, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
§ 5-7-6 MONROE CODE § 5-7-6
1-1:406
(4) Building entrance.
(a) The main entrance shall be clearly defined and accentuated
through the use of detailing, distinctive materials, and/or colors,
projections or recesses, porticos, covered entrances, stoops, or
other features as deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator.
(5) Mechanical and exterior building systems.
(a) Drainage pipes on exterior walls shall match or be complementary
to the color of the roof and wall onto which they are mounted.
(b) Air intakes and exhaust vents for high-energy gas appliances and
meters shall not be permitted on any facade that faces a public
street.
(c) Building-mounted equipment.
1. Window-mounted air conditioning units shall not be permitted
in any window that faces a public street.
a. When no alternative is available, units shall be masked
(painted, encased, etc.) in order to blend into the
building's exterior finish and shall be flush-mounted so as
not to project beyond the main plane of the facade.
2. Building-mounted equipment installed on the facade visible
from an adjacent public right-of-way or residential district
must be disguised with screening that is:
a. Architecturally compatible with the primary structure to
which the equipment is attached. Screening materials
shall be identical to or substantially similar to the
materials used on the building facade to which the
equipment is attached.
b. Incorporated as part of the building wall and/or flushmounted
so as not to project beyond the main plane of the
facade.
c. Consistent with the color of the structure to which the
equipment is attached.
(d) Roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted equipment shall be
screened, preferably by parapet walls.
1. Screening shall be architecturally compatible with the primary
structure to which the equipment is attached. Screening
materials shall be identical to or substantially similar to the
materials used on the building facade to which the equipment
is attached.
2. Equipment shall be consistent with the color of the structure to
which the equipment is attached.
§ 5-7-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-6
1-1:407
§ 5-7-7. Design standards for industrial uses.
3. Screening shall be designed to be an integral part of the
building's architectural design and give the impression that it
is something other than a mechanical screen.
(e) See § 5-7-26(6) for screening requirements for ground-mounted
mechanical systems.
(6) Wall- or roof-mounted lighting.
(a) Full cutoff light fixtures are required at each entrance.
(b) The design, color, height, location, and light quality of all onbuilding
light fixtures shall be consistent throughout the entire site,
unless the building is divided into individual components; in such
case, all on-building light fixtures shall be consistent within each
individual component.
(c) All entrances shall be lit after sunset during business hours. The
minimum illumination at each entrance shall be 1.0 footcandles.
(1) Architectural design.
(a) Buildings shall be designed to provide interest and variety. Flat,
unadorned walls shall be avoided.
(b) Buildings shall be oriented so as to face the road with the highest
traffic volumes. This requirement shall not apply to buildings with
frontage on state or federal highways, unless there is direct access
from the development to the highway.
1. If a visitor, office, and/or customer entrance component is
included in the building, such space(s) shall be clearly defined
and accentuated through the use of detailing, windows,
distinctive materials and/or colors, projections or recesses, or
other architectural features as deemed appropriate by the
Zoning Administrator.
(2) Exterior materials. Industrial buildings shall be clad in Class I, II or III
materials. Certain Class IV materials are also acceptable as described
below.
(a) For all facades facing a public street, a minimum of 15% of the
facade shall be composed of Class I building materials.
1. This requirement may be reduced to 10% of the facade,
provided that other elements are incorporated into the
building and site design, such as facade articulation, increased
landscaping, or other improvements approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
§ 5-7-6 MONROE CODE § 5-7-7
1-1:408
(b) Smooth-faced/nondecorative block may be used if enhanced on all
elevations with Class I or II materials in combination with
decorative fascia, overhangs, trim, lintels, sills, headers, belt
courses, reveals, pilasters, windows, or other architectural features
as deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator. In such cases,
Class I or II materials shall amount to at least 15% of each facade.
(c) Concrete panels (tilt-up/precast) may be used if they are part of a
palette of permitted materials or if they incorporate horizontal and
vertical articulation including, but not limited to, changes in color
or texture.
(d) Nondecorative metal panels may be used if enhanced on all
elevations with Class I or II materials in combination with
decorative fascia, overhangs, trim, lintels, sills, headers, belt
courses, reveals, pilasters, windows, chimney, or other
architectural features as deemed appropriate by the Zoning
Administrator. In such cases, Class I or II materials shall amount at
least 15% of each facade.
1. In the RH-35, LI, and HI Zoning Districts, visible exterior
fasteners shall be the same color as the attached wall for any
principal or accessory building visible from a public street.
2. In all other zoning districts, exterior wall fasteners shall be
fully concealed from view.
(e) Materials of comparable quality may be substituted for any class of
material or be used as a decorative element if the material can be
removed or replaced with a permitted exterior material, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Mechanical and exterior building systems.
(a) Applicability. See § 5-7-26(6) to determine whether screening is
required.
(b) Drainage pipes on exterior walls shall match or be complementary
to the color of the roof and wall onto which they are mounted.
(c) Building-mounted equipment.
1. Building-mounted equipment installed on the facade visible
from an adjacent public right-of-way or residential district
must be disguised or screened in one of the following ways:
a. Architecturally compatible with the primary structure to
which the equipment is attached. Screening materials
shall be identical to or substantially similar to the
materials used on the building facade to which the
equipment is attached.
§ 5-7-7 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-7
1-1:409
§ 5-7-8. Design standards in the Historic Preservation Overlay
District.
b. Incorporated as part of the building wall and/or flushmounted
so as not to project beyond the main plane of the
facade.
c. Consistent with the color of the structure to which the
equipment is attached.
(d) Roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted equipment visible from an
adjacent public right-of-way or residential district shall be
screened, preferably by parapet walls. Other acceptable screen
types shall be:
1. Architecturally compatible with the primary structure to which
the equipment is attached. Screening materials shall be
identical to or substantially similar to the materials used on the
building facade to which the equipment is attached.
2. Consistent with the color of the structure to which the
equipment is attached.
3. Designed to be an integral part of the building's architectural
design and give the impression that it is something other than
a mechanical screen.
(1) Purpose. This district is intended to implement the urban design
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan by preserving and
enhancing the historical quality of the downtown and by attaining a
consistent visually pleasing image for the downtown area, as defined by
the mapped boundaries of the Historic Preservation Overlay District.
(2) Applicability. The regulations of this section shall apply to new
development and changes to the exterior of any building within the
mapped boundaries of the Historic Preservation Overlay District.
(3) Review and approval.
(a) There are three categories of review in this district:
1. Renovation review:
a. Repair or maintenance of the exterior appearance of a
property such as repainting re-roofing, residing or
replacing with identical colors, finishes, and materials;
b. Any change in fencing, paving, or signage; and
c. Painting with new colors from the preapproved color
palette for the Historic Preservation Overlay District.
2. Design alteration review. Change only in the exterior
appearance of any building such as roofing, siding,
§ 5-7-7 MONROE CODE § 5-7-8
1-1:410
architectural component substitution, or painting with a new
color that is not on the preapproved color palette for the
Historic Preservation Overlay District.
3. Project review. Modification to the physical configuration of a
property such as the erection of a new building, the demolition
of an existing building, or the addition or removal of bulk to an
existing building.
(b) Plan Commission review and approval may be required. The three
categories and procedural requirements for review and approval
are described fully in § 5-10-32.
(c) Design standards for changes meeting the criteria for renovation
review are found in § 5-7-8(5), below. Design standards for changes
meeting the criteria for design alteration review or project review
are found in § 5-7-8(6), below.
(d) Designated historic structures. These regulations are separate and
in addition to requirements that may exist related to changes to
local, state, and national landmarks and properties. Prior to taking
action, the Plan Commission shall consult with the Historic
Preservation Commission for all properties designated as historic,
contributing to a historic district, or considered by a study or
survey to be eligible for listing on a local, state, or national register.
(4) Design theme. The design theme for the Historic Preservation Overlay
District is based on its historical, pedestrian-oriented development
pattern that incorporates retail, residential, and institutional uses.
Building orientation and character includes minimum setbacks at the
edge of the sidewalk, multistory structures, use of alleys for access, and
on-street or other off-site parking. The design theme is characterized by
a variety of architectural styles popular at the time, including
Italianate, Romanesque, and Neoclassical, in a two- or three-story
format with office, storage, or residential located over commercial. The
facades of these buildings have a traditional Main Street storefront
appearance, are relatively small in scale, have street yard and side yard
setbacks of zero feet, have prominent horizontal and vertical patterns
formed by regularly spaced window and door openings, detailed
cornice designs, rich detailing in masonry coursing, window detailing
and ornamentation, and are predominately brick, stone, or wood.
Exterior building materials are of high quality. Exterior appurtenances
are minimal. Exterior colors are harmonious, simple, and muted.
Exterior signage blends, rather than contrasts, with buildings in terms
of coloring (complementary to building), location (on-building), size
(small), and number (few).
(5) Design standards for project review (new construction, building
additions, and building alterations).
(a) The design standards contained in this subsection shall apply to all
changes meeting the criteria for project review (including all new
§ 5-7-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-8
1-1:411
buildings, building additions, and new building appurtenances).
Such activities shall correspond to the following:
1. Urban design guidelines as determined by the Historic
Preservation Commission and as evidenced by certain existing
structures within the downtown.
2. The following requirements for building setback; height;
building mass; horizontal rhythms (created by the placement
and design of facade openings and related elements such as
piers, columns); vertical rhythms (created by the placement
and design of facade details such as sills, transoms, cornices
and sign bands); roof forms; exterior materials; exterior
surface features and appurtenances; exterior colors; exterior
signage; on-site landscaping; exterior lighting; parking and
loading area design; and the use of screening.
Figure 5-7-8a: Architectural Components
(b) Building setback. Throughout the district, the setback of buildings
from street yard and side yard property lines shall be compatible
with existing buildings in the immediate area which conform to the
design theme described in Subsection (4) above, as determined by
the Historic Preservation Commission.
(c) Building height.
1. Throughout the district, the height of buildings shall be
compatible with existing buildings in the immediate area which
conform to the design theme described in Subsection (4)
above, as determined by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
2. Buildings shall not be more than two stories taller than the
height of a building of similar use on one of the immediately
adjoining properties. See Figure 5-7-8b. Taller building heights
may be approved by conditional use permit.
§ 5-7-8 MONROE CODE § 5-7-8
1-1:412
Figure 5-7-8b: Building Height Example
(d) Building mass.
1. Throughout the district, the mass of buildings shall be
compatible with existing buildings in the immediate area which
conform to the design theme described in Subsection (4)
above, as determined by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
2. The characteristic proportion (relationship between facade
height and width) of the design theme shall be maintained.
3. Building mass for large structures (with a facade area
exceeding 5,000 square feet) shall be disguised through the
use of facade articulations, or through the use of exterior
treatments which give the impression of directly adjoining
individual buildings, as determined by the Historic
Preservation Commission.
(e) Horizontal rhythms. The horizontal pattern of exterior building
elements formed by patterns of building openings for windows and
doors and related elements such as piers and columns shall be
spaced at regular intervals across all visible facades of the building
and shall be compatible with those of existing buildings in the
immediate area which conform to the design theme described in
Subsection (4) above, as determined by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
(f) Vertical rhythms. The floor heights on main facades shall appear
visually in proportion to those of adjoining buildings. The rhythm of
the ground floor shall harmonize with the rhythm of upper floors.
The vertical pattern of exterior building elements formed by
patterns of building openings for windows and doors, and related
elements such as sills, headers, transoms, cornices and sign bands
shall be compatible in design and elevation with those of existing
buildings in the immediate area which conform to the design theme
described in Subsection (4) above, as determined by the Historic
Preservation Commission.
§ 5-7-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-8
1-1:413
(g) Roof forms. Flat or gently sloping roofs which are not visible from
the street shall be used. Mansards or other exotic roof shapes not
characteristic of the design theme described in Subsection (4)
above, as determined by the Historic Preservation Commission,
shall not be used. See Figure 5-7-8c.
Figure 5-7-8c: Roof Forms
(h) Exterior materials. Selected building materials shall be compatible
with those of existing buildings in the immediate area which
conform to the design theme described in Subsection (4) above, a
determined by the Historic Preservation Commission.
1. Masonry. Stone or brick facing shall be of even coloration and
consistent size. Cinderblock, concrete block, concrete slab, or
concrete panel shall not be permitted.
2. Siding.
a. Wood, thin board texture vinyl, fiber cement or textured
metal clapboard siding may be appropriate, particularly if
the proposed nonmasonry exterior was used on a building
which conforms to the design theme described in
Subsection (4) above, as determined by the Historic
Preservation Commission.
b. In certain instances, clapboard, board and batten may be
in keeping with the design theme.
c. Class IV materials are prohibited.
3. Glazing. Clear, or slightly tinted glass or related glazing
material shall be used. Mirrored glass, smoked glass, or
heavily tinted glass shall not be permitted, unless needed in a
special situation as determined by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
(i) Exterior surface. Exterior surface appurtenances shall be
compatible with those of existing buildings in the immediate area
which conform to the design theme described in Subsection (4)
above, as determined by the Historic Preservation Commission.
1. The traditional storefront design theme (characterized by
strong horizontal and vertical rhythms formed by building
openings, windows, and transom windows) shall be employed
§ 5-7-8 MONROE CODE § 5-7-8
1-1:414
for all new nonresidential buildings. Ground floors consisting
entirely of residential or office uses shall be exempt from this
requirement.
2. Throughout the district, avoid cluttering building facades with
brackets, wiring, meter boxes, antennae, gutters, downspouts
and other appurtenances. Unnecessary signs shall also be
avoided. Where necessary, such features shall be colored so as
to blend in, rather than contrast, with the immediately
adjacent building exterior. Extraneous ornamentation which is
inconsistent with the design theme described in Subsection (4)
above, as determined by the Historic Preservation
Commission, is also prohibited.
(j) Awnings and marquees. Awning and marquee size, color and
placement shall complement the architectural character of the
building, as determined by the Historic Preservation Commission.
1. Soft, weather-treated canvas or vinyl materials which allow for
flexible or fixed installation shall be used for awnings.
2. Aluminum or suspended metal canopies shall be prohibited.
3. Signage applied to awnings shall be simple and durable.
4. Backlit awnings are prohibited.
(k) Exterior lighting. On-building exterior lighting shall be compatible
and harmonious with the design theme described in Subsection (4)
above, as determined by the Historic Preservation Commission.
1. On-building lighting. The design, color, height, location, and
light quality of all on-building light fixtures shall be consistent
for all light fixtures.
2. Ground-mounted lighting. The design, color, height, location
and light quality of ground-mounted lighting shall be
consistent with the design theme described in Subsection (4)
above, as determined by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
(l) Signage. Signage shall comply with Subsection (7) below.
(m) Cleaning. Structural components and exterior materials shall be
cleaned when necessary, and with only the gentlest possible
methods.
1. Low-pressure water, steam cleaning, and soft natural bristle
brushes are permitted.
2. Sandblasting and power washing (more than 400 psi) are
prohibited.
§ 5-7-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-8
1-1:415
3. Other methods shall be preapproved by the Historic
Preservation Commission.
(6) Design standards for design alteration review and renovation review
(changes to the exterior appearance of a property).
(a) Applicability. The design standards contained in this subsection
shall apply for the following changes to the exterior of a property:
1. All changes meeting the criteria for design alteration review
(including painting, roofing, siding, and architectural
component substitution).
2. All changes meeting the criteria for renovation review
(including repainting, reroofing, residing, or replacing with
identical colors, finishes, and materials; changes in fencing,
paving, or signage; painting using preapproved colors).
3. Any other instance in which existing construction is proposed
for rehabilitation and/or restoration. (New projects, building
additions, and new appurtenances and features shall comply
with the applicable design standards in §§ 5-7-3 through
5-7-7.).
(b) In general. Buildings shall be restored relying on physical evidence
(such as photographs, original drawings, and existing architectural
details) as much as possible, in keeping with the design theme
described in Subsection (4) above, as determined by the Historic
Preservation Commission.
(c) Exterior materials and surface features. Materials and features
identical to the original exterior materials and surface features
shall be used. For the purposes of this section, materials shall be
considered to be "identical" if they appear to be same as the
original to an ordinary observer. If replacement with identical
materials and features is not possible, other features and materials
may be used, provided they are compatible with the design and
style of the building, as determined by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
1. Where such knowledge is lacking, materials and features in
common use at the time of building erection shall be used.
2. Significant architectural features, including cornices, moldings
and coursings, shall be preserved or replaced with identical
features and materials where possible.
(d) Windows and doors. The size, proportion, and rhythm of original
windows and doors shall not be altered.
1. Original window and door openings shall not be blocked.
Where now blocked, blocked window and door openings shall
be restored where possible.
§ 5-7-8 MONROE CODE § 5-7-8
1-1:416
2. Window and door features, including lintels, sills, architraves,
shutters, pediments, hoods and hardware, shall be preserved
where possible.
a. If preservation is not possible, as determined by the
Historic Preservation Commission, window and door
features shall be replaced with identical features and
materials. If replacement with identical features and
materials is not possible, other features and materials may
be used, provided they are compatible with the design and
style of the building, as determined by the Historic
Preservation Commission.
b. Dark frames (i.e., anodized bronze) shall be used to
replace storefront and upper story windows.
c. Clear aluminum finishes and mill finish aluminum storm
windows are prohibited.
d. If shutters are proposed, real, functional shutters or
shutters that are the same dimensions as real, functional
shutters (as opposed to purely decorative shutters) shall
be used.
(e) Storefronts. Storefronts shall fit inside the original shop front in
terms of all three dimensions (vertical, horizontal and front-to-back
articulation).
1. Display windows shall be restored to their original appearance.
2. The configuration of display windows shall be substantially
similar to the original configuration. This provision shall be
construed to prohibit garage doors and bay windows when
they were not part of the original building design.
(f) Entrances, porticos, and porches. Original porches, and steps shall
be retained, except as required to meet accessibility standards.
Porches, porticos, steps, and related enclosures which do not
comply with the architectural design theme, as determined by the
Historic Preservation Commission, shall be removed.
(g) Roofs. The original roof shape and character of visible materials
shall be retained. Original architectural features which give the
roof its essential character, including dormer windows, cupolas,
cornices, brackets, chimneys and weathervanes, shall be preserved
if in keeping with the architectural design theme described in
Subsection (4) above, as determined by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
(h) Signage. Signage shall comply with Subsection (7) below.
§ 5-7-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-8
1-1:417
(7) Signage. All signage existing upon the adoption date of this Title 5
which does not comply with the standards of Chapter 9, Signage, may
be continued as long as it is well maintained.
(a) The maintenance of such legal nonconforming signs shall be
limited to repair of the sign structural or lighting elements, and to
the repainting or replacement of the sign face with identical new
material, and original appearance. For the purposes of this section,
materials shall be considered to be "identical" if they appear to be
same as the original to an ordinary observer.
(b) Should a change in material or original appearance be desired, the
legal nonconforming sign shall be removed.
(c) Sign design guidelines.
1. Sign size, color and placement shall complement the
architectural character of the building, as determined by the
Historic Preservation Commission.
2. Where feasible, signs should be of material that was, or could
have been, used at the time the building was erected.
Substitute materials with the same appearance may be
appropriate.
3. Fluorescent, neon, or other bright colors should be avoided.
Historic colors and earth tones are recommended. Refer to the
preapproved color palette described in Subsection (8) below.
4. Three-dimensional signs should be of a style used at the time
the building was erected and should pertain to the type of
business conducted within.
5. External illuminated signs should be illuminated by fixtures
compatible with the period in which the building was erected.
6. Any original sign that was used at any time on a building prior
to the year 1900, or an authentic facsimile thereof, may be
replaced on that building.
7. Wall signs in the Historic Preservation Overlay District may be
located either on the front of the building abutting a street or
on either sidewall perpendicular to the street frontage or alley.
(8) Preapproved historical color palette. The color palette list, maintained
by the Zoning Administrator, identifies exterior paint/finish colors that
are preapproved for buildings in the Historic Preservation Overlay
District. Other colors may also be permissible with approval by Historic
Preservation Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a
color chip chart or display illustrating the range of preapproved colors.
Sherwin-Williams standard paint numbers are used on the color palette
list for reference, but any manufacturer's paint is acceptable if similar
in color, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. This list reflects
§ 5-7-8 MONROE CODE § 5-7-8
1-1:418
§ 5-7-9. Vehicle access standards.
the community's desire to encourage colors that complement the
architectural character of the building and which could have been used
at the time the building was erected.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for
the provision of driveways and other points of access to public rights-ofway
for various sites and uses.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to each
driveway and access point onto a public street or right-of-way in all new
developments.
(3) Review and approval. Through the site plan review process (see
§ 5-10-31), the Zoning Administrator shall review and approve all
proposed driveways and other access points on the subject property.
(4) Access limitation by use. Single-family and two-family dwelling units
shall not have driveways or other access points onto a collector or
arterial street that is not primarily residential unless such street has the
only available frontage. Nonresidential and multifamily uses shall not
have driveways or other access points onto a residential local street
unless such street has the only available frontage.
(5) Number of access points.
(a) Each lot shall have no more than two access points on any street
frontage adjacent to any lot. Access points shall require approval
by the Director of Public Works.
(b) No lot shall be permitted more than one access point on any one
street if the lot's street frontage is less than 100 linear feet, as
measured along the right-of-way line.
(c) On arterial streets and in areas expected to experience congestion
and/or safety problems, access to a lot may be required to be
located via an access point located on an adjacent property or
another street frontage.
(d) For residential buildings, two access points serving the same street
frontage may be approved as a conditional use.
(6) Access near street intersections. No access point shall be closer than 30
feet from any lot line corner on a right-of-way of 60 feet or less. For a
right-of-way greater than 60 feet, said distance shall be increased one
foot for every one-foot increase in the right-of-way width up to a
maximum distance of 50 feet. This distance may be reduced by the
Zoning Administrator if the street is the only available frontage on the
subject property. In all cases, access points shall be located as far from
an intersection as the lot size permits.
§ 5-7-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-9
1-1:419
(7) Distance between driveways and other access points. The minimum
distance between access drives serving the same property shall be 25
feet (edge to edge), as measured at the property line. A distance in
excess of 25 feet may be required if existing or projected traffic
warrants a greater distance.
(8) Angle of intersection with public right-of-way. All driveways and other
access points shall intersect with any public right-of-way at an angle of
not less than 75° and shall intersect at an angle of 90° wherever
possible.
(9) Visibility standards. All driveways and other access points shall comply
with the visibility standards of § 5-7-10.
(10) Distance from property line. The distance from an access drive to the
property line of an adjacent property shall not be less than five feet, as
measured along the right-of-way line.
(11)Width of driveways. All access drives shall have a minimum width of 10
feet for single- and two-family dwellings, and 18 feet for all other land
uses. All curb openings for access drives shall have a maximum width of
24 feet for all residential uses and 30 feet for all nonresidential uses, as
measured at the right-of-way line. Access drives may be flared between
the right-of-way line and the roadway up to a maximum of five
additional feet. This requirement may be exceeded with explicit Plan
Commission approval for uses other than single-family.
(12) Traffic control. The traffic generated by any use shall be channelized
and controlled in a manner that avoids congestion on public streets and
other safety hazards.
(a) Traffic into and out of all off-street parking, loading, and traffic
circulation areas serving six or more parking spaces shall be
forward-moving, with no backing into public streets.
(b) Parking, loading, and traffic circulation areas serving less than six
parking spaces may back into local streets, but shall not back into
collector or arterial streets. Refer to § 5-7-11(12)(f) regarding
backing into streets. Traffic control devices shall be required as
determined by the Department of Public Works.
(13) Depiction on required site plan. Any and all proposed driveways and
other access points on the subject property shall be depicted as to their
location and configuration on the site plan required for the
development of the subject property.
(14) Surfacing.
(a) Driveways shall follow the surfacing requirements of § 5-7-11(19).
(b) Driveways shall be surfaced in accordance with this Title 5 within
365 days of building permit issuance. If not dust-free during the
§ 5-7-9 MONROE CODE § 5-7-9
1-1:420
§ 5-7-10. Visibility standards.
permitted 365 days, a minimum aggregate base of four inches is
required.
(15) Nonconforming driveways.
(a) Nonconforming driveways shall comply with all of the regulations
and requirements of Chapter 5 for nonconforming sites.
1. Legal nonconforming driveways located on properties
containing single- or two-family land uses may be
reconstructed, provided the reconstructed driveway is not
dimensionally expanded.
(b) Shared driveways (driveways located on multiple lots and typically
situated over lot lines) that existed prior to the adoption of this Title
5 may remain legal driveways. No new or reconstructed shared
driveways may be established unless cross-access easements are
recorded with the Register of Deeds.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of public and private rights-of-way so as to promote the
safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum
requirements for the provision of vehicular visibility.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all new
development or redevelopment.
(3) Review and approval. Through the site plan review process (see
§ 5-10-31), the Zoning Administrator shall review and approve all
development for conformance with this section.
(4) Vision triangle at public streets. A vision triangle extending 20 feet
from all public street right-of-way intersections shall be maintained for
local street intersections and 30 feet when the intersection includes
collector or arterial streets. If the street intersection is curved, the
vision triangle distance shall be maintained as if the right-of-way were
extended to create a ninety-degree corner. No wall, fence, structure,
utility structure or appurtenance, or vegetation shall be permitted
within such vision triangle which materially impedes vision between the
height of 2 1/2 feet and 10 feet with the exception of fencing, which
shall be no greater than 30% opaque.
(a) Development in the CMU District and development located on
streets with signalized intersections shall be exempt from this
requirement.
(5) Vision triangle at alleys and driveways. A vision triangle extending 10
feet from alleys and driveways shall be maintained. No wall, fence,
structure, utility structure or appurtenance, or vegetation shall be
§ 5-7-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-10
1-1:421
§ 5-7-11. Off-street parking and traffic circulation.
permitted within such vision triangle which materially impedes vision
between the height of 2 1/2 feet and 10 feet.
(a) Development in the CMU District shall be exempt from this
requirement.
Figure 5-7-10: Visibility Standards
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of public rights-of-way so as to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for
the provision of off-street parking and circulation in accordance with
the use of various sites and types of development.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all new
development and redevelopment.
(3) Review and approval. Through the site plan review process (see
§ 5-10-31), the Zoning Administrator shall review and approve all
development for conformance with this section.
(4) Depiction on required site plan.
(a) Any and all parking and traffic circulation areas proposed to be
located on the subject property shall be depicted as to their
location and configuration on the site plan.
(b) Site plans shall be drawn to scale.
(c) Site plans shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
1. All lot dimensions and lot lines.
2. Paved areas shown and dimensioned.
3. The traffic pattern and parking space layout, including
required handicapped spaces.
§ 5-7-10 MONROE CODE § 5-7-11
1-1:422
4. Dimensions of individual parking spaces and aisle width.
Required parking spaces not intended to be immediately
improved shall be shown with a dashed line.
5. Size and location of ingress and egress openings.
6. Location, size at planting, and species of all landscape
plantings.
7. Location of all lighting systems.
8. Location of all snow storage areas.
9. Drainage and/or stormwater management plan subject to
approval by the City.
10. Other facilities proposed.
(5) Minimum number of required off-street parking spaces. See Chapter 3
for minimum parking requirements by land use.
(a) Off-street parking requirements for each land use are generally
tied to the use's capacity and gross floor area or the number of
employees at the subject property during the largest work shift.
1. The term "capacity" means the maximum number of persons
that may be accommodated by the use as determined by its
design or by state Building Code regulations, whichever
number is greater.
2. The term "employees on the largest work shift" means the
maximum number of employees working at the facility during a
single given day, regardless of the time period during which
this occurs, and regardless of whether any such person is a
full-time employee. The largest work shift may occur on any
particular day of the week or during a lunch or dinner period in
the case of a restaurant.
3. The term "gross floor area" shall mean the total floor area
inside the building envelope on all levels of a building.
(b) A garage stall shall be considered a parking space.
(c) One reserved parking space shall be provided for each service
vehicle used by the operation during business hours.
(6) Parking requirement exceptions in the Central Mixed-Use District.
(a) Within the CMU District, the parking requirements of this Title 5
are hereby waived. However, when off-street parking facilities are
provided, such facilities shall meet the requirements of this Title 5,
except in respect to the required number of spaces. Residential
uses need only provide evidence of the availability of off-street
§ 5-7-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-11
1-1:423
public or private parking in the amount of one parking space per
dwelling unit within 1,000 feet of the unit.
(7) Limit on the number of off-street parking spaces provided. No site plan
may be approved for a multifamily or nonresidential use which contains
more than 125% of the development's minimum number of required
parking spaces, except as granted through a conditional use permit.
Consideration of the following factors shall be given in considering a
conditional use permit request:
(a) This provision shall not apply to lots in which less than 25 parking
spaces are required.
(b) The proposed development has unique or unusual characteristics
(such as high sales volume or low parking turnover) which creates
a parking demand that exceeds the maximum ratio and does not
typically apply to comparable uses.
(c) The lot is designed to allow for more intensive future site
development.
(d) Pedestrian and bicycle connectivity is provided through the lot and
connects to adjacent local and regional transit, pedestrian, and
bicycle facilities.
(e) The need for additional parking cannot be reasonably met through
provision of on-street or shared parking with nearby uses.
(8) Parking studies. The Zoning Administrator has the ability to require a
parking study to determine parking requirements. Where a parking
study is required, the study shall contain information on the anticipated
number of employees, customers, visitors, clients, shifts, events, or
deliveries to the use, and may refer to other studies or similar situations
elsewhere.
(9) Screening. Off-street parking areas which abut an adjacent residential
district or residential use shall be provided with a masonry wall, solid
screen planting of appropriate shrubs or a solid wooden fence of a
height not less than four feet along the entire boundary common to both
the residential area and the parking area. Landscaping used to meet
these requirements shall count toward the landscaping required for
paved areas in Chapter 8.
(10) Locational prohibitions for off-street parking areas.
(a) On a lot containing a single-family or two-family dwelling unit, offstreet
parking shall not be located between the principal structure
and a street right-of-way, except within residential driveways
leading to a legal parking space.
(b) No private parking shall occur on street terraces, publicly owned
driveways, or any other areas located within a public right-of-way.
§ 5-7-11 MONROE CODE § 5-7-11
1-1:424
(11) Setbacks.
(a) In the SMU and LI Districts, the parking area setback may be
reduced to five feet from rear and side property lines if a five-foot
landscaped buffer is provided and if any additional bufferyard
requirements are met.
(b) Existing parking areas that do not meet the requirements of this
Title 5 may be maintained or repaired at their setback as of the
effective date of this Title 5.
(12)Off-street parking and traffic circulation standards.
(a) Circulation. The site shall be designed to provide for the safe and
efficient movement of all traffic entering, exiting, and circulating
on the site. Circulation patterns shall conform to the general rules
of the road. All traffic control measures shall meet the
requirements of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(b) Surfacing. All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas shall
follow the surfacing requirements of § 5-7-11(19).
(c) Drainage. All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas shall be
designed in such a manner so as to not have a negative surface
water drainage impact on adjacent properties and to meet the
requirements of Chapter 11.
(d) Marking. All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas shall be
marked, striped, and maintained in a clear and visible manner
which clearly indicates parking spaces, pedestrian walkways, and
other designated areas.
(e) Curbing. A minimum six-inch-high curb shall be installed around all
parking areas and internal landscape islands, except as follows:
1. Where bio-filtration and/or bio-retention methods of
stormwater management are utilized as part of an approved
grading and drainage plan, alternatives to the installation of
curbing may be considered by the Department of Public Works,
provided that measures are taken to protect the landscaping
from vehicular circulation damage.
2. For industrial uses within industrial zoning districts, curbing is
only required adjacent to buildings, planting islands, required
front yards, and where necessary to prevent any part of a
vehicle from extending over or beyond any pedestrian paths or
rights-of-way.
(f) Access.
1. Each off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle
or driveway that is wide enough to provide a safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to the parking space without
§ 5-7-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-11
1-1:425
directly backing or maneuvering a vehicle into any pedestrian
way or arterial or collector street.
a. Parking, loading, and traffic circulation areas serving less
than six parking spaces may back into local streets, but
shall not back into collector or arterial streets. Refer to the
traffic control requirements of § 5-7-9(12).
2. All off-street parking and traffic circulation facilities shall be
designed with an appropriate means of vehicular access to a
street or alley, in a manner which least interferes with traffic
movements.
3. No driveway across public property or requiring a curb cut
shall exceed a width of 40 feet at the property line for
nonresidential land uses, or 25 feet for residential land uses.
(g) Lighting. All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas serving
six or more cars shall be lit to ensure their safe and efficient use
during evening hours. An illumination level between 0.4 and 1.0
footcandle is recommended but shall not exceed the standards of
§ 5-7-25.
(h) Signage. All signage located within, or related to, required offstreet
parking or traffic circulation shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 9.
(13) Parking space design standards. Other than handicapped parking,
permitted parking in residential driveways, and where otherwise
regulated in this section, each off-street parking space shall comply
with the minimum requirements of Figure 5-7-11a. All parking spaces
shall have a minimum vertical clearance of at least seven feet.
Figure 5-7-11a: Parking Layout Dimensions
Parking Angle in Degrees
Minimum
Permitted
Dimensions
0°
(parallel)
(feet)
45°
(feet)
60°
(feet)
75°
(feet)
90°
(feet)
Stall width at
parking angle
(SW)
9 9 9 9 9
Stall width
parallel to aisle
(WP)
22 12 feet 6
inches
10 feet 3
inches
9 feet 3
inches
9
Stall depth to wall
(D)1
9 18 18 18 18
Stall length (SL) 18 25 22 20 18
§ 5-7-11 MONROE CODE § 5-7-11
1-1:426
Figure 5-7-11a: Parking Layout Dimensions
Parking Angle in Degrees
Minimum
Permitted
Dimensions
0°
(parallel)
(feet)
45°
(feet)
60°
(feet)
75°
(feet)
90°
(feet)
Aisle width for
1-way traffic flow
(AW)
14 14 16 23 24
Aisle width for
2-way traffic flow
with angled
parking
24 24 24 24 24
Throat length
(right-of-way to
parking angle)
(T)2
Refer to requirements in Figure 5-7-11b.
Notes:
1 Stall depth (D) may be reduced by two feet, provided vehicle overhang is
located over a landscaped area or pedestrian walk if said walk is
oversized to provide a minimum of five feet of clear pedestrian access
and a concrete curb or wheel stop is provided to protect vegetation and
pedestrians.
2 In no case shall the throat length be less than the required setback.
(14) Minimum permitted throat length. Figure 5-7-11b shall be used to
determine the minimum permitted throat length of access drives
serving parking lots as measured from the right-of-way line along the
centerline of the access drive.
(a) Minimum permitted throat length may be modified by the Plan
Commission by explicit motion associated with the site review
process. In no case shall the throat length be less than the required
setback.
§ 5-7-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-11
1-1:427
Figure 5-7-11b: Permitted Throat Length
Minimum Throat Length
Type of Access Street
Land Use Type
Scale of
Development
Collector
(feet)
Arterial
(feet)
0 to 100
dwelling units
25 N/A
101 to 200
dwelling units
Residential Any 50 75
residential
201+ dwelling
units
75 125
0 to 50,000
gross square
feet
25 50
50,001 to
100,000 gross
square feet
25 75
100,001 to
200,000 gross
square feet
50 100
Office
200,001+
gross square
feet
100 150
0 to 2,000
gross square
feet
25 75
In-vehicle
sales or
service 2,001+ gross
square feet
50 100
0 to 150
rooms
25 75
Commercial
indoor lodging
151+ rooms 25 100
0 to 25,000
gross square
feet
25 50
25,001 to
100,000 gross
square feet
25 75
Commercial
Other
commercial
uses
100,001 to
500,000 gross
square feet
50 100
§ 5-7-11 MONROE CODE § 5-7-11
1-1:428
Figure 5-7-11b: Permitted Throat Length
Minimum Throat Length
Type of Access Street
Land Use Type
Scale of
Development
Collector
(feet)
Arterial
(feet)
500,001+
gross square
feet
100 200
0 to 100,000
gross square
feet
25 50
100,001 to
500,000 gross
square feet
50 100
Industrial All industrial
uses
500,001+
gross square
feet
50 200
Other uses 6+ spaces 25 50
(15) Partial or phased development of required parking spaces.
(a) Any development may seek permission from the Zoning
Administrator to phase-in a portion of its required parking at time
of site plan review. The site plan shall depict the minimum number
of required parking spaces.
(b) Areas required for parking, but not immediately improved, shall be
reserved for future parking.
(c) Undeveloped future parking areas shall be seeded with a grass mix
or vegetative cover acceptable to the Zoning Administrator until
said area is developed into a parking surface.
(16) Joint off-site parking facilities.
(a) Parking facilities which have been approved by the Director of
Public Works to provide required parking for one or more uses shall
provide a total number of parking spaces which shall not be less
than the sum total of the separate parking needs for each use
during any peak hour parking period when said joint parking
facility is utilized at the same time by said uses.
(b) Joint use parking facility. Up to a fifteen-percent reduction in the
number of required parking spaces for four or more separate uses,
10% for three separate uses, and 5% for two separate uses may be
authorized by the Zoning Administrator, following approval of a
plan which provides for a collective parking facility.
§ 5-7-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-11
1-1:429
(c) Day-night use parking facility. The Zoning Administrator may
authorize the shared day-night use of parking facilities under the
following conditions:
1. Up to 50% of the parking facilities by nighttime uses may be
supplied by the off-street parking facilities of daytime uses.
2. Up to 50% of the parking facilities of daytime uses may be
supplied by the off-street parking facilities of nighttime uses.
3. For the purposes of this section, daytime uses are defined as
offices, banks, retail stores, personal service or repair shops,
household equipment or furniture stores, manufacturing or
wholesale, or similar primarily daytime uses; and nighttime
uses are defined as auditoriums incidental to grade schools,
churches, multifamily development (nonelderly), bowling
alleys, dancehalls, theaters, bars or restaurants, motels, or
similar primarily nighttime or Sunday uses.
(d) The applicant(s) for approval of a joint or day-night use parking
facility shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator that there is no substantial conflict in the demand for
parking during the principal operating hours of the uses for which
the joint parking facility is proposed to serve. Conditions required
for joint use shall be as follows:
1. The building or use for which application is being made to
utilize the off-street parking facilities provided by another
building or use shall be located within 500 feet of such parking
facilities.
2. The applicant(s) shall show that there is no substantial conflict
in the principal operating hours of the two buildings or uses for
which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed.
3. A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties
concerned for joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly
approved as to form and manner of execution by the City
Attorney, shall be filed with Zoning Administrator. Joint use
parking privileges shall continue in effect only so long as such
an instrument, binding on all parties, remains in force. If such
instrument becomes legally ineffective, then parking shall be
provided as otherwise required in this chapter.
(17) Locational prohibitions for off-street parking areas.
(a) Off-street parking shall not be located between the principal
structure on a residential lot and a street right-of-way, except
within residential driveways and parking lots designated on the
approved site plan.
§ 5-7-11 MONROE CODE § 5-7-11
1-1:430
(b) No private parking shall occur on street terraces, driveways, or any
other areas located within a public right-of-way not explicitly
designated by the Director of Public Works.
(c) Except in the CMU and UMU Districts, there shall be a minimum
ten-foot setback for any driveway width additions or parking pads
in the front and street side yards. See Figure 5-7-11c. Driveways
adjacent to alleys are exempt from this requirement.
Figure 5-7-11c: Minimum Driveway Expansion and Parking Pad
Setback
(18) Bicycle parking standards.
(a) Required provision of bicycle parking areas.
1. For all multifamily, commercial, institutional, and industrial
uses, a minimum of four bicycle spaces shall be provided.
2. For parking lots containing more than 40 automobile parking
spaces, off-street bicycle parking spaces shall be provided. The
number of off-street bicycle parking spaces to be provided shall
be equal to 5% of the automobile parking space requirement or
20 bicycle parking spaces, whichever is less.
3. A nonresidential use's automobile parking requirement may be
reduced by providing additional bicycle parking. After the
bicycle parking requirement has been met, a minimum of four
bicycle parking spaces may be provided in lieu of one required
automobile parking space, with a maximum reduction of up to
five automobile parking spaces.
(b) Specifications for bicycle parking spaces.
1. The "inverted-U" type bike rack is the preferred bicycle
parking rack and means of providing off-street bicycle parking
spaces as required in this section, but all types of bicycle
§ 5-7-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-11
1-1:431
parking racks are acceptable. One inverted-U type rack counts
as two bicycle parking spaces.
2. All bicycle parking provided shall be on a hard-surfaced area
and shall be set back from walls and other objects, so the
bicycle rack is useable. Freestanding bicycle parking racks
shall be securely fastened to the ground.
3. Bicycle parking spaces shall be installed in conformance with
setback requirements applicable to automobile parking lots.
The racks shall be placed where bicyclists would naturally
transition to pedestrian mode. The placement of the racks shall
not conflict with pedestrians and motorized traffic.
(19) Surfacing.
(a) All driveways, off-street parking, loading, and traffic circulation
areas shall be graded and surfaced so as to be dust-free and
properly drained and shall be paved with a hard, all-weather or
other surface to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.
(b) The following shall be exempt from these surfacing requirements:
1. Driveways in the RH-35 District shall be exempt except for the
first 20 feet of the driveway closest to the right-of-way, which
shall be hard surfaced.
2. All agricultural land uses (§ 5-3-7).
3. Parking areas in the LI, HI, and EX Zoning Districts if more
than 200 feet from a residential zoning district. Such surfaces
shall be dust-free and properly drained.
4. Enclosed and screened outdoor storage areas. When such uses
are discontinued, the area(s) shall comply with the surfacing
requirements of Subsection (19)(a), above, or shall be returned
to vegetative ground cover.
(20) Installation and maintenance.
(a) Off-street parking and circulation areas and required screening and
landscaping shall be continuously maintained in good condition and
appearance. Surfacing, lighting, barriers, markings, planting
materials, and all other aspects of the off-street parking and
circulation facility shall be repaired or replaced with new materials
in compliance with the provision of this Title 5.
(b) All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas shall be
completed prior to building occupancy and shall be maintained in a
dust-free condition at all times, except for approved phased
development of parking spaces as provided for by Subsection (15),
above. In no instance or manner shall any off-street parking or
§ 5-7-11 MONROE CODE § 5-7-11
1-1:432
traffic circulation area be used as a storage area, except as
provided for by § 5-7-26.
(21) Limitations on uses of all off-street parking areas.
(a) All vehicles shall be in condition for safe and legal performance on
public rights-of-way, be registered, and display current license
plates.
(b) Under no circumstances shall any vehicle or equipment be used as
living quarters, except for approved campground land uses.
(c) Single-family and two-family uses shall be limited to one
commercial vehicle, trailer, or a motor home per dwelling unit.
(d) On a nonresidential property, no more than one of the following
types of vehicles or equipment shall be parked or stored outdoors:
1. Vehicles or equipment not normally associated with a
residential use include but are not limited to:
a. Dump and stake body style trucks.
b. Semi cabs.
c. Concession, vending, and catering trailers.
d. Commercial/industrial equipment trailers and lifts.
e. Tow trucks, wreckers, or car carriers except for one lightduty
tow truck (not a roll back, flat bed, or carrier type)
with a gross vehicle weight not exceeding 12,000 pounds
may be parked when on call, operating under the rotating
call list established and kept by the City of Monroe Police
Department.
2. The following vehicles shall not be parked or stored outdoors,
except in areas identified on an approved site plan for the
purpose of heavy vehicle parking or an outdoor storage land
use:
a. Construction equipment such as bulldozers, backhoes,
skid steers, and fork lifts.
b. Landscaping business equipment such as tractors, tree
spades, graders, and scrapers.
c. Semi-trailers and tractors.
d. Amusement rides and similar vehicles.
(22) Limitations on uses of residential off-street parking areas. In residential
districts and on lots associated with residential uses, accessory offstreet
parking facilities shall be regulated as follows:
§ 5-7-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-11
1-1:433
§ 5-7-12. Off-street loading standards.
(a) Residential off-street parking areas shall be utilized solely for the
parking of passenger vehicles.
(b) A maximum of one commercial vehicle per dwelling unit shall be
parked outdoors on residential property provided that the vehicle is
used by a resident of the dwelling unit, has a manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less, and is less than 21
feet in length.
(c) No person shall park any motor truck, truck trailer, trailer,
semitrailer or any other vehicle or combination of vehicles
weighing more than 10,000 pounds, except recreational vehicles or
motor homes are permitted if parked in a driveway or other legal
off-street parking space.
(d) A recreational vehicle (RV) associated with and customary to
residential uses may be parked as if a passenger vehicle but shall
not be utilized for the storage of goods, materials, or equipment
other than that which is considered part of the RV or essential to its
function.
(e) Recreational vehicles and structures. Outside storage is permitted
for not more than two (total) of the following: building for ice
fishing, mobile camp trailer, snowmobile, camper utility trailer,
boat, all-terrain vehicle and personal watercraft, provided that the
above vehicles and structures are owned by the residence. No
storage is permitted in front yards, except in the owner's driveway.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for
the provision of loading facilities on various sites.
(2) Applicability. All institutional, commercial, industrial, storage, and
transportation land uses shall provide off-street loading facilities in
accordance with the regulations of this section.
(3) Review and approval. All developments and redevelopments will be
reviewed for conformance with this section through the site plan review
process (see § 5-10-31).
(4) Depiction on required site plan. The location and configuration of all
required loading areas and trailer and container storage areas
proposed to be located on the subject property shall be depicted on the
site plan required for the development of the subject property.
(5) Location.
(a) Loading areas shall be located on the private lot and shall not be
located within or interfere with any public right-of-way while in
use.
§ 5-7-11 MONROE CODE § 5-7-12
1-1:434
(b) Loading areas shall be located on the same lot as the use served.
(c) Loading areas shall be located 25 feet or more from the
intersection of two street right-of-way lines.
(d) Loading areas shall not be located within any required front yard or
street yard setback area.
(e) Loading areas shall be located at least 50 feet from a residential
district.
(6) Size of loading area.
(a) Structures of less than 10,000 square feet shall provide adequate
receiving platforms or other facilities located off an adjacent alley,
service drive, or other open space on the same lot.
(b) Structures larger than or equal to 10,000 square feet but less than
20,000 square feet shall provide an off-street loading space that is
at least 10 feet wide and at least 25 feet long.
(c) Structures 20,000 square feet or larger shall provide an off-street
loading space that is at least 10 feet wide and at least 50 feet long.
(d) Refer to Figure 5-7-12 for additional loading standards.
Figure 105-7-12: Loading Standards
Design
Vehicle
Length
in Feet
Dock
Angle
(a)
Clearance
in Feet
(D)
Berth
Width
in Feet
(W)
Apron
Space
in Feet
(A)
Total
Offset
in Feet
(T)
10 63 113
90° 50 12 56 106
14 52 102
10 46 90
60° 44 12 40 84
14 35 79
10 37 73
45° 36 12 32 68
14 29 65
10 77 132
12 72 127
WB-40 50
90° 55
14 67 122
10 55 103
WB-50 55 60° 48 12 51 99
14 46 94
§ 5-7-12 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-12
1-1:435
§ 5-7-13. Bicycle and pedestrian access standards.
Figure 105-7-12: Loading Standards
Design
Vehicle
Length
in Feet
Dock
Angle
(a)
Clearance
in Feet
(D)
Berth
Width
in Feet
(W)
Apron
Space
in Feet
(A)
Total
Offset
in Feet
(T)
10 45 84
45° 39 12 40 79
14 37 76
(7) Access to loading area. Each loading area shall be located so as to
facilitate access to a public street or alley, shall not interfere with other
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and shall not interfere with the function
of parking areas. In no instance shall loading areas rely on backing
movements into public rights-of-way while in use.
(8) Surface. All required loading areas shall follow the surfacing
requirements of § 5-7-11(19).
(9) Use of required loading areas. The use of all required loading areas
shall be limited to the loading and unloading of vehicles. Loading areas
shall not be used to provide the required number of parking spaces.
(10) Lighting. All loading areas shall be lit to ensure their safe and efficient
use during evening hours. An illumination level between 0.4 and 1.0
footcandle is recommended but shall not exceed the standards of
§ 5-7-25.
(11) Signage. All signage located within or related to loading areas shall
comply with the requirements of Chapter 9.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to support the use of alternative
modes of transportation and promote the safety and general welfare of
the public by establishing requirements for pedestrian and bicycle
access and bicycle parking.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all new
development or redevelopment.
(3) Quantity. One pedestrian and bicycle access shall be provided on at
least one street frontage.
§ 5-7-12 MONROE CODE § 5-7-13
1-1:436
§ 5-7-14. through § 5-7-16. (Reserved)
§ 5-7-17. Outdoor recreational space requirements.
(4) Off-site connections. Pedestrian and bicycle access shall include
appropriate connections to the existing and planned pedestrian and
bicycle facilities in the community and in surrounding neighborhoods.
(5) On-site connections. The entire development shall provide walkways for
full and safe pedestrian and bicycle access within the development.
(a) Walkways shall provide pedestrian access through or around offstreet
parking areas from street sidewalks to building entries.
Walkways shall be located and aligned to directly and continuously
connect areas or points of pedestrian origin and destination, and
walkways shall not be located and aligned solely based on the
outline of a parking lot configuration unless such configuration
allows for direct pedestrian access.
(b) Design requirements.
1. Walkways shall have an acceptable dust-free surface not less
than five feet in width and shall be grade-separated from the
parking lot or otherwise delineated with pavement markers,
planters, or alternate paving materials.
2. The entirety of the on-site pedestrian walkway system shall be
marked and defined using pavement treatments, signs,
lighting, median refuge areas, and landscaping as appropriate
and as consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act and
the Building Code, as approved by the Zoning Administrator.
3. Where the pedestrian walkway crosses drive aisles or internal
roadways, the pedestrian crossing shall emphasize and place
priority on pedestrian access and safety.
4. The material and layout of the pedestrian walkway shall be
continuous as the pedestrian access crosses the driveway, with
a break in continuity of the driveway paving and not in the
pedestrian accessway.
(1) Outdoor recreational space requirements for multifamily uses.
(a) Each multifamily development containing three or more units shall
provide an outdoor recreational space suitable for outdoor
recreation such as sitting, sunbathing, grilling, and playing catch.
Outdoor recreational space could also include a children's play
area. Outdoor recreational space can be provided at ground level
or other areas including but not limited to communal porches/
decks, balconies, and rooftop gardens.
§ 5-7-13 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-17
1-1:437
§ 5-7-18. through § 5-7-24. (Reserved)
§ 5-7-25. Exterior lighting standards.
1. The outdoor recreational space and/or children's play area is
encouraged to include picnic tables, recreational equipment,
and/or play equipment suitable for small children such as
sandboxes, swing sets, and play structures. This is intended to
provide an equivalent level of outdoor recreation equipment
that would normally be available with a single- or two-family
dwelling.
(b) Multifamily uses located within the Central Mixed-Use Zoning
District are encouraged to provide outdoor recreational space but
are exempt from the requirement to provide outdoor recreational
space as regulated in this section.
(c) Minimum area. A minimum of 200 square feet plus 25 square feet
per bedroom of outdoor recreational space shall be provided.
(d) Required outdoor recreational space shall be for the private use of
residents and need not be open to the public.
(2) Buildings shall be organized in relation to open spaces to create a
balance of usable open space and efficient circulating and parking. The
requirements of this section shall not override the establishment of an
orderly, positive, and urban character of the relationship of buildings to
streets.
(3) Required outdoor recreational space may be divided into multiple
distinct spaces, provided that no single outdoor recreation space is
smaller than 100 square feet or narrower than 10 feet in any direction.
(4) The following shall not count toward the total outdoor recreational
space requirement:
(a) Areas in the required front or side yard setbacks.
(b) Areas within two feet of parking stalls (as measured from the face
of the curb).
(c) Areas used for landscaping, stormwater infiltration, bicycle
parking, trash and recycling storage, or heating and cooling units.
(5) Required outdoor recreational space shall not count toward land
dedication or fee in lieu of land dedication requirements of the City of
Monroe Municipal Code.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide illumination levels on
sites for function and safety as well as regulate the spillover of light and
glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and nearby land uses
in the vicinity of a light source in order to promote traffic safety and to
prevent the creation of nuisances.
§ 5-7-17 MONROE CODE § 5-7-25
1-1:438
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all exterior
lighting within the jurisdiction of this Title 5, except for lighting within
public rights-of-way.
(3) Review and approval. All developments and redevelopments will be
reviewed for conformance with this section through the site plan review
process (see § 5-10-31).
(4) Depiction on required site plan. All exterior lighting shall be depicted as
to its location, orientation, and configuration on the site plan required
for the development of the subject property.
(5) Exterior lighting requirements.
(a) In no instance shall an exterior lighting fixture be oriented so that
the lighting element (or a clear shield) is visible from a property
located within a residential zoning district. The use of shielded
luminaries and careful fixture placement is encouraged so as to
facilitate compliance with this requirement.
(b) Flashing, flickering and/or other lighting which may distract
motorists are prohibited.
(c) Intensity of illumination.
1. In no instance shall the amount of illumination attributable to
exterior lighting, as measured at the property line, exceed 0.50
footcandle above ambient lighting conditions on a cloudless
night.
2. The maximum average on-site lighting in nonresidential zoning
districts shall be 3.0 footcandles.
3. The maximum average on-site lighting in residential zoning
districts shall be 1.0 footcandles.
4. The following exceptions shall be permitted.
a. The maximum average allowable on-site lighting of
outdoor recreation facilities and assembly areas is 4.0
footcandles.
b. The maximum average on-site lighting of auto display lots
and gas station pump islands is 25.0 footcandles, provided
that lighting is dimmed to 3.0 footcandles when business is
closed. All under-the-canopy fixtures shall be fully
recessed.
5. Reflected glare onto nearby buildings, streets, or pedestrian
areas is prohibited.
(d) Fixtures and luminaries.
§ 5-7-25 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-25
1-1:439
§ 5-7-26. Exterior storage and screening standards.
1. Outdoor lighting shall be full cut-off fixtures and downward
facing and no direct light shall transmit onto adjacent
properties.
a. Exempt from this requirement are decorative light fixtures
with frosted glass lamps, and any fixtures using a light
bulb with a factory-rated light output of 1,700 lumens or
less, including 100-watt incandescent bulbs and 100-wattequivalent
compact florescent bulbs.
2. The color and design of fixtures shall be compatible with the
building and public lighting in the area and shall be uniform
throughout the entire development site.
3. The maximum fixture mounting height by zoning district shall
be:
a. Sixteen feet in the RH-30, SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-7, DR-8,
and TR-10 Zoning Districts.
b. Twenty feet in the MR-15, MR-30, MH-7, NMU, I, SMU,
UMU, CMU, and IOA Zoning Districts.
c. Twenty-five feet in the BP, LI, HI, and EX Zoning Districts.
4. All lighting fixtures existing prior to the effective date of this
Title 5 shall be considered legal nonconforming fixtures.
(e) All areas designated on required site plans for vehicular parking,
loading, or circulation and used for any such purpose after sunset
shall provide artificial illumination in such areas at a minimum
intensity of 0.4 footcandle.
(6) Additional lighting requirements for intensive outdoor recreation uses.
(a) Lighting shall be set to automatically shut off when there is no
scheduled play and shall be extinguished no later than 10:00 p.m.
Lower light levels for off-the-field lighting may be provided for an
additional one hour for safe egress.
(b) The mounting height for light fixtures shall be no greater than 1/4
the distance to the nearest property line from where the light
fixture is located.
(c) Light fixtures of up to 75 feet in height may be permitted through
the conditional use process, provided the applicant demonstrates
compliance with the other provisions of the Section, particularly
Subsection (6)(c), above.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to control the use of residential,
office, and commercial property for exterior storage so as to promote
§ 5-7-25 MONROE CODE § 5-7-26
1-1:440
the safety and general welfare of the public. For additional
requirements relating to exterior storage for specific uses, refer to
Chapter 3.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all development.
(3) Review and approval. All developments and redevelopments will be
reviewed for conformance with this section through the site plan review
process (see § 5-10-31). Outdoor storage land uses shall meet the
requirements of § 5-3-12(2).
(4) Requirements for exterior storage.
(a) Requirements for exterior storage in Mixed-Use Zoning Districts.
1. In all mixed-use zoning districts, all materials and equipment
shall be stored within a completely enclosed building except
for the following: screened refuse containers, construction
materials, landscape materials, and related equipment
connected within on-site construction. Materials related to
construction and landscaping projects shall not be stored
outdoors after the completion of the project.
2. Such outdoor storage shall not be located within any front yard
or required street yard (except for vehicles in designated offstreet
parking spaces). Outdoor storage shall conform to all
setback requirements or shall be located a minimum of five
feet from all property lines, whichever is more restrictive.
(b) Screening for storage land uses shall comply with the requirements
of § 5-3-12. Screening for incidental outdoor storage land uses shall
comply with the requirements of § 5-3-17(19).
(c) Screening shall be well maintained.
(5) Exterior trash/recycling storage.
(a) For multifamily, institutional, commercial, mixed-use buildings, and
industrial uses, all exterior trash/recycling storage areas shall be
located within an enclosure at least six feet in height that
completely screens the view of all trash/recycling and trash/
recycling storage containers. The exterior of said enclosure shall
be constructed of solid wood or one or more of the materials used
on the exterior of the main building. A solid gate shall be used to
gain access to the storage area; said gate shall be constructed of an
opaque material or interwoven slat fencing.
(b) No exterior trash/recycling storage or dumpsters shall be located
between a building and a public street except if in the opinion of
the Zoning Administrator no other suitable location is available for
such purpose and provided the dumpster area is developed in a
manner so as to minimize its appearance from a public street.
§ 5-7-26 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-26
1-1:441
§ 5-7-27. Fencing standards.
(6) Mechanical equipment and on-site utilities.
(a) Applicability.
1. The screening of mechanical equipment and utilities shall be
required for all uses as regulated in this Title 5, with the
exception of single-family and two-family dwelling units;
satellite dishes, personal antennas and towers, industrial
smoke stacks, and solar or wind energy systems; and other
uses exempted in other sections of the City of Monroe
Municipal Code.
2. The screening of mechanical equipment and utilities shall be
required for building expansions or additions when single or
cumulative additions exceed 50% of the floor area of original
building.
(b) Screening design standards for ground-mounted equipment.
Ground-mounted mechanical equipment must be hidden from view
through the use of one or both of the following methods:
1. Earth berm(s) with evergreen landscaping at a combined
height sufficient to fully screen the equipment from the rightof-
way or other users of the site.
2. A bufferyard with a minimum opacity of 0.4 that completely
surrounds the equipment.
(c) Screening distance.
1. Mechanical equipment is considered to be screened if it is not
visible from any portion of the adjacent street right-of-way or
adjacent property lines as measured at a height of five feet
from the sidewalk/curb elevation or from the grade of the
center line of the street if no sidewalk or curb is present.
2. Exceptions can be made for elevated roads that are of a
considerable higher grade from that of the mechanical
equipment, for drastic grade changes, or for other special
circumstances as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the materials,
location, height, and maintenance of fencing, landscaping walls, and
decorative posts in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to
promote the general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all fencing,
landscape walls, and decorative posts for all land uses and activities.
§ 5-7-26 MONROE CODE § 5-7-27
1-1:442
(3) Review and approval. Fences shall be reviewed and approved by the
Zoning Administrator and shall require a building permit, unless the
proposed fence requires a conditional use permit.
(4) Temporary fencing, including the use of wood or plastic snow fences for
the purposes of limiting snow drifting between November 1 and April 1,
protection of excavation and construction sites, and the protection of
plants during grading and construction in association with an active
building permit, is permitted. Permits are not required for temporary
fencing.
(5) Materials.
(a) Fences shall be constructed using the following materials: naturally
resistant or treated wood, brick or masonry, natural stone, wrought
iron, vinyl, galvanized and/or coated chain link, or any other
material of comparable quality as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
(b) Rules related to specific materials.
1. Permanent chicken wire fences or snow fences shall not be
used with residential uses.
2. Noncorrugated, solid metal fences are permitted in the LI, HI,
and EX Zoning Districts.
3. Wire mesh and noncoated/nongalvanized chain link fencing is
not permitted within front yards in the SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-7,
DR-8, TR-10, MR-15, MR-30, and MH-7 Zoning Districts,
except when used in conjunction with parks, schools, airports,
or other institutional uses.
4. Barb wire fencing or similar security fencing shall be permitted
only on the top of security fencing when located at least six feet
above the ground and shall be permitted only in the I, LI, HI,
and EX Districts. Such fences shall meet the setbacks for the
principal structure.
5. Coated chain link fences shall have a minimum nine-gauge
thickness, and a top rail support is required. Coated chain link
fences shall not be permitted in front or street yards and shall
not extend toward the street beyond the front of the building.
(6) Design.
(a) With the exception of fences used for required screening, any fence
located in the front yard shall be a maximum of fifty-percent
opaque, meaning that the spaces between the pickets are equal to
or greater than the width of the pickets. See Figure 5-7-27a.
§ 5-7-27 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-27
1-1:443
Figure 5-7-27a: Fencing Opacity
(b) A fence that includes prewoven or interwoven privacy fence slats
and that is at least ninety-percent opaque shall be considered a
solid fence.
(c) Fences shall be architecturally compatible with the design and
materials of the principal building. Design details shall be
substantially the same (but need not be identical) as those of the
principal building. Industrial uses shall be exempt from this
requirement.
(d) Fences, landscape walls, or decorative posts shall be erected so as
to locate visible supports and other structural components toward
the subject property.
(e) Swimming pools. Fencing for swimming pools shall be provided per
the Model Swimming Pool Enclosure Code established by the
National Spa and Pool Institute (NSPI), which is available from the
City Public Works Department.
(7) Height.
(a) Maximum height. The maximum height of any fence panel,
landscape wall, or decorative post shall be the following:
1. In the SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-7, DR-8, TR-10, MR-15, MR-30,
MH-7, I, and NMU Zoning Districts:
a. Four feet when located within the required or provided
front yard or street yard, whichever is closer to the street.
b. Six feet within the side yard or rear yard, but not in the
required front yard or beyond the front facade of the
principal building.
c. Where permitted, barb wire fencing or similar security
fencing on top of fences shall not extend higher than three
feet beyond the top of the fence.
2. In the RH-35, SMU, UMU, CMU, IOA, BP, LI, HI, and EX Zoning
Districts:
a. Four feet when located within the required or provided
front yard or street yard, whichever is closer to the street.
§ 5-7-27 MONROE CODE § 5-7-27
1-1:444
b. Eight feet within the side yard or rear yard, but not in the
required front yard or beyond the front facade of the
principal building.
c. Where permitted, barb wire fencing or similar security
fencing on top of fences shall not extend higher than three
feet beyond the top of the fence.
3. Height shall be measured from the ground immediately under
the fence to the top rail of the fence.
(b) Height exceptions.
1. Decorative posts at a minimum spacing of 24 inches may
extend eight inches above the maximum height. See Figure
5-7-27b.
2. To accommodate slopes and/or lawn maintenance, up to four
inches of ground clearance shall be allowed which will not
contribute to the measurement of maximum fence height.
3. Berms with slopes less than or equal to a minimum of three
feet of horizontal to a maximum of every one foot of vertical
(i.e., 3:1) shall not contribute to the measurement of maximum
fence height.
Figure 5-7-27b: Fence Height and Exceptions
(8) Location.
(a) Fences must meet the visibility standards in § 5-7-10.
(b) Fences may be located within or on any property line.
(c) Fences legally constructed prior to the effective date of this Title 5
shall be permitted to be replaced in their existing location.
(9) Maintenance. Any and all fences, landscape walls, or decorative posts
shall be maintained in a structurally sound and attractive manner.
§ 5-7-27 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-27
1-1:445
§ 5-7-28. through § 5-7-30. (Reserved)
§ 5-7-31. Vibration standards.
Figure 5-7-27c: Fencing Standards
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of
vibration which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to
prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all uses and
activities which create detectable vibrations, except that these
standards shall not apply to vibrations created during the construction
of the principal use on the subject property.
(3) Review and approval. Through the site plan review process (see
§ 5-10-31), the Plan Commission shall review and approve all
development on the subject property.
(4) Depiction on required site plan. Any activity or equipment which
creates detectable vibrations outside the confines of a building shall be
depicted as to its location on the site plan required for the development
of the subject property.
(5) Requirements. No activity or operation shall cause or create earthborn
vibrations in excess of the displacement values given in Figure 5-7-31,
below.
§ 5-7-27 MONROE CODE § 5-7-31
1-1:446
§ 5-7-32. (Reserved)
§ 5-7-33. Air pollution standards.
(6) Method of measurement. Measurements shall be made at or beyond the
adjacent lot line or the nearest residential district boundary line.
Vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument capable
of simultaneously measuring in three mutually perpendicular
directions. The maximum permitted displacements shall be determined
in each zoning district by the following formula: D = K/f, where D =
displacement in inches; K = a constant to be determined by reference to
Figure 5-7-31 below; f = the frequency of vibration transmitted through
the ground (cycles per second).
Figure 5-7-31: Vibration Measurement Constant
K
All Other Districts
K
GI District
On or beyond any
adjacent lot line
Continuous 0.003 0.015
Impulsive 0.006 0.030
Less than 8 pulses per
24-hour period
0.015 0.075
On or beyond any
residential district
boundary line
Continuous 0.003 0.003
Impulsive 0.006 0.006
Less than 8 pulses per
24-hour period
0.015 0.015
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of air
pollution which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to
prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities, except that these standards shall not apply to air pollution
created during the construction of the principal use on the subject
property, or by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance
operations.
(3) Standards. In addition to all applicable state and federal standards, the
following shall apply:
(a) The emission of particulate matter containing a particle diameter
larger than 44 microns is prohibited.
§ 5-7-31 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-33
1-1:447
§ 5-7-34. Odor standards.
§ 5-7-35. Glare and heat standards.
(b) Emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density equal to or
greater than Number 2 on the Ringelmann Chart (US Bureau of
Mines) is prohibited at all times.
(c) Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such
sources as storage areas, yards, and roads within the boundaries of
any lot shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping,
paving, oiling, or other acceptable means.
(d) Outdoor wood furnaces are not permitted in the City of Monroe for
public health and safety reasons.
(e) All applicable state and federal standards.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of odor
which adversely affects adjoining properties in order to prevent the
creation of nuisances and to promote the healthy, safety, and general
welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities, except that these standards shall not apply to odors created
during the construction of the principal use on the subject property, or
by incidental fertilizer application, traffic, parking, loading, or
maintenance operations. Public landfills and public sanitary sewage
treatment plants shall be exempted from the requirements of this
section as essential public services.
(3) Standards. Except for food preparation and cooking odors emanating
from residential land uses, and odors associated with property
development and maintenance (such as construction, lawn care, and
the painting and roofing of structures), no odor shall be created for
periods exceeding a total of 15 minutes per any day which are
detectable (by a healthy observer such as the Zoning Administrator or a
designee who is unaffected by background odors such as tobacco or
food) at the boundary of the subject property, where said lot abuts
property within any residential or mixed use district, or the Business
Park (BP) District.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of glare
or heat in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities, except that these standards shall not apply to glare created
during the construction of the principal use on the subject property, or
by incidental traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance operations.
§ 5-7-33 MONROE CODE § 5-7-35
1-1:448
§ 5-7-36. Fire and explosions.
§ 5-7-37. Toxic, noxious, and waste materials.
§ 5-7-38. Hazardous materials.
(3) Standards. No direct or sky-reflected glare shall be visible at the lot line
of the subject property, whether from floodlights or from temperature
processes, such as combustion, welding, or otherwise. As determined
by the Zoning Administrator, there shall be no discernible transmission
of heat or heated air at the lot line. Solar systems regulated by Wis.
Stats. § 66.0401 shall be entitled to the protection of its provisions.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the creation of fire
and/or explosion hazards which adversely affect adjoining properties in
order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities.
(3) Standards. Any use involving materials which could decompose by
detonation shall be located not less than 400 feet from any residential
or mixed-use zoning district except that this standard shall not apply to
the storage or usage of liquefied petroleum or natural gas for normal
residential or business purposes. All activities and storage of flammable
and explosive materials at any point shall be provided with adequate
safety and firefighting devices in accordance with all fire prevention
codes of the State of Wisconsin.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the handling of toxic,
noxious, or waste material which adversely affects adjoining properties
in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities.
(3) Standards. No use shall discharge across the boundaries of the subject
property, or through percolation into the subsoil, toxic or noxious
material in such concentration as to be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to
private property or business. No use shall discharge at any point into
any public or private sewage disposal system or stream, or into the
ground, any liquid or solid materials except in accordance with the
regulations of the Wisconsin Department of Public Health.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide information to the
City regarding the nature of land uses which involve research,
production, storage, disposal, handling, and/or shipment of hazardous
materials.
§ 5-7-35 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-38
1-1:449
§ 5-7-39. through § 5-7-44. (Reserved)
§ 5-7-45. Regulations for vacant buildings.
(2) Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities involving any one or more of the following:
(a) Microorganism cultures subject to Wis. Stats. § 94.65.
(b) Pesticides subject to Wis. Stats. § 94.67(25).
(c) Biological products subject to Wis. Stats. § 95.39.
(d) Hazardous substances subject to Wis. Stats. § 100.37(1)(c).
(e) Toxic substances subject to Wis. Stats. § 101.58(2)(j).
(f) Infectious agents subject to Wis. Stats. § 101.58(2)(f).
(g) Any material for which the State of Wisconsin requires notification
of a local fire department.
(h) Any other uses, activities, or materials which are subject to county,
state, or federal hazardous, or related, materials regulations.
(3) Standards. All land uses involving such hazardous materials shall
submit a written description of such materials and the operations
involving such materials conducted on their property as part of the
required site plan submittal.
(1) This section shall apply to all buildings as of the effective date of this
Title 5.
(2) Where any building is vacated because 100% of the residential or
commercial use conducted thereon is being terminated or relocated to
a different building, the party that vacated the site shall not impose
limits on the type of reuse of the vacated site through conditions of sale
or lease.
(3) With the exception of historic buildings and landmarks, any building
that is completely vacated for any reason shall be subject to the
following provisions:
(a) The owner must file with the City a written statement as to the
names, phone numbers, and addresses for all persons who are in
control of the property and building.
(b) The owner shall be required to meet the requirements defined
below based on the amount of time the building remains vacant:
§ 5-7-38 MONROE CODE § 5-7-45
1-1:450
§ 5-7-46. Administration and enforcement.
Determinations necessary for administration and enforcement of
performance standards set forth in this article range from those which can
be made with satisfactory accuracy by a reasonable person using normal
senses and no mechanical equipment, to those requiring great technical
competence and complex equipment for precise measurement. It is the
intent of this chapter that:
Figure 5-7-45: Steps for Addressing Building Vacancy
Time Period
Building is Vacant Requirement
1 year of vacancy Install a fire department access box for annual fire
inspection if the Fire Department determines it is
necessary. Remove signage per the requirements of
§ 5-9-37.
5 years of vacancy The City will complete a comprehensive maintenance
review of the property and may require the property
owner to meet the standards of the Property
Maintenance and Building Codes.
10 years of vacancy If the building is not maintained, the City may require
the site to be cleared of all improvements and
returned to vegetative ground cover.
(c) Within the first quarter of each year of complete vacancy, the owner
shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a statement as to the
condition of the building and prospects for removal or reoccupancy
of the building(s).
(d) At any time following complete vacancy, the City may utilize other
enforcement options available to it to ensure property maintenance
and upkeep of the building and site such as requiring the property
owner to meet the standards of the Property Maintenance and
Building Codes.
(e) Occupancy of any portion of the building(s) and/or the exterior
grounds for a period of less than 90 consecutive days shall not be
considered to remove the vacancy status of the building under this
section.
(1) Where determinations can be made by the Zoning Administrator using
equipment normally available to the City or obtainable without
extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be so made before
notice of violations is issued.
(2) Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it
unreasonable for the City to maintain the personnel or equipment
necessary for making difficult or unusual determinations, procedures
shall be available for causing corrections or apparent violations of
§ 5-7-45 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-7-46
1-1:451
Chapter 5-8
LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
§ 5-8-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish landscaping requirements and
other regulations intended to preserve and maintain vegetation within in a
manner that promotes the natural resource protection, aesthetic, and public
health goals of the City.
§ 5-8-2. Applicability.
performance standards, for protecting individuals from arbitrary,
capricious, and unreasonable administration and enforcement of
performance standard regulations, and for protecting the general
public from unnecessary costs for administration and enforcement.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall give written notice, by certified
mail or other means, ensuring a signed receipt for such notice to
the person or persons responsible for the alleged violations. The
notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation and the
reasons why the Zoning Administrator believes there is a violation
in fact and shall require an answer or correction of the alleged
violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator.
(b) The notice shall state, and it is hereby declared, that failure to reply
or to correct the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator within the time limit set constitutes admission of
violation of the terms of this chapter. The notice shall further state
that upon request of those to whom it is directed, technical
determination as described in this chapter will be made, and that if
violations as alleged are found, costs of such determinations shall
be charged against those responsible for the violation, in addition
to such other penalties as may be appropriate, but that if it is
determined that no violation exists, the cost of the determination
will be paid by the City.
(1) The requirements of this section shall not apply retroactively to existing
buildings, structures, or paved areas, including requirements for
bufferyards.
(2) Any use for which site plan approval is required under § 5-10-31(2) shall
provide landscaping in accordance with the regulations of this section,
including the following development:
(a) New buildings and paved areas.
(b) Expansions of existing buildings that exceed 50% of the existing
floor area of the building.
§ 5-7-46 MONROE CODE § 5-8-2
1-1:452
(c) Expansions of paved areas that exceed 50% of the existing paved
area.
(d) In the case of expansions, only the new portion of building or paved
area shall provide landscaping per the requirements of this
chapter.
(3) Where insufficient site area remains to comply with all provisions of this
section, the City may require compliance to the greatest extent
practical.
(4) This chapter is designed to encourage preservation of existing plants on
the site by granting them double point values per § 5-8-4.
(5) Single-family, two-family, agricultural land uses, and all uses in the
Central Mixed-Use Zoning District are exempt from landscaping
requirements.
(6) Changes to the landscaping plan. The City may allow or require
changes to the landscaping plan of § 5-8-3 or the landscaping
requirements of § 5-8-4, as provided for below.
(a) The Zoning Administrator and the Plan Commission shall have the
authority to allow alterations or substitutions of one type of plant
for another to the landscaping requirements as long as the altered
requirements achieve an equivalent or greater level of landscaping
on a site. Such alternations or substitutions may be based on the
following:
1. Unusual conditions.
2. The consideration of landscape architecture approaches.
3. The preservation of existing trees.
4. The consideration of Wisconsin native landscaping.
5. When larger size plantings are provided as part of the overall
landscape plan.
6. When more shrubs may be appropriate versus more trees, and
vice versa.
7. Utility or other easements.
(b) The Zoning Administrator and the Plan Commission shall have the
authority to require the modification of any landscaping plan,
including the rearrangement of landscaping points on a site, to
better meet aesthetic, environmental, and stormwater objectives.
§ 5-8-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-3
1-1:453
§ 5-8-3. Landscape plan.
The applicant shall provide a landscaping plan drawn at a reasonable scale
to clearly delineate the landscape improvements and depict the following,
at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator:
§ 5-8-4. Landscaping requirements.
Landscaping shall be provided based on the following requirements for
street frontages, paved areas, and bufferyards.
(1) The name and address of the developer/owner, name of architect/
designer, date of plan preparation, date and description of all revisions,
name of project or development, scale of plan, and North point
indication.
(2) All property lines and easements.
(3) Zoning of the subject property and abutting properties.
(4) The location, size, and type (common and botanical) of all existing plant
material on the site and designation of all trees and shrubs to be saved
and/or removed.
(5) The location, quantity, size at planting, and type (common and
botanical) of all proposed plant material. All plants shall be drawn at
the spread they will achieve at maturity.
(6) The number of landscaping points per Figure 5-8-4d for all plant
material.
(7) Linear feet of the new/expanded building foundation and street
frontage.
(8) Square footage of the total lot and new/expanded paved area.
(1) Building foundations.
(a) For every 100 linear feet of building foundation, the landscaping
installed shall at a minimum meet the number of landscaping points
specified in Figure 5-8-4d.
(b) Shade trees and tall trees shall not be used to meet building
foundation landscaping requirements.
(c) Building foundation landscaping shall be placed so that at maturity,
the plant's drip line is located within 10 feet of the building
foundation.
(d) Building expansions shall be subject to the same landscaping
formula requirements as new buildings (see Figure 5-8-4a). The
formula shall not be applied to portions of the building foundation
developed prior to the adoption of this Title 5.
§ 5-8-3 MONROE CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:454
(e) The measurement of the building foundation may be simplified as
the smallest single rectangle that contains the entire building
perimeter, except that the sides of the building facing an adjacent
public street, where the actual perimeter shall be measured.
(2) Paved areas.
(a) For every 10 off-street parking stalls or 10,000 square feet of
pavement (whichever yields the greater landscaping requirement),
landscaping shall at a minimum meet the number of landscaping
points specified in Figure 5-8-4a.
(b) Paved area landscaping shall be placed so that at maturity, the
plant's drip line is located within 10 feet of the paved area.
Landscaping area does not have to be provided in one contiguous
area. Plants used to fulfill this requirement shall visually screen
parking, loading, and circulation areas from view from public
streets.
(c) A minimum of 30% of all points shall be devoted to medium or tall
trees, or a combination of such trees, and a minimum of 40% of all
points shall be devoted to shrubs.
(d) Parking lot design.
1. Landscaped medians shall be used to break large parking
areas into distinct pods, with a maximum of 100 spaces in any
one pod.
2. Parking spaces must be broken by a tree island at the rate of
one island for each linear row of 12 parking spaces for singlerow
or peninsula configurations, or for each 24 parking spaces
in double row configurations.
3. All tree islands and landscaped areas with trees shall have a
minimum width of nine feet as measured from outside the curb
or frame.
4. All landscaped areas without trees, but planted with shrubs,
shall have a minimum width of three feet measured from inside
the curb or frame.
(e) Landscaping used to comply with the parking lot screening
requirements of § 5-7-11(9) shall count toward the landscaping
requirements of this section.
(f) Paved area expansions shall be subject to the same landscaping
formula requirements as new paved areas (see Figure 5-8-4a). The
formula shall not be applied to paved areas developed prior to the
adoption of this Title 5.
(3) Street frontages.
§ 5-8-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:455
(a) For every 100 linear feet of street frontage of a developed lot
abutting a public street right-of-way, the landscaping installed shall
at a minimum meet the number of landscaping points specified in
Figure 5-8-4a.
(b) Street frontage landscaping shall be placed so that at maturity, the
plant's drip line is located within 10 feet of the public street rightof-
way.
(c) Unless meeting the requirements in Subsection (3)(e), below,
landscaping shall not be located within a public right-of-way.
Landscaping shall not impede vehicle or pedestrian visibility. See
§ 5-7-5.
(d) Shrubs shall not be used to meet street frontage landscaping
requirements. All required points shall be devoted to a combination
of medium deciduous trees and tall deciduous trees.
(e) The City may require the street frontage landscaping to be placed
within the right-of-way and may collect fees to purchase and install
such landscaping.
(4) Yards.
(a) For every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of all principal and
accessory buildings on the site, the landscaping installed shall at a
minimum meet the number of landscaping points specified in
Figure 5-8-4a.
(b) The intent of this section is to provide yard shade and to require a
visual screen of a minimum of six feet in height for all detached
exterior appurtenances (such as HVAC, utility boxes, standpipes,
stormwater discharge pipes and other pipes).
(c) Landscaping required by this section is most effective if located
away from other areas required for landscaping such as building
foundations, street frontages, paved areas, protected green space
areas, or bufferyards.
(d) Building expansions shall be subject to the same landscaping
formula requirements as new buildings (see Figure 5-8-4a). The
formula shall not be applied to portions of buildings developed
prior to the adoption of this Title 5.
(5) Bufferyards. A bufferyard is a combination of distance and a visual
buffer or barrier. It includes an area, together with the combination of
plantings, berms, and fencing that are required to eliminate or reduce
existing or potential nuisances (e.g., dirt, litter, noise, glare, signs, and
incompatible land uses, buildings, or parking areas).
(a) The required level of bufferyard opacity is listed in Figure 5-8-4b.
Detailed bufferyard requirements are listed in Figure 5-8-4c.
Opacity is a quantitatively derived measure which indicates the
§ 5-8-4 MONROE CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:456
degree to which a particular bufferyard screens the abutting
property. The required level of opacity indicated is directly related
to the degree to which the potential character of development
differs between different zoning districts.
(b) Bufferyards shall be located along (and within) the outer perimeter
of a lot wherever two different zoning districts abut one another.
Bufferyards shall not be required in front yards or along public
street frontages.
(c) To ensure that the year-round screening objectives are fulfilled,
only the plant classifications in Figure 5-8-5b listed as "Appropriate
for Screening" shall count toward bufferyard point totals, unless
nonscreening plants are used in combination with a solid fence or a
berm of six feet or more, in accordance with Figure 5-8-4c.
(d) Reduction of required bufferyard width.
1. Intent. This subsection is intended to allow for the reduction of
the required width of a required bufferyard where the
presence of permanently protected green space or similar
areas provides equivalent permanent screening and separation
benefits as would be provided by the otherwise required
bufferyard.
2. Where the minimum permitted width for the required
bufferyard is not available under the current or proposed state
of development, the Zoning Administrator may reduce the
width required for the bufferyard to that currently available on
the site, provided that the portion of the site that requires a
bufferyard contains one or more of the following:
a. Steep slopes that contain retaining walls or rip-rap.
b. Permanently undevelopable green space or other
permanently protected green space designated on site
plans such as a native or restored prairies or park
savannas, wetlands, bodies of water, floodplains,
drainageways, upland woods, stormwater basins, or other
natural resource protection areas, including areas
protected by covenants or conversation easements.
3. If permanently protected green space is located on an
adjoining property adjacent to the portion of a site that
requires a bufferyard, the Zoning Administrator may reduce
the width required for the bufferyard. The reduction shall
consist of no more than one foot for every three feet of
permanently protected green space on the adjoining property,
as measured from the property line at a right angle into said
adjacent property. There shall be no reduction in the number of
landscape points required.
§ 5-8-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:457
(e) Use of required bufferyard and landscaped areas.
1. Any and all required bufferyards or landscaped areas may be
used for passive recreation activities. Said areas may contain
pedestrian or bike trails provided that no required landscaping
material is eliminated; the total width of the required
bufferyard, or the total area of required landscaping, is
maintained; and all other regulations of this chapter are met.
2. No swimming pools, tennis courts, sports fields, golf courses,
or other such similar active recreational uses shall be
permitted.
3. No parking, buildings, outdoor light fixtures, and no outdoor
display of storage of materials shall be permitted.
4. Paving in such areas shall be limited to that required for
necessary access to or across the subject property or for a
passive recreational use such as paved multiuse trails or
pedestrian walkways.
(6) Determination of landscaping requirements.
(a) The requirements of this chapter are additive to each other and any
other landscaping or screening requirements in this chapter.
(b) Landscape points used to meet one requirement (e.g., building
foundations, paved areas, street frontages, yards, or bufferyards)
shall not be used to meet another requirement.
(7) Measurement and calculation.
(a) Landscaping point values shall be doubled for mature existing
landscape plantings that are retained and protected with the
development of the site. Existing plantings eligible for double point
values shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(b) In calculating the number of required landscaping points under the
provisions of this chapter, all areas and distances on which
required calculations are based shall be rounded up to the nearest
whole number of square feet or linear feet.
(c) Any partial plant derived from the required calculations of this
chapter (for example: 23.3 shade trees) shall be rounded up to the
next whole plant (for example: 24 shade trees).
(8) Utility easements. Landscaping materials, fences and berms located
within a duly recorded utility, stormwater, or a pedestrian easement
shall not count toward meeting a landscaping requirement, unless
authorized otherwise by the City and the easement holder. The width of
such areas may be counted as part of a landscaping width requirement
for bufferyards.
§ 5-8-4 MONROE CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:458
(9) Other green space areas. Green space areas not used for landscape
plantings other than natural resource protection areas shall be graded
and seeded or sodded with an acceptable maintainable seed mix,
restored to native vegetation. Mulch of plantings or planting beds is
acceptable, provided that such mulching consists of organic or natural
materials. Mulches shall be installed so that they will not erode, fall, be
plowed or otherwise transported into walks, drives, streets or other
hard surfaced portions of the site. Alternatively, such areas may be
maintained in crop production if a principal use exists on-site and if
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
Figure 5-8-4a: Landscaping Requirements for Regular Development*
Landscaping Component
Building
Foundation
Paved
Areas
Street
Frontages Yards Bufferyards
Type of
Landscaping:
Shade trees
and tall
trees not
allowed
A minimum
of 40% of
points
devoted
shrubs and
30% to tall
and/or
medium
trees
Shrubs not
allowed.
All points
to be
devoted to
tall and/or
medium
deciduous
trees
Any type
allowed
See types
"Appropriate
for
Screening"
in Figure
5-8-5b
Placement
of
Landscaping:
Within 10
feet of
building
foundation
Within 10
feet of
paved area
or within
paved area
Within 10
feet of
street
right-ofway
Any
location
Within
bufferyard,
per Figure
5-8-4f
Calculation
of
Landscaping
Points:
Points per
100 linear
feet of
building
foundation
Greater of:
points per
10 parking
stalls or
10,000
square feet
of paved
area
Points per
100 feet of
street
right-ofway
frontage
Points per
1,000
square feet
of gross
floor area
for all
buildings on
lot
See Figure
5-8-4f
Zoning
Districts:
§ 5-8-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:459
Figure 5-8-4a: Landscaping Requirements for Regular Development*
Landscaping Component
Building
Foundation
Paved
Areas
Street
Frontages Yards Bufferyards
Rural
Holding
(RH-35)
20 20 20 10
Single-
Family
Res. (SR-3)
40 40 40 20
Single-
Family
Res. (SR-4)
40 40 40 20
Single-
Family
Res. (SR-5)
40 40 40 20
Single-
Family
Res. (SR-7)
40 40 40 20
Duplex
Res. (DR-8)
50 50 50 25
One and
Two Fam.
Res.
(TR-10)
50 50 50 25
Multi-
Family
Res.
(MR-15)
60 60 60 30
Multi-
Family
Res.
(MR-30)
80 80 80 40
Mobile
Home Res.
(MH-7)
40 40 40 20
Neigh.
Mixed Use
(NMU)
40 40 40 20
Institutional
(I)
40 40 40 20
Suburban
Mixed Use
(SMU)
40 40 40 20
Only
required
along
certain
zoning
district
boundaries
See Figure
5-8-4b for
requirements
§ 5-8-4 MONROE CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:460
Figure 5-8-4a: Landscaping Requirements for Regular Development*
Landscaping Component
Building
Foundation
Paved
Areas
Street
Frontages Yards Bufferyards
Urban
Mixed Use
(UMU)
40 40 40 20
Central
Mixed Use
(CMU)
0 0 0 0
Intensive
Outdoor
(IOA)
40 40 40 20
Business
Park (BP)
40 40 40 20
Light
Industrial
(LI)
25 25 25 15
Heavy
Industrial
(HI)
20 20 20 10
Extraction
(EX)
20 20 20 10
*Note: Single-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, and
agricultural land uses are exempt from landscaping requirements.
§ 5-8-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:461
Figure 5-8-4b: Required Bufferyard Opacity Values
Apply the required
opacity value from
this Figure to
Figure 5-8-4c and
select the most
appropriate
bufferyard option.
Note that certain
land uses,
conditional uses,
and planned
development
projects may have
more stringent
bufferyard
requirements
RHS-3RS5-R3-S4RS-R5-D7RT-R8M-1R0M-1R5M-3H0N-7MIUSMUUMCUMIUOABPLI HIEX
Rural Holding
(RH-35) *
Single Family
Residential-3
(SR-3)
* 0
Single Family
Residential-4
(SR-4)
* 0 0
Single Family
Residential-5
(SR-5)
* 0 0 0
Single Family
Residential-7
(SR-7)
* 0 0 0 0
Duplex
Residential
(DR-8)
* 0.10.10.10.10
One and Two
Family
Residential
(TR-10)
* 0.10.10.10.10.10
Multi-Family
Residential-15
(MR-15)
* 0.20.20.20.20.10.1 0
Zoning
District
of
Subject
Property:
Multi-Family
Residential-30
(MR-30)
* 0.30.30.30.30.20.20.1 0
§ 5-8-4 MONROE CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:462
Figure 5-8-4b: Required Bufferyard Opacity Values
Apply the required
opacity value from
this Figure to
Figure 5-8-4c and
select the most
appropriate
bufferyard option.
Note that certain
land uses,
conditional uses,
and planned
development
projects may have
more stringent
bufferyard
requirements
RHS-3RS5-R3-S4RS-R5-D7RT-R8M-1R0M-1R5M-3H0N-7MIUSMUUMCUMIUOABPLI HIEX
Mobile Home
Residential
(MH-7)
* 0.30.30.30.30.20.20.10.1 0
Neighborhood
Mixed Use
(NMU)
* 0.20.20.20.20.10.10.10.10.10
Institutional (I) * 0.30.30.30.30.30.30.20.20.20.10
Suburban Mixed
Use (SMU) * 0.30.30.30.30.30.30.20.20.20.20.10
Urban Mixed
Use (UMU) * 0.40.40.40.40.40.40.30.30.20.30.10.10
Central Mixed
Use (CMU) * 0.40.40.40.40.40.40.30.30.20.30.10.10.1 0
Intensive
Outdoor Activity
(IOA)
* 0.50.50.50.50.50.50.40.40.40.50.30.20.20.2 0
Business Park
(BP) * 0.40.40.40.40.40.40.30.30.20.40.20.10.10.1 0 0
Light Industrial
(LI) * 0.50.50.50.50.50.50.40.40.40.50.30.20.20.20.20.20
Heavy Industrial
(HI) * 0.60.60.60.60.50.50.40.40.40.50.40.40.40.40.30.30.20
Extraction (EX) * 1.01.01.01.01.01.01.01.01.01.01.00.80.80.80.80.80.80.80
* For properties zoned RH-35, base bufferyard requirements on the
proposed zoning district for said property as depicted on the Future Land
Use Map in the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan.
§ 5-8-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:463
Figure 5-8-4c: Detailed Bufferyard Requirements
Opacity
Required
Number of
Landscaping
Points per 100
feet
Required
Minimum Width
(feet)
Required
Structure
00 10 Minimum 44-inch
picket fence*
00 10 Minimum 4-foot
wood rail fence*
40 10 N/A
36 15 N/A
33 20 N/A
31 25 N/A
0.05
29 30 N/A
00 10 Minimum 44-inch
picket fence*
38 10 Minimum 4-foot
wood rail fence*
91 10 N/A
80 15 N/A
73 20 N/A
68 25 N/A
65 30 N/A
62 35 N/A
0.10
00 35 Minimum 4-foot
berm
00 10 Minimum 6-foot
solid fence*
84 10 Minimum 44-inch
picket fence*
133 15 Minimum 4-foot
wood rail fence*
198 15 N/A
173 20 N/A
158 25 N/A
149 30 N/A
140 35 N/A
0.20
10 35 Minimum 4-foot
berm
§ 5-8-4 MONROE CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:464
Figure 5-8-4c: Detailed Bufferyard Requirements
Opacity
Required
Number of
Landscaping
Points per 100
feet
Required
Minimum Width
(feet)
Required
Structure
135 40 N/A
00 40 Minimum 5-foot
berm
00 10 Minimum 6-foot
solid fence*
198 15 Minimum 44-inch
picket fence*
320 20 N/A
240 20 Minimum 4-foot
wood rail fence*
276 25 N/A
252 30 N/A
235 35 N/A
104 35 Minimum 4-foot
berm
223 40 N/A
44 40 Minimum 5-foot
berm
215 45 N/A
209 50 N/A
0.30
00 50 Minimum 6-foot
berm
53 10 Minimum 6-foot
solid fence*
330 20 Minimum 44-inch
picket fence*
440 25 N/A
362 25 Minimum 4-foot
wood rail fence*
385 30 N/A
349 35 N/A
208 35 Minimum 4-foot
berm
0.40
327 40 N/A
§ 5-8-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:465
Figure 5-8-4c: Detailed Bufferyard Requirements
Opacity
Required
Number of
Landscaping
Points per 100
feet
Required
Minimum Width
(feet)
Required
Structure
148 40 Minimum 5-foot
berm
310 45 N/A
299 50 N/A
56 50 Minimum 6-foot
berm
150 10 Minimum 6-foot
solid fence*
564 30 N/A
405 30 Minimum 44-inch
picket fence*
492 30 Minimum 4-foot
wood rail fence*
499 35 N/A
319 35 Minimum 4-foot
berm
454 40 N/A
261 40 Minimum 5-foot
berm
422 45 N/A
405 50 N/A
160 50 Minimum 6-foot
berm
388 55 N/A
0.50
374 60 N/A
250 10 Minimum 6-foot
solid fence*
433 35 Minimum 4-foot
berm
541 35 Minimum 44-inch
picket fence*
630 35 Minimum 4-foot
wood rail fence*
0.60
626 40 N/A
§ 5-8-4 MONROE CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:466
Figure 5-8-4c: Detailed Bufferyard Requirements
Opacity
Required
Number of
Landscaping
Points per 100
feet
Required
Minimum Width
(feet)
Required
Structure
379 40 Minimum 5-foot
berm
570 45 N/A
525 50 N/A
270 50 Minimum 6-foot
berm
500 55 N/A
480 60 N/A
415 30 Minimum 6-foot
solid fence*
655 40 Minimum 4-foot
berm
627 45 Minimum 5-foot
berm
873 45 Minimum 44-inch
picket fence*
910 50 N/A
505 50 Minimum 6-foot
berm
809 50 Minimum 4-foot
wood rail fence*
804 55 N/A
744 60 N/A
710 65 N/A
0.80
677 70 N/A
636 40 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence
732 50 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence
751 50 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence
867 55 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence
1.00
1091 60 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence
§ 5-8-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:467
Figure 5-8-4c: Detailed Bufferyard Requirements
Opacity
Required
Number of
Landscaping
Points per 100
feet
Required
Minimum Width
(feet)
Required
Structure
1136 60 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence
1083 65 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence
994 70 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence
934 75 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence
892 80 Minimum 8-foot
solid fence
Notes: *Fences contributing to landscaping requirements are not permitted
along street frontages for nonresidential uses. Where used in combination
with plant materials to meet bufferyard requirements, a minimum of 50% of
all plant materials shall be located on the exterior side (the side away from
the center of the subject property) of the fence. A building wall which does
not contain doors (except those used for emergency exit) may be used to
satisfy the required fence portions of the bufferyard requirements.
Figure 5-8-4d; Landscaping Points
Plant Category
Landscaping Points
Per Plant1
Minimum Permitted
Installation Size
Shade tree 50 1 1/4" diameter
Tall deciduous tree 30 1 1/4" diameter
Medium deciduous tree 15 1 1/4" diameter
Low deciduous tree 10 1 1/4" diameter
Tall evergreen tree 40 4' tall
Medium evergreen tree 20 4' tall
Low evergreen tree 12 4' tall
Tall deciduous shrub 5 12" tall
Medium deciduous
shrub
3 12" tall
Low deciduous shrub 1 12" tall
Medium evergreen
shrub
5 12" tall/wide
Low evergreen shrub 3 12" tall/wide
§ 5-8-4 MONROE CODE § 5-8-4
1-1:468
§ 5-8-5. Classification of plant species.
Species suitable for landscaping and compatible with local climate and soil
factors are listed in Figure 5-8-5a. Plant species native to Wisconsin are
noted by an asterisk (*). This list is not intended to be exhaustive, and the
Zoning Administrator shall review proposals for the applicability of species
not listed and is authorized to approve appropriate similar species. See
Figure 5-8-5b for species appropriate for specific and common landscaping
situations (e.g., planting under power lines), and Figure 5-8-5c for a list of
species to use sparingly or to avoid.
Figure 5-8-5a: Commonly Used Appropriate Landscaping Species
Plant Category
Landscaping
Point Value Per
Plant Common Name Scientific Name
Shade trees 55 Maple (red) Acer spp.*
Shade trees 50 Birch (river,
paper)
Betula spp.
Shade trees 50 Linden
(basswood,
redmond, little
leaf)
Tilia spp.
Shade trees 50 Elms (hybrids) Ulmus spp.
Shade trees 55 Oak (white) Quercus spp.*
Shade trees 50 Honey locust
(male cultivars)
Gleditsia
triacanthos var.
inermis
Tall deciduous
trees
30 Chanticleer pear Pyrus calleryana
'Chanticleer'
Tall deciduous
trees
33 Hackberry Celtis
occidentalis*
Tall deciduous
trees
30 Chinkapin oak Quercus
muehlenbergii
Tall deciduous
trees
30 Ginkgo (male
cultivars)
Ginkgo biloba
Figure 5-8-4d; Landscaping Points
Plant Category
Landscaping Points
Per Plant1
Minimum Permitted
Installation Size
Noncontributory plants 0 N/A
Source: A Guide to Selecting Landscape Plants for Wisconsin, E.R.
Hasselkus, UW-Extension Publication: A2865
1 Point values will be increased by 10% for the use of Wisconsin native
plant species
§ 5-8-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-5
1-1:469
Figure 5-8-5a: Commonly Used Appropriate Landscaping Species
Plant Category
Landscaping
Point Value Per
Plant Common Name Scientific Name
Tall deciduous
trees
30 State Street
miyabe maple
Acer miyabei
'Morton'
Medium
deciduous trees
15 Paperbark maple Acer griseum
Medium
deciduous trees
16.5 Serviceberry Amelanchier*
Medium
deciduous trees
15 Winter king
hawthorn
Crataegus viridis
Medium
deciduous trees
16.5 Hornbeam
(musclewood)
Carpinus
caroliniana*
Medium
deciduous trees
16.5 Ironwood/
hophornbeam
Ostrya virginiana*
Medium
deciduous trees
15 Callery pear Pyrus calleryana
Low deciduous
trees
11 Hazelnut Corylus spp.*
Low deciduous
trees
10 Flowering
crabapples
Malus spp.
Low deciduous
trees
10 Japanese tree lilac Syringa reticulata
Tall evergreen
trees
40 Firs Abies spp.
Tall evergreen
trees
44 Black hills spruce Picea glauca var.
densata*
Tall evergreen
trees
40 Serbian spruce Picea omorika
Tall evergreen
trees
44 Pine (except
Austrian)
Pinus spp. (not
nigra)*
Tall/medium
evergreen
33 Juniper (red
cedar)
Juniperus
virginiana*
Tall/medium
evergreen
33 Arborvitae Thuja spp.*
Tall/medium
evergreen
33 Eastern hemlock Tsuga
canadensis*
Low evergreen
trees
12 Juniper
(Mountbatten)
Juniperus
chinensis
Tall deciduous
shrubs
5 Elderberry Sambucus
candensis "aurea"
§ 5-8-5 MONROE CODE § 5-8-5
1-1:470
Figure 5-8-5a: Commonly Used Appropriate Landscaping Species
Plant Category
Landscaping
Point Value Per
Plant Common Name Scientific Name
Tall deciduous
shrubs
5.5 Dogwood (gray,
pagoda)
Cornus spp.*
Medium
deciduous shrubs
3 Weigela Weigela spp.
Medium
deciduous shrubs
3 Cotoneaster Cotoneaster spp.
Medium
deciduous shrubs
3 Forsythia
(Virgina, rugosa)
Forsythia
Medium
deciduous shrubs
3.3 Shrub Rose Rosa spp.*
Medium
deciduous shrubs
3.3 Viburnum
(arrowwood,
warfaring tree,
nannyberry)
Viburnum spp.*
Medium
deciduous shrubs
3.3 Potentilla Potentilla spp.*
Medium
deciduous shrubs
3.3 Bush honeysuckle Diervilla spp.*
Medium
deciduous shrubs
3 Ninebark Physocarpus spp.
Low deciduous
shrubs
1 Azalea Rhododendron
(Azalea) spp.
Low deciduous
shrubs
1.1 Gro-low sumac Rbus aromatica*
Tall-medium
evergreen shrubs
5 Juniper (Pfitzer) Juniperus x
pfitzeriana
Tall-medium
evergreen shrubs
5 Yew (Japanese) Taxus spp.
Low evergreen
shrubs
2 Boxwood Buxus spp.
Low evergreen
shrubs
2 Juniper (sergeant,
creeping,
andorra)
Juniperus spp.
Perennial
plantings
22/20 sf Coneflower Echinacea spp.*
Perennial
plantings
20/20 sf Catmint Nepeta spp.
§ 5-8-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-5
1-1:471
Figure 5-8-5a: Commonly Used Appropriate Landscaping Species
Plant Category
Landscaping
Point Value Per
Plant Common Name Scientific Name
Perennial
plantings
22/20 sf Black-eyed susan Rudbeckia birta*
Perennial
plantings
20/20 sf Lily Lilium spp.
Perennial
plantings
20/20 sf Daylily Hemerocallis spp.
Perennial
plantings
20/20 sf Ornamental grass varies
Perennial
plantings
20/20 sf Lady's mantel Alchemilla spp.
Perennial
plantings
22/20 sf Columbine Aquilegia spp.*
Perennial
plantings
22/20 sf Aster Aster spp.*
Perennial
plantings
20/20 sf Jack frost Brunnera
macrophylla
Perennial
plantings
22/20 sf Blazing star Liatris spp.*
Perennial
plantings
20/20 sf Black bugbane Cimicifuga
simplex
"Brunette"
Perennial
plantings
20/20 sf Peony Paeonia spp.
Perennial
plantings
20/20 sf Pachysandra Pachysandra spp.
Perennial
plantings
22/20 sf Stonecrops Sedum spp.*
Perennial
plantings
20/20 sf Astilbe Astilbe spp.
Perennial
plantings
20/20 sf Hosta Hosta spp.
* Wisconsin native plant species, identified with an asterisk, are
preferred plant materials; an additional 10% has been added to their
respective point values.
§ 5-8-5 MONROE CODE § 5-8-5
1-1:472
Figure 5-8-5b: Sample Plant Species Appropriate for Specific
Situations
Classification
Landscaping
Point Value Per
Plant Common Name Scientific Name
Low deciduous
tree
Flowering
crabapple
Malus spp.
Appropriate for
planting under
power lines Low deciduous
tree
Japanese tree
lilac
Syringa reticulata
Low deciduous
tree
Japanese tree
lilac
Syringa reticulata
Medium
deciduous shrub
Viburnum
(arrowwood,
warfaring tree,
nannyberry)
Viburnum spp.
Appropriate for
utility easements
Low evergreen
shrub
Boxwood Buxus spp.
Tall evergreen
tree
Firs Abies spp.
Tall evergreen
tree
Juniper (red
cedar)
Juniperus
virginiana
Tall evergreen
tree
Spruces Picea spp.
Tall evergreen
tree
Pines Pinus spp.
Tall evergreen
tree
Douglas fir Pseudotsuga
menziesii var.
glauca
Tall evergreen
tree
Eastern hemlock Tsuga canadensis
Appropriate for
screening
Medium
evergreen tree
Arborvitae Thuja
occidentalis
Shade tree/tall or
medium
deciduous tree
(varies by
species)
Maple Acer spp.
Shade tree Sweet gum Liquidambar
styraciflua
Shade tree (not
street)
European horse
chestnut
Aesculus
hippocastranum
Salt-tolerant
Shade tree White oak Quercus alba
§ 5-8-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-5
1-1:473
Figure 5-8-5b: Sample Plant Species Appropriate for Specific
Situations
Classification
Landscaping
Point Value Per
Plant Common Name Scientific Name
Low deciduous
tree
Flowering
crabapples
Malus spp.
Low deciduous
tree
Crape myrtle Lagerstroemia
indica
Deciduous tree Honey locust Gleditsia
triacanthos
Tall deciduous
shrub
Dogwood (gray,
pagoda)
Cornus spp.
Tall deciduous
shrub
Japanese tree
lilac
Syringa reticulata
Tall deciduous
shrub
Common lilac Syringa vulgaris
Medium
deciduous shrub
Barberry Berberis spp.
Medium
deciduous shrub
Viburnum Adoxaceae
Medium
deciduous shrub
Forsythia
(Virgina, rugosa)
Forsythia spp.
Medium
deciduous shrub
Rugosa rose Rosa rugosa
Small deciduous
shrub
Potentilla Cinquefoils
Low deciduous
shrub
Azalea Azalea spp.
Low deciduous
shrub
Apline current Ribes alpinum
Low deciduous
shrub
Snowberry Symphoricarpos
Tall evergreen
tree
American holly Ilex opaca
Tall deciduous
shrub
Staghorn sumac Rhus typhina
Tall deciduous
shrub
Mockorange Philadelphus
Tall/medium
evergreen shrub
Pfitzer juniper Juniperus x
pfitzeriana
§ 5-8-5 MONROE CODE § 5-8-5
1-1:474
Figure 5-8-5b: Sample Plant Species Appropriate for Specific
Situations
Classification
Landscaping
Point Value Per
Plant Common Name Scientific Name
Tall/medium
evergreen shrub
Yew (Japanese) Taxus spp.
Low evergreen
shrub
Boxwood Buxus spp.
Figure 5-8-5c: Prohibited Species and Species to Use Sparingly
Classification
Common
Name
Scientific
Name
Prohibited2
or Use
Sparingly1 Reason Alternative
Shade tree Nonresistant
elms
Ulmus spp. Prohibited Dutch elm
disease
Shade tree Boxelder Acer
negundo
Prohibited Spread
quickly
Shade tree Freeman
maple
Acer x
freemanii
Prohibited Overplanted
Shade tree Norway
maples
Acer
platanoides
Prohibited Overplanted,
dense
Shade tree Red maples Acer
rubrum
Use
spairngly
Prefer
acidic soil
Shade tree Sugar
maples
Acer
saccharum
Use
sparingly
Thrives only
in certain
conditions;
picky
Shade tree Silver
maple
Acer
saccharinum
Prohibited Weak wood
and
aggressive
root
systems
Disease
Resistant
Elm
cultivars:'Princeton,'
'Valley
Forge,' and
'New
Harmony'
Littleleaf
Linden
Tilia
cordata,
(urban
tolerant)
Kentucky
Coffeetree
Gymnocaldus
dioicus
River birch
Betula
nigra
Oaks
Quercus
spp.
§ 5-8-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-5
1-1:475
Figure 5-8-5c: Prohibited Species and Species to Use Sparingly
Classification
Common
Name
Scientific
Name
Prohibited2
or Use
Sparingly1 Reason Alternative
Tall
deciduous
tree
Autumn
blaze maple
Acer
truncatum
Use
sparingly
Overplanted
Tall
deciduous
tree
Ash trees Fraxinus
spp.
Prohibited Emerald
ash borer
Tall
deciduous
tree
Bradford
pears
Pyrus
calleryana
"bradford"
Use
sparingly
Poorly
branches,
tend to
break
Tall
deciduous
tree
Cottonwood Popuplus
deltoids,
populus
fremontii,
or populus
nigra
Prohibited Weak wood
and
aggressive
root
systems
Tall
deciduous
tree
Poplar Populus Use
sparingly
Aggressive
root
systems
Tall
deciduous
tree
Willow Salix Prohibited Drops
branches
Ginkgo
Ginkgo
biloba
Hackberry
Celtis
occidentalis
Chanticleer
pear
Pyrus
calleryana
'Chanticleer'
§ 5-8-5 MONROE CODE § 5-8-5
1-1:476
Figure 5-8-5c: Prohibited Species and Species to Use Sparingly
Classification
Common
Name
Scientific
Name
Prohibited2
or Use
Sparingly1 Reason Alternative
Medium
deciduous
tree
Ailanthus,
tree of
heaven
Ailanthus
altissima
Prohibited Invasive
nonnative
Medium
deciduous
tree
European
white birch
Betula
pendula
Use
sparingly
Bronze
birch borer
Medium
deciduous
tree
White
mulberry
Morus alba Prohibited Invasive
nonnative
Serviceberry
Amelanchier
spp.
American
hornbeam
or
musclewood
Carpinus
caroliniana
Eastern
redbud
Cercis
canadensis
Serviceberry
Amelanchier
spp.
American
hornbeam
or
musclewood
Carpinus
caroliniana
Eastern
redbud
Cercis
canadensis
§ 5-8-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-5
1-1:477
Figure 5-8-5c: Prohibited Species and Species to Use Sparingly
Classification
Common
Name
Scientific
Name
Prohibited2
or Use
Sparingly1 Reason Alternative
Low
deciduous
tree
Purple leaf
cherry
plum,
Japanese
purple plum
Prunus
cerasifera
'Atropurpurea'
Use
sparingly
Drops fruit
Low
deciduous
tree
Purple
sandcherry
Prunus x
cistena
Use
sparingly
Short-lived
Low
deciduous
tree
Russian
olive
Elaegnus
angustifolia
Use
sparingly
Drops fruit,
nonnative
Flowering
crabapple
Malus spp.
American
hazelnut
Corylus
americana
Japanese
tree lilac
Syringa
reticulata
Tall
deciduous
shrub
Buckthorns Rhamnus
cathartica
Prohibited Invasive,
nonnative
Tall
deciduous
shrub
Autumnolive
Elaeagnus
umbellata
Prohibited Invasive,
nonnative
Tall
deciduous
shrub
Multiflora
rose
Rosa
multiflora
Prohibited Invasive,
nonnative
Gray
dogwood
Cornus mas
Lilacs
Syringa
spp.
§ 5-8-5 MONROE CODE § 5-8-5
1-1:478
Figure 5-8-5c: Prohibited Species and Species to Use Sparingly
Classification
Common
Name
Scientific
Name
Prohibited2
or Use
Sparingly1 Reason Alternative
Medium
deciduous
shrub
Japanese
spirea
Spiraea
japonica
Prohibited Invasive
(re-seed)
Medium
deciduous
shrub
Burning
bush
Euonymus
alatus
Prohibited Invasive
nonnative
Medium
deciduous
shrub
Honeysuckle Lonicera
spp.
Prohibited Invasive,
nonnative
Red
chokeberry
Aronia
arbutifolia
Black
chokeberry
Aronia
melanocarpa
Redosier
dogwood
Cornus
sericea
Summersweet
Clethra
Cletbra
alnifolia
Viburnums
Viburnum
spp.
Low
deciduous
shrub
Japanese
barberry
Berberis
thunbergii
Prohibited Invasive;
overplanted
Dwarf bush
honeysuckle
Diervilla
lonicera
§ 5-8-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-5
1-1:479
Figure 5-8-5c: Prohibited Species and Species to Use Sparingly
Classification
Common
Name
Scientific
Name
Prohibited2
or Use
Sparingly1 Reason Alternative
Tall
evergreen
tree
Austrian
pine
Pinus nigra Use
sparingly
Overplanted
Tall
evergreen
tree
Blue spruce Picea
pungens
Use
sparingly
Overplanted
Tall
evergreen
tree
White pine Pinus
strobus
Use
sparingly
Overplanted
Tall
evergreen
tree
White
spruce
Picea
glauca
Use
sparingly
Overplanted
Norway
spruce
Picea abies
Canadian
hemlock
Tsuja
canadensis
Scotch pine
Pinus
sylvestris
American
arborvitae
Thuja
occidentalis
Notes:
1 "Species to use sparingly" may be used as part of an overall landscaping
plan, but only if the number of individual plants does not constitute more
than one plant per 20 total plants within the same plant classification. For
example, if a landscaping plan includes a total of 20 tall deciduous trees,
no more than one of those 20 trees may be classified as a "Species to
use sparingly." The purpose of this provision is to encourage plant species
diversity throughout the City.
2 "Prohibited species" shall not be included as part of any landscaping plan
that is subject to City review per § 5-8-3. The purpose of this provision
is to limit the planting of species that are invasive, have invasive
tendencies, or that may perpetuate or spread disease.
§ 5-8-6. Standards for rain gardens and bioswales.
(1) Definition.
(a) Rain gardens can serve both as landscaping and stormwater
management features on a building site, where appropriately
designed and sited. A rain garden is a shallow, depressed garden
that is designed and positioned on a site to capture stormwater
runoff and allow for the infiltration of water back into the ground.
Rain garden plants are carefully chosen for their ability to
withstand moisture extremes and potentially high concentrations
§ 5-8-5 MONROE CODE § 5-8-6
1-1:480
of nutrients and sediments that are often found in stormwater
runoff. A well designed and maintained rain garden serves as an
attractive component of an overall landscaping plan for a
development site.
(b) Bioswales can serve both as landscaping and stormwater
management features on a building site, where appropriately
designed and sited. A bioswale is a linear, vegetative stormwater
runoff conveyance system that is designed to store and infiltrate
water from small storm events back into the ground and direct
water from heavy rain events to appropriate storm sewer inlets or
other management facilities. The flow of water being conveyed
through a bioswale is slowed down, allowing for municipal storm
systems to more effectively manage heavier rain events and help
reduce the risk of flooding on or off-site. Water being infiltrated or
conveyed via a bioswale is also filtered by the vegetation within it,
generally improving both ground and surface water quality.
(2) Requirements.
(a) The installation of a rain garden or bioswale may contribute to the
overall stormwater management plan for a development site and
count toward meeting the City's landscaping guidelines. Rain
gardens and bioswales may count for 20 points for every 20 square
feet of rain garden or bioswale; points may count toward yard,
building foundation, and/or paved area requirements, provided the
following requirements are met. Rain gardens and bioswales shall
count for no more than 100 points of the required landscaping per
site.
(b) Detailed plans shall be provided that show all proposed dimensions
of the rain garden or bioswale including length, width, depth, and
slope of depression; location of the rain garden or bioswale on the
lot relative to hard-surfaced areas, downspouts, and site
topography; characteristics of the soil underlying the rain garden
or bioswale; description of planting media; the species, number,
and size at time of installation of all vegetation proposed for the
rain garden or bioswale; and information on any other materials
that will be used to line the rain garden or bioswale.
(c) Installation shall not be proposed for any of the following areas of a
site:
1. Areas where there is known soil contamination unless the rain
garden or bioswale is proposed to be constructed with an
under-drain;
2. Areas where the characteristics of the soil would not allow for
the proper infiltration of water into the ground; or
3. Areas where there are expected to be high levels of foot traffic,
unless such areas are protected from foot traffic.
§ 5-8-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-6
1-1:481
§ 5-8-7. Installation requirements.
(d) The owner of the site shall demonstrate that the rain garden or
bioswale is properly maintained, specifically: kept free of trash,
weeds, debris, and dead or dying plants; any pipes associated with
the rain garden or bioswale will be inspected on an annual basis
and kept free of debris; and by the beginning of every spring dead
plant materials will be cut back or removed.
(e) Bioswales and rain gardens shall be generously and appropriately
vegetated to qualify for landscaping points. If bioswales and rain
gardens (or portions thereof) are lined with turf but do not include
other vegetation, then they will not count toward meeting
landscaping point requirements.
(f) Rain gardens and bioswales may serve as a component of an overall
stormwater management plan for a site only if detailed plans,
calculations, and specifications are submitted and approved by the
City. Detailed plans shall include the location and description of all
other stormwater management facilities serving the site,
particularly those to which any bioswale will be directed.
(1) Installation. Any and all landscaping and bufferyard material required
by the provisions of this chapter shall be installed on the subject
property, in accordance with the approved site plan within 365 days of
the issuance of an occupancy permit for any building on the subject
property.
(2) Surety.
(a) If the subject property is to be occupied prior to the installation of
all required landscaping and bufferyard material, the property
owner shall sign an instrument agreeing to install the landscaping
within the 365-day period and shall furnish to the City an
irrevocable letter of credit or other form of security acceptable to
the City sufficient to guarantee completion of the work. Such
security shall be provided by the property owner at the time that
the agreement is signed. It shall be in an amount equal to 110% of
the estimated actual cost for all of the required elements of the
approved site plan and shall specifically guarantee that all such
elements shall be made and installed according to the approved
site plan. The costs of the work shall be furnished by the property
and shall be verified by the City. The financial security shall remain
in force until all of the work has been completed and approved by
the City. This agreement shall also contain a statement indicating
that the property owner's failure to comply with the requirements
of the terms of the agreement will constitute a violation of the Title
and subject the property owner to a forfeiture upon conviction.
(b) If the required landscaping and bufferyard materials are to be
installed during different phases of a subdivision development, the
§ 5-8-6 MONROE CODE § 5-8-7
1-1:482
developer may furnish for each phase financial security in an
amount sufficient to guarantee completion of the landscaping and
bufferyard work performed during a particular phase, unless the
Land Division Regulations requires otherwise.
(c) If the property owner is a governmental unit, it may, in lieu of
signing an agreement and furnishing a guarantee and file a
resolution or letter from officers authorized to act in its behalf,
agreeing to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) If existing plant material meets the requirements of this chapter and
will be preserved on the subject property following the completion of
development, it may be counted as contributing to the landscaping
requirements and worth double the landscaping point value per plant.
(4) All landscaping and bufferyard areas shall be seeded with lawn or
native ground cover unless such vegetation is already fully established.
(5) The exact placement of plants and structures shall be depicted on the
required detailed landscaping plan submitted to the City for its
approval. Such plant and structure location shall be the decision of each
property owner provided the following requirements are met:
(a) Evergreen shrubs shall be planted in clusters to maximize their
chance for survival.
(b) Where a combination of plant materials, berming, and fencing is
used in a bufferyard, the fence and/or berm may be located toward
the interior or exterior of the subject property and at least 50% of
the required landscaping points shall be located toward the
exterior of the subject property.
(c) A property owner may establish through a written agreement,
recorded with the Register of Deeds, that an abutting property
owner agrees to provide on the immediately abutting portion of his
or her land a partial or full portion of the required bufferyard,
thereby relieving the developer of the responsibility of providing
the entire bufferyard on his property. Responsibility for
maintenance of bufferyard landscaping shall be included as part of
this agreement.
(d) Under no circumstance shall landscaping or bufferyard materials
be selected or located in a manner resulting in the creation of a
safety or visibility hazard.
(e) The restrictions on types of plants listed in this chapter shall apply.
(6) Upon completion of the approved landscape improvements, a
certification of compliance shall also be submitted by the owner or
agent.
(7) Maintenance.
§ 5-8-7 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-7
1-1:483
§ 5-8-8. Sample landscaping schemes.
Sample landscaping schemes that may be used for building foundations,
street frontages, paved areas, yards, and bufferyards are depicted in Figure
5-9-8a through Figure 5-9-8g.
(a) The continual maintenance of all required landscaping and
bufferyard materials shall be a requirement of this chapter and
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which
said materials and plants are required. This requirement shall run
with the property and shall be binding upon all future property
owners. Development of any or all property following the effective
date of this Title 5 shall constitute an agreement by the property
owner to comply with the provisions of this section.
(b) The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the watering,
maintenance, repair, and replacement of all landscaping, fences,
and other landscape architectural features on the site. All planting
beds shall be kept weed-free. Plant material which has died shall be
replaced with equivalent vegetation within 365 days.
(c) If the property owner fails to comply with these provisions, the City
may enter upon the property for the purpose of evaluating and
maintaining all required landscaping and bufferyard materials and
may specially assess the costs thereof against the property. A
property owner's failure to comply with this requirement shall also
be considered a violation of this chapter, and shall be subject to any
and all applicable enforcement procedures and penalties.
§ 5-8-7 MONROE CODE § 5-8-8
1-1:484
Figure 5-9-8a: Sample Landscaping Schemes - Site Before Required
Landscaping
§ 5-8-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-8
1-1:485
Figure 5-9-8b: Sample Landscaping Schemes - Building Foundation
§ 5-8-8 MONROE CODE § 5-8-8
1-1:486
Figure 5-9-8c: Sample Landscaping Schemes - Paved Area
§ 5-8-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-8
1-1:487
Figure 5-9-8d: Sample Landscaping Schemes - Street Frontage
§ 5-8-8 MONROE CODE § 5-8-8
1-1:488
Figure 5-9-8e: Sample Landscaping Schemes - Yard
§ 5-8-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-8-8
1-1:489
Figure 5-9-8f: Sample Landscaping Schemes - Bufferyard
§ 5-8-8 MONROE CODE § 5-8-8
1-1:490
Figure 5-9-8g: Sample Landscaping Schemes - All Required
Landscaping
Chapter 5-9
SIGNAGE
§ 5-9-1. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the fabrication,
erection, and use of signs, and to regulate the location, type, size, and
height of signage for all properties within the City of Monroe. The
adoption of this chapter reflects the formal finding of fact by the City of
§ 5-8-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-1
1-1:491
§ 5-9-2. (Reserved)
§ 5-9-3. Definitions.
Monroe Plan Commission and Common Council that regulation of
signage advances the following compelling governmental interests:
(a) Reduce signage that the City has determined to be a cause of
unsafe traffic and visibility conditions for pedestrians, bicyclists,
drivers, and passengers.
(b) Protect pedestrians, bicyclists, drivers, and passengers from injury
caused by the faulty and uncontrolled construction and use of signs
within the City.
(c) Protect pedestrians, bicyclists, drivers, and passengers from injury
caused by distractions, obstructions, and hazards created by
certain signs or by cluttered, distracting, or illegible signage.
(d) Promote the public welfare, health, and safety of all persons using
public thoroughfares and rights-of-way within the City of Monroe in
relation to the signage displayed thereon, or overhanging or
projecting into such public spaces.
(e) Preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility
of signs with surrounding land uses.
(f) Assure that public benefits derived from expenditures of public
funds for the improvement and beautification of public streets and
other public structures and spaces are protected by exercising
reasonable controls over character and design of signage.
(g) Advance the aesthetic goals of the City throughout the community
and ensure the effectiveness and flexibility in the design, creativity,
or use of signage without creating a detriment to the general
public.
(2) Furthermore, this regulation leaves ample and adequate alternative
channels of commercial speech communication for the messages
portrayed on advertising signs - namely, distributed print media,
broadcast media, and point-of-purchase display - and is narrowly
defined so as to limit said prohibition to commercial speech on exterior
signage and signage intended to be viewed from beyond the boundaries
of a site.
(3) The penalties of the City of Monroe Municipal Code may be applicable
to violations of the provisions of this chapter.
(4) Any sign authorized by this chapter may contain a noncommercial
message.
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 5-9-1 MONROE CODE § 5-9-3
1-1:492
§ 5-9-4. (Reserved)
SIGN — In this chapter, any object, device, display, structure, or part
thereof, situated or visible from outdoors, which is used to advertise,
identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person,
institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location
by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, logos, symbols,
fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images.
Signs do not include:
Traffic control and other government messages located within
a right-of-way.
1.
Legally mandated signs expressly required by local, state, or
federal law.
2.
Decorations that are incidentally and customarily associated
with any national holiday or religious holiday, or with any
community festival or similar event.
3.
Artworks, including but not limited to wall murals, which do
not contain a commercial message, logo, or colors; and/or
which contain pictorial representations referring to
businesses, merchandise, products, or services of an
exclusively historic nature (meaning no longer offered as an
active commercial enterprise).
4.
Flags which do not contain a commercial message, logo, or
colors.
5.
Building colors and lighting which do not contain a commercial
message, logo, or colors.
6.
Interior site signs located on the interior of the grounds of the
following land uses: a passive outdoor recreation facility, an
active outdoor recreational facility, or an outdoor open space
institutional facility, which are primarily oriented to persons
within the grounds.
7.
Interior building signs located on the interior of a building
and not attached to a window, which are primarily oriented to
persons within the building.
8.
Window displays of merchandise, pictures, or models of
products or services incorporated in a window display that are
not directly attached to an interior or exterior window surface.
9.
Vehicles that are licensed, operable, and parked in legal
parking spaces.
10.
11. Construction site fences per Wis. Stat. § 66.1102(5).
(a)
§ 5-9-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-5
1-1:493
§ 5-9-5. Definitions and rules related to sign groups, sign
categories, and sign types.
This section provides the definitions and rules related to various sign
groups, sign categories, and sign types. Figures 5-9-11(1) through 5-9-11(4)
provide the regulations for these signs applicable to each zoning district.
Any sign type not addressed by this chapter shall be construed to be
prohibited.
(1) Definitions and rules related to the permanent business signs group:
Permanent Business Sign. A permanent sign which directs attention to
a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold,
offered, or manufactured upon the site where the sign is located.
"Permanent Business Signs" is a sign group containing various sign
categories and sign types that a business is eligible to use. Permanent
business signs include the following sign categories: freestanding
signs, on-building signs, pedestrian signs, and daily notice signs. See
Figure 5-9-11(1) for additional rules for permanent business signs
related to zoning districts.
(a) Freestanding sign category. A sign permanently resting on or
supported by a slab, pedestal, post, pylon, or any other form of base
located on the ground. The following freestanding sign types are
addressed by this chapter:
1. Monument sign. A type of freestanding sign in which the
bottom edge of the sign face is located within one foot of a
ground-mounted pedestal.
2. Dual post sign. A type of freestanding sign mounted to the
sides or ends of two or more posts, with the majority of the sign
area located between the outermost posts, with the bottom
edge located within an average of three feet of existing grade.
3. Pylon sign. A type of freestanding sign erected upon one or
more pylons or poles, generally of a height that is taller than
permitted for a dual post sign.
(b) On-building sign category. A type of sign permanently affixed to an
outside wall of a building. The following on-building sign types are
addressed by this chapter:
1. Wall sign. A type of on-building sign that is mounted directly
on, and parallel to, a building facade or other vertical building
surface. A wall sign also includes a sign located on the interior
of a building that is intended to be viewed primarily from
beyond the boundaries of the site. Whether an interior sign is
considered a wall sign shall be determined by the Zoning
Administrator during the sign permit review process.
a. The top edge of a wall sign shall not extend above the top
edge of the vertical exterior wall or above the lowest edge
§ 5-9-5 MONROE CODE § 5-9-5
1-1:494
of a roof line of the portion of the building to which it is
mounted, except that:
b. Wall Signs shall not project more than 18 inches
horizontally beyond the edge of any wall or other surface
to which they are mounted.
2. Awning sign. A type of on-building sign that is directly affixed
via sewing, silk screening, painting, or similar method to a
nonrigid removable awning which is mounted to the facade of a
building.
a. Sign copy shall be horizontally and vertically centered on
the face(s) of the awning.
b. Sign copy shall not project above, below, or beyond, the
awning surface.
c. Sign copy shall not exceed 25% of the area of an angled
face of the awning.
d. On a vertical face of the awning, sign copy shall not exceed
12 inches in height.
3. Canopy sign. A type of on-building sign that is directly affixed
via bolts, brackets, or similar method to a rigid permanent
canopy which is mounted to, or adjacent to, the facade of a
building.
a. Sign copy shall be horizontally and vertically centered on
the face(s) of the canopy.
b. Sign copy shall not project above or below the canopy face.
4. Marquee sign. A type of on-building sign that is mounted to a
permanent roof-like structure that projects out from the
exterior wall of a structure and shelters the entrance and/or
entrance approaches to a building.
a. Marquee signs shall be located only above the primary
public entrance of a building facing a public street or
parking lot.
b. The vertical distance from the top to the bottom of a
marquee sign shall not exceed six feet.
c. No marquee sign shall extend closer to the curb than three
feet.
d. Sign copy shall be horizontally and vertically centered on
the face(s) of the marquee.
e. Marquee signs shall require a conditional use permit.
§ 5-9-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-5
1-1:495
f. Alternative forms of sign lighting may be approved
through the conditional use permit process.
5. Projecting sign. A type of on-building sign that is mounted at
any angle other than parallel to the wall on which it is
mounted, extends beyond 36 inches from the face of the wall,
and/or is internally illuminated.
a. New projecting signs are not permitted in the City of
Monroe. Existing projecting signs are permitted as legal
nonconforming signs per the requirements of § 5-9-35.
(c) Pedestrian category. A sign attached perpendicularly to the facade
of a building and mounted just above sidewalk level, and which is
oriented and sized for visibility to nearby pedestrians rather than to
motorists. The following pedestrian sign types are addressed by
this chapter:
1. Blade sign. A type of pedestrian sign that is mounted
perpendicular to the wall on which it is mounted, extends less
than 36 inches from the wall, and is oriented to pedestrian
traffic.
2. Suspended sign. A type of pedestrian sign that is mounted
perpendicular to the nearest wall and suspended from the
underside of a horizontal plane surface, such as a covered
porch, arcade, or canopy.
(d) Daily notice sign category. A sign typically used to advertise daily
specials, daily menu items, or on-site events that change on a daily
basis and which usually includes changeable copy. This type of sign
is often associated with restaurants, taverns, retail stores, music
venues, and retail stores. The following daily notice sign types are
addressed by this chapter:
1. Menu board sign. A type of daily notice sign mounted flat
against a wall containing changeable copy.
a. Menu board signs shall be securely affixed to the exterior
wall of the building containing the use.
b. Menu board signs shall not extend more than four inches
from the wall on which they are mounted.
2. Sandwich board sign. A type of daily notice sign placed on the
ground and constructed in such a manner as to form an "A" like
shape, hinged or not hinged at the top, with each angular face
held together at an appropriate distance by a supporting
element such as a folding bar, latch, or chain.
a. Anything attached to a sandwich board sign shall not
project outside the perimeter of the sign face nor project
in excess of one inch from the sign face.
§ 5-9-5 MONROE CODE § 5-9-5
1-1:496
3. Bulletin board sign. A type of freestanding daily notice sign
located on-site containing changeable copy.
4. Drive-through sign. A type of daily notice sign used in
conjunction with drive-through or drive-in establishments.
a. Drive-through signs shall require a conditional use permit.
The conditional use permit application for a drive-through
sign is typically reviewed as a component of a conditional
use permit application for an in-vehicle sales and service
land use, but a drive-through sign may be applied for as a
distinct conditional use permit.
b. Drive-through signs shall be freestanding or mounted on
the exterior wall of the building containing the use.
c. Freestanding two-way microphone/speaker devices shall
not count toward the maximum permitted area of the
drive-through sign.
(2) Definitions and rules related to the temporary business signs group:
Temporary business sign. A temporary sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold,
offered, or manufactured upon the site where the sign is located.
Temporary business signs do not require a sign permit and are typically
used to promote temporary activities. "Temporary business signs" is a
sign group containing various sign categories and sign types that a
business is eligible to use. Temporary business signs include the
following sign categories: window signs, temporary board and banner
signs, and temporary approved development signs. See Figure
5-9-11(2) for additional rules for temporary business signs related to
zoning districts.
(a) Window sign category. A sign located within a building that is
attached to the inside face of an exterior window. The following
window sign types are addressed by this chapter:
1. Window sign. A type of sign that is attached to the inside face
of an exterior window. Window signs may face toward the
outside of the building, the inside of the building, or both.
(b) Temporary board and banner sign category. A sign located on the
outside of a building for up to two limited periods of display in a
calendar year. Such signs are often used for the purpose of
informing the public of a sale or special offer. The following
temporary board and banner sign types are addressed by this
chapter:
1. Board sign. A type of temporary board and banner sign that is
temporarily placed on the ground and is made of rigid material
such as plywood or corrugated plastic.
§ 5-9-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-5
1-1:497
2. Banner sign. A type of temporary board and banner sign that is
made of flexible material such as cloth or vinyl and is
supported along one or more sides or at two or more corners
by wires, ropes, string, nails, or other removable fastening
materials.
(c) Temporary approved development sign category. A sign which is
limited to display only during the active development of a building
or plat. The following temporary approved development sign types
are addressed by this chapter:
1. Active building board sign. A type of temporary approved
development sign that is made of a rigid material such as
plywood or corrugated plastic, which may be displayed only on
the site of a building under construction, and only during the
time period in which the building permit is valid.
2. Active plat board sign. A type of temporary approved
development sign that is made of a rigid material such as
plywood or corrugated plastic, which may be displayed only on
the site of a subdivision plat under construction, and only
during the time period when less than 75% of the lots in the
plat phase have been sold.
3. Feather sign. A sign consisting of a piece of vertically
elongated, flexible material such as cloth or vinyl which is
affixed to a single pole driven in the ground.
4. Inflatable sign. A sign capable of being filled with and
expanded by air or other gas, including includes animated or
"dancing" inflatable signs.
(d) Prohibited temporary signs. Exterior signs or similar eye-catching
devices with the characteristics described in § 5-9-30 are
prohibited at all times by this chapter.
(3) Definitions and rules related to the permanent miscellaneous signs
group: Permanent miscellaneous sign. A permanent sign that is
available to all sites in the City regardless of land use, with the
exception of the institutional information sign, which is only permitted
in the Institutional Zoning District. "Permanent miscellaneous signs" is
a sign group containing various sign categories and sign types that a
site or business is eligible to use. Permanent miscellaneous signs
includes the following sign categories: City-required signs and optional
miscellaneous signs. See Figure 5-9-11(3) for additional rules for
permanent miscellaneous signs related to zoning districts.
(a) City-required sign category. A sign category that includes signs
that the City finds essential in order to protect the public health,
safety, and/or welfare. Specifically, these signs are used to provide
information essential to the following public purposes: to deliver
mail; to identify property addresses for the provision of emergency
§ 5-9-5 MONROE CODE § 5-9-5
1-1:498
services such as fire or rescue service; to identify the management
of rental properties for the provision of emergency services; to
provide information about parking limitations or warnings against
trespassing; and to provide information about required traffic flow
where a safe path to a destination is not evident. The following Cityrequired
sign types are addressed by this chapter:
1. Address sign. A type of City-required sign that contains
address numerals.
2. Building management identification sign. A type of Cityrequired
sign indicating the name and/or address of the
property owner, tenant, and/or manager of the property.
3. On-site warning sign. A type of City-required sign that
indicates a warning from the property owner related to
conditions on the site and/or that cites a City, state, or federal
law, order, rule, or regulation. Such signs shall contain no
commercial message. Examples include signs listing parking
hours or "No Trespassing," "No Loitering," or "Customer
Parking Only" signs.
4. On-site directional sign. A type of City-required sign that
includes a directional arrow or symbol that directs people to a
specific destination within a development or site. On-site
directional signs may also include either the name, logo, or
symbol of the destination, provided that the name, logo, or
symbol is less than one square foot.
(b) Optional miscellaneous sign category. A sign category that conveys
information which the City of Monroe finds essential to encourage
placemaking and communicating public information, particularly
related to officially recognized historic places, officially designated
neighborhoods, identifying home occupations, and conveying
information for the general public. Signs in this category are only
permitted through official government action, including
designation of historic places, creation of outlots in a plat or
certified survey map, and the presence of the Institutional (I)
Zoning District. The following optional miscellaneous sign types
are addressed by this chapter:
1. Metal plaque sign. A type of optional miscellaneous sign
available to officially recognized historic properties, sites, or
districts, typically denoting the name of the building onto
which it is mounted, its date of erection, and/or historical
information.
2. Permanent plat sign. A type of optional miscellaneous sign
typically indicating the name of a neighborhood, neighborhood
association, or subdivision recognized by the City of Monroe.
§ 5-9-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-5
1-1:499
a. Permanent plat signs shall require a conditional use
permit.
b. Permanent plat signs shall be configured as dual post signs
or monument signs.
c. Permanent plat signs shall be constructed of stone, wood,
decorative metal, or composite materials that simulate the
appearance of said materials.
d. Permanent plat signs shall be located in an outlot or public
access easement that is depicted on the certified survey
map or final plat.
3. Institutional information sign. A type of optional miscellaneous
sign typically providing information to the community
regarding scheduled public events, public activities, and public
facilities.
a. Institutional information signs shall be permitted only in
the Institutional Zoning District.
b. Institutional information signs shall require a conditional
use permit.
c. Institutional information signs shall be configured as
monument signs.
d. Institutional information signs may have changeable copy
or be configured as an electronic message sign meeting
the requirements of § 5-9-8.
(c) Home occupation signs. A type of optional miscellaneous sign used
in association with home occupation occurring on-site.
1. Home occupation signs shall be permitted only in association
with an active home occupation land use occurring on-site that
conforms to the requirements of § 5-3-17(5).
2. Home occupation signs shall require a conditional use permit.
(4) Definitions and rules related to the temporary miscellaneous signs
group:
TEMPORARY MISCELLANEOUS SIGN — A temporary sign that does
not contain a commercial message. "Temporary miscellaneous signs" is
a sign group containing one sign category, yard signs, which is available
to all land uses. See Figure 5-9-11(4).
(a) Yard sign category. A sign category that is intended to
accommodate a wide variety of sign purposes (e.g., garage sale
signs, for sale signs, political signs, "slow down for kids" signs,
etc.), often needed on a temporary basis. Such signs are
freestanding and mounted on one or two stakes or posts and do not
§ 5-9-5 MONROE CODE § 5-9-5
1-1:500
have footings. The following yard sign types are addressed by this
chapter:
1. Stake sign. A type of yard sign that consists of a sign face
erected upon one or more metal wires or wood, metal, or
plastic stakes of no more than three inches in width.
2. Frame sign. A type of yard sign that consists of a frame into
which a sign face can be inserted and erected upon two wood,
metal, or plastic stakes or ground spikes.
3. Arm and post sign. A type of yard sign mounted on a post or
posts, either with a bracket arm extending outward to support
a hanging sign, with the sign attached directly to the side of
the post, or with the sign mounted between two posts.
(5) Prohibited signs. Refer to § 5-9-30 for additional sign prohibitions and
limitations.
(a) Abandoned sign. Any sign remaining in place on a site or a portion
of a site (such as a single tenant in a multitenant building) that has
been vacant, closed, or otherwise unoccupied for a period of 90
days.
(b) Advertising vehicle sign. A vehicle, trailer, or other piece of
equipment which contains any sign or advertising device, which is
unlicensed and/or inoperable, and which is parked on a public
right-of-way or in a location that is not an active worksite so as to
be seen from a public right-of-way.
1. Business vehicles legally parked in any of the locations
described below shall not be considered advertising vehicle
signs:
a. At the place of business in a parking space designated for
company vehicle parking or storage on a site plan
approved by the City.
b. On-site at the residence of an employee, including
driveways and legal off-street parking spaces.
(c) Beacon/search beacon sign. Any light with one or more beams
directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not
on the same site as the light source; also, any light with one or
more beams that rotate or move.
(d) Commercial message flag sign. A flag attached to a freestanding or
wall-mounted flag pole that contains a commercial message, logo,
or colors.
(e) Flashing/scrolling/animated sign. A sign having lights or
illumination which flashes, scrolls, moves, rotates, twinkles, blinks,
flickers, varies in intensity of color, or uses intermittent electrical
§ 5-9-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-5
1-1:501
pulsations. Electronic message signs meeting the definition and
requirements of § 5-9-8 of this chapter shall not be considered
flashing, scrolling, or animated signs.
(f) Mobile/portable sign. A sign not permanently attached to the
ground that is designed to be moved from one location to another.
Also, a sign mounted on a frame or chassis designed to be easily
relocated, including unlicensed or inoperable vehicles and/or
trailers whose principal commercial use is for signage. Licensed
and operable business vehicles, trailers, or other pieces of
equipment shall not be considered mobile or portable signs.
Sandwich board signs meeting the definition and requirements of
§ 5-9-5(1)(d)2. of this chapter shall not be considered mobile or
portable signs.
(g) Off-premises advertising sign. A sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service, or entertainment that is conducted,
sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the site where the sign is
displayed. Off-premises advertising signs include billboards but do
not include institutional information signs.
1. Existing legal off-premises advertising signs made
nonconforming by this section shall be permitted to continue
as legal, nonconforming signs, subject to the requirements of
§ 5-9-35.
(h) Roof sign. A sign displayed above the eaves or cornice of a building.
(6) Other definitions.
ADVERTISING — Any writing, painting, display, emblem, drawing, sign,
or other device designed, used, or intended for display or any type
of publicity for the purpose of making anything known or attracting
attention to a place, product, goods, services, idea, or statement.
BUILDING FRONTAGE — The width of the building facade that fronts
a public street.
BUSINESS/TENANT FRONTAGE — The portion of a building frontage
occupied by a single tenant space having a public entrance within said
building frontage. For businesses located on the interior of a building
without building frontage, the building elevation providing customer
access shall be considered the business frontage.
CHANGEABLE COPY — Sign copy that may be changed manually to
provide different information such as boards with changeable letters,
bulletin boards, and chalkboards. See § 5-9-8 for electronic message
signs.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any sign wording, logo, or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business product, service, idea, or commercial activity.
§ 5-9-5 MONROE CODE § 5-9-5
1-1:502
COPY — Words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic
representations incorporated into a sign.
CUSTOMER ENTRANCE — The entrance that the public can use when
an establishment is open to the public.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN — See § 5-9-8.
ELEVATION, BUILDING — The view of any building or other structure
from any one of four sides regardless of the configuration or orientation
of a building. No building shall be treated as having more than four
building elevations. Each elevation will generally be identified as a
north, south, east or west building elevation.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION — The lighting of an object from a light
source located a distance from the object.
FACADE — See "elevation, building."
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance from the base of the sign at
average grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign.
See § 5-9-15(2) for the measurement of sign height.
LIGHTING, AMBIENT — Illumination in which the only light that falls
onto the sign comes from sources that are available naturally (e.g.,
sunlight, moonlight) or from artificial lighting sources used for other
purposes in the vicinity of the sign (e.g., street lights, lighting installed
for other purposes or sites).
LIGHTING, BACKLIT — Illumination that is arranged in such a way that
the light is cast from behind the sign to the eyes of the viewer. Often,
the lighting element is unshielded but concealed behind individual
freestanding letters, creating a silhouette effect.
LIGHTING, GOOSENECK — Illumination resulting from light emitted
directly from a shielded light fixture located at the top of the sign and
angled downward onto the sign face. The light fixture is attached to a
curved neck that is of 10 flexible, allowing the user to position the light
source onto the sign face.
LIGHTING, INTERNAL — Illumination emanating from a lighting
element that is located behind the sign face and which is completely
enclosed. Such illumination is diffused through a translucent material
such as plastic or frosted glass. This includes internally lit cabinets or
internally lit individual letters or characters.
MAINTAIN — Maintaining the existing appearance of the sign;
replacing the sign face or the supporting structure with identical
materials, colors, and messages; changing the message of a marquee
sign or institutional information sign; or changing the face of an offpremises
advertising sign.
PLAT PHASE — The collection of lots, rights-of-ways, and outlots
located within the perimeter boundary of a final plat.
§ 5-9-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-5
1-1:503
§ 5-9-6. through § 5-9-7. (Reserved)
§ 5-9-8. Electronic message signs.
SIGN AREA — The entire face of a sign, including the extreme limits
of writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any
material or color forming an integral part of the background of the
display but not including any supporting framework. See § 5-9-15(4).
SIGN FACE — The area or display surface used for the message.
SITE — A site shall include all lots that are contiguous, under unified
single ownership, and intended to remain under unified single
ownership under the jurisdiction of this chapter. A site may also be
determined to be a portion of a single lot where more than one building
in a group development (approved by the City) contains separate
businesses. For the purposes of this chapter, the site shall be
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign or advertising intended to be displayed
for a certain limited period of time. If a sign display area is permanent,
but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall
not be considered as temporary. A mobile or portable sign shall not be
considered a temporary sign or used for such a purpose. Refer to Figure
5-9-11(2) and Figure 5-9-11(4) for rules related to temporary signs.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL SIGNS — Signs that have a depth or relief on
their surface. Where a sign consists of one or more three-dimensional
objects (i.e., balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculpture or statue-like
trademarks), the sign area shall be measured as their maximum
projection upon a vertical plane.
WINDOW PANE — The area defined by any combination of the window
frame and mullions located within said frame.
(1) Electronic message sign. A type of sign that displays words, lines, logos,
graphic images, or symbols, which may be changed electronically to
provide different information, and which includes digital/computer
signs, electronic reader boards, video screens, LCD signs, electronic
time and temperature signs, and other signs with electronically
controlled changing or moving displays.
(a) Electronic message signs shall require a conditional use permit.
(b) Electronic message signs shall be permitted only with a
nonresidential land use.
(c) No more than one electronic message sign shall be permitted per
site.
(d) Electronic message signs may be integrated into the design of the
following sign types: monument signs, pylon signs, drive-through
signs, or institutional information signs.
§ 5-9-5 MONROE CODE § 5-9-8
1-1:504
§ 5-9-9. Fuel price signs.
§ 5-9-10. Group developments.
1. For monument signs, pylon signs, and drive-through signs, no
more than 33% of a sign's actual area shall contain an
electronic message sign.
2. For institutional information signs, no more than 75% of a
sign's actual area shall contain an electronic message sign.
3. Electronic message signs shall count toward the site's
maximum permitted signage.
(e) Messages and nontext images shall not change appearance more
than once every 60 seconds, and transitions between messages
shall be via instantaneous change. Use of electronic message signs
for images, text, or lighting that change appearance in a manner
not permitted above shall be considered flashing, scrolling, or
animated signs, which are prohibited per § 5-9-30.
(f) Electronic message signs shall be equipped with photosensitive
equipment which automatically adjusts the brightness and contrast
of the sign in direct relation to the ambient outdoor illumination.
(g) Electronic message signs shall comply with the lighting
requirements of § 5-7-25.
(h) Electronic message signs shall be maintained so as to be able to
display messages in a complete and legible manner.
(i) In addition to the setback requirements of this chapter, no
electronic message sign shall be located within 100 feet of any
parcel within a residential zoning district.
(1) Fuel price signs. A type of sign that lists the price of gasoline sold onsite,
as required by Wis. Stats. § 100.18(8).
(a) Fuel price signs shall not be separate signs, but rather shall be
integrated into the design of a permitted monument sign or pylon
sign, described in § 5-9-5(1)(a)1 and in Figure 5-9-11(1).
(b) Fuel price signs may list up to one price per type of fuel, which
shall be displayed on a single structure.
(c) Fuel price signs may be illuminated, per the lighting requirements
of § 5-7-25.
(d) Fuel price signs may contain changeable copy or electronic
message signs per the requirements of § 5-9-8.
(1) In order to accommodate increased signage needs, group developments
[as defined in § 5-7-2(2)(a)] and multitenant buildings with three
§ 5-9-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-10
1-1:505
§ 5-9-11. Permitted sign rules.
§ 5-9-12. through § 5-9-14. (Reserved)
§ 5-9-15. Sign setback, height, measurement, and flexibility.
tenants or more shall be permitted an increase in total permitted sign
area and height. Large developments [per § 5-7-2(2)(b)] shall not be
permitted an increase in total permitted sign area and height.
(a) Group development signs may be increased by up to 50% in area
and up to and two feet in height from the sign area and height
maximums permitted in the applicable zoning district.
(b) Each business shall be eligible for integration into a group
development sign. The allocation of sign area for each tenant shall
be determined by the property owner.
(c) Group development signs shall be configured as monument signs
per § 5-9-5(1)(a)1, or pylon signs per § 5-9-5(1)(a)3 (where
permitted).
(1) Signs shall be allowed on private property in the City in accordance
with Figures 5-9-11(1) through 5-9-11(4). These four figures address
signage as it relates to permits, quantity, area, location, lighting, and
zoning districts. The requirements set forth in Figures 5-9-11(1)
through 5-9-11(4) shall be declared to be part of this chapter.
(a) The rules for permanent business signs are located in Figure
5-9-11(1).4
(b) The rules for temporary business signs are located in Figure
5-9-11(2).5
(c) The rules for permanent miscellaneous signs are located in Figure
5-9-11(3).6
(d) The rules for temporary miscellaneous signs are located in Figure
5-9-11(4).7
(e) Signage for all uses in the Planned Development Zoning District
shall be permitted per the base zoning district and shall not be
granted flexibility through the planned development process.
(f) Signage in the Historic Preservation Overlay Zoning District shall
also be subject to the design guidelines in § 5-7-8.
4. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
5. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
6. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
7. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 5-9-10 MONROE CODE § 5-9-15
1-1:506
(1) Sign setbacks. Freestanding signs shall be set back a distance of two
feet from the property line, or per the visibility requirements of
§ 5-7-10, whichever is greater.
(2) Sign height.
(a) The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the
average ground level adjacent to the sign to the top of the sign, or
from the centerline grade of the nearest adjacent public road, if
such information is supplied with the permit application and
confirmed by the Zoning Administrator, whichever is higher.
(b) The average ground level is defined as the average elevation of the
ground upon which the sign supports are placed, except when the
sign supports rest upon a berm or other area elevated above the
surrounding ground. In such cases, the average elevation of the
base of such berm or other area shall be considered as the ground
level.
(3) Minimum ground clearance. All awning, canopy, marquee, blade, and
suspended signs shall have a minimum clearance of 14 feet above a
drive, alley, or street and a minimum of eight feet above a sidewalk,
path, trail, or other ground-level surface.
(4) Measurement of sign area: The measurement of sign area is based on
the arrangement of sign copy and sign background:
(a) In the case of a freestanding sign (including three-dimensional
objects), sign area shall include the total sign areas that can be
viewed from any single vantage point, i.e., for a typical
freestanding sign that faces two directions, only the largest sign
face visible from any single vantage point shall count toward the
total permitted sign area. Sign area shall not include any elements
of the sign structure designed solely for support of the sign
structure and located below or to the side of the sign message.
Examples of parts of a freestanding sign structure which are
exempt from the sign area include the sign base and the supporting
columns, posts, or poles.
(b) For signs comprised of individual letters and related copy which
are attached to a background surface with one or more neutral
surface colors, sign area shall be measured as the sum of the
smallest rectangle enclosing each letter or related copy. (See
Example 1 in Figure 5-9-15.)
(c) For signs comprised of individual letters and related copy which
are attached to a background surface with one or more nonneutral
background colors, sign area shall be measured as the sum of the
smallest rectangles and right triangles enclosing entire sign
message and any and all nonneutral background color areas. (See
Example 2 in Figure 5-9-15.)
§ 5-9-15 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-15
1-1:507
(d) For signs comprised of letters and related copy surrounded by one
or more sign background colors on a single panel, frame, or
cabinet, the sign area shall be measured as the smallest single
rectangle enclosing the entire sign message and any and all
background color areas. (See Example 3 in Figure 5-9-15.)
(e) For signs comprised of individual letters and related copy
surrounded by one or more sign background colors on individual
panels, sign area shall be measured as the smallest single rectangle
enclosing the entire sign message and any and all background color
areas. (See Example 4 in Figure 5-9-15.)
(f) For signs comprised of one or more three-dimensional objects (i.e.,
balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculpture or statue-like
trademarks), the sign area shall be measured as their maximum
projection upon a vertical plane.
§ 5-9-15 MONROE CODE § 5-9-15
1-1:508
§ 5-9-16. through § 5-9-26. (Reserved)
§ 5-9-27. Sign permit application, enforcement, and revocation.
Figure 5-9-15: Measurement of Sign Area
(1) Applicability.
(a) No permanent business signs listed under § 5-9-5(1) or optional
miscellaneous signs listed under § 5-9-5(3)(b) shall be erected,
installed, constructed, or maintained without the granting of a
permit from the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(b) For signs requiring a permit in Subsection (1)(a), above, this
section shall apply and be construed to require a permit for a
§ 5-9-15 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-27
1-1:509
change of copy on any sign or for any conversions or changes in the
sign structure.
(c) This section shall not apply to repainting or refacing with the same
sign copy, cleaning, repair, or other normal maintenance of the sign
or sign structure.
(d) No new permit is required for signs which are in place as of the
effective date this chapter, and such signs may remain as legal
nonconforming signs. Any alteration or relocation of such signs
shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. Refer to § 5-9-35
for rules pertaining to nonconforming signs.
(e) Any sign permit granted hereunder may not be assigned or
transferred to any other sign, including a modified sign face or
modified sign structure.
(f) The owner or tenant may request all such signs at one site be
included under one permit.
(2) Sign permit application. Each sign permit application shall include:
(a) The name, address, phone number, and email address of the
applicant.
(b) The name of the business or land use the proposed sign will serve.
(c) The name, address, phone number, email address, and signature of
the property owner.
(d) The name, address, phone number, and email address of the sign
contractor.
(e) The property's zoning designation.
(f) The property's current land use or uses for entire subject property,
including all indoor and outdoor areas.
(g) A signage plan, drawn to a recognizable scale, shall be submitted
showing the following:
1. Location, type, height, width, and area of the proposed sign.
2. Location, type, height, width, and area of all existing signs on
the property and indication of whether existing sign(s) will
remain or be removed/replaced.
3. All property lines and buildings on the property and within 50
feet of the proposed sign.
4. All parking areas, driveways, and public roads.
5. Method of attachment, structural support, method of
illumination, and sign materials.
§ 5-9-27 MONROE CODE § 5-9-27
1-1:510
6. Approximate value of the sign to be installed, including cost of
installation.
7. Signage plans shall be approved and stamped by a professional
engineer registered in the State of Wisconsin and accompanied
by a statement of compliance with state laws.
(h) If the sign contractor is not UL listed, the applicant shall have an
electrical subcontractor to supervise the work and obtain an
electrical permit.
(i) Payment of the sign permit fee, as established from time to time by
the Common Council.
(j) A written statement that all temporary signs will be removed per
the limits.
(k) Any other information that may reasonably be requested by the
Zoning Administrator for the purpose of application evaluation.
(l) Any existing or proposed sign on property abutting a state highway,
United States highway, or interstate highway shall also require
approval from the Wisconsin Department of Transportation or the
Federal Highway Administration.
(3) Granting and issuance.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall review the application to ensure it
is complete per the requirements of Subsection (2), above.
(b) In cases where no other review or approvals are required under
this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall review said application
for compliance with Subsection (4), below, and shall, in writing,
either approve or deny said sign permit within 10 working days of
the acceptance of the complete application and payment of the
required fee.
(c) In certain cases, a sign permit may not be granted prior to the
approval of a conditional use permit. In such cases, the Zoning
Administrator shall review said application for compliance with
Subsection (4), below, and shall schedule the item on the
appropriate meeting agenda(s) within 10 working days of the
acceptance of the complete application and payment of the
required fee. Within 10 working days of recommendation or action
by the body with recommending or approval authority, the Zoning
Administrator shall approve or deny said sign permit based on such
recommendation or action.
(d) Denial of a sign permit shall not result in total or partial
reimbursement of permit fees paid.
§ 5-9-27 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-27
1-1:511
(e) A granted sign permit shall expire, and shall be null and void, if the
sign is not attached or erected within 180 days after the issuance of
the sign permit.
(f) Issuance of a sign permit shall not relieve the applicant from
obtaining other permits and approvals required by the City or other
governmental authority.
(4) Basis for granting a sign permit. In deciding whether or not to grant a
sign permit, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the
proposed sign is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In
such review, the Zoning Administrator may also consider the following
factors:
(a) Whether the sign is designed, constructed, installed, or maintained
in such a manner that it does not endanger public safety or traffic
safety.
(b) Whether the sign is in compliance with all provisions of the City of
Monroe Municipal Code and Building Code, including those related
to traffic safety, traffic visibility, sign setbacks, and structural
integrity.
(5) Enforcement and revocation of sign permit.
(a) A sign permit may be revoked if the applicant has failed to comply
with the provisions of this chapter or any conditions that may have
accompanied the permit at the time of issuance. Revocation
requires written notice by either the Zoning Administrator for
Zoning Ordinance violations or the Building Inspector for Building
Code or other construction code violations.
(b) In the event that construction, installation, or manufacture of a sign
for which a permit has been issued has not commenced within 180
days from the date of the issuance of such permit, said permit shall
be null and void and automatically revoked. If work authorized by
such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days any
time after the work is commenced, the original permit shall become
null and void. In such cases, a new permit shall be obtained to
complete the work and a new permit fee shall be required.
(c) Any sign subject to a revoked permit shall be removed by the
licensee, sign owner, or property owner within 45 days of such
revocation.
(d) Revocation shall not result in total or partial reimbursement of
permit fees paid.
(6) Appeals.
(a) Appeal from decision of Zoning Administrator. A decision by the
Zoning Administrator to disapprove, approve or conditionally
approve issuance of a sign permit may be appealed to the Plan
§ 5-9-27 MONROE CODE § 5-9-27
1-1:512
Commission by the applicant or by the City Administrator. Any
appeal under this section shall be initiated by filing a written
notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 10 days following the
delivery of the Zoning Administrator's decision, or, if no decision
is delivered within the time allowed by this chapter, within 10
days following expiration of the time allowed for processing the
application. The City Clerk shall forward said notice of appeal to
the Plan Commission, which shall consider such appeal within 30
days following receipt of the notice of appeal. Upon such appeal
the Plan Commission may approve, disapprove or conditionally
approve issuance of a sign permit. Failure of the Plan Commission
to act upon an appeal within 30 days following receipt of the notice
of appeal shall be considered to be a denial thereof as of the 30th
day following such referral.
(b) Appeal from decision of Plan Commission. A decision by the Plan
Commission to disapprove, approve or conditionally approve
issuance of a sign permit may be appealed to the Council by the
applicant or by the City Administrator. Any appeal under this
section shall be initiated by filing a written notice of appeal with
the City Clerk within 10 days following final action by the Plan
Commission, or, if no final action is taken, within 10 days following
the date the application is considered to have been denied by the
Plan Commission. The Council shall consider such appeal within 30
days following the filing of the appeal with the City Clerk. Upon
such appeal the Council may approve, disapprove or conditionally
approve issuance of a sign permit.
(7) Removal of signs in violation of this chapter.
(a) If the Zoning Administrator determines that any sign exists in
violation of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
sign permit holder or the owner of the property on which the sign is
located. Said notification shall indicate that such violation shall be
corrected within 60 days of receipt of said notice on penalty of
automatic revocation of any sign permit, and that removal of the
sign by the City may occur at the expense of the owner of the
property.
(b) If notification is sent and the violation is not corrected within 60
days, the Zoning Administrator shall revoke the permit for any sign
which is in violation of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the
Zoning Administrator to cause removal of such sign.
(c) The expense of removing such sign shall be charged to the owner of
the property on which the sign is located. If the owner fails to pay
such expense within one month of being billed therefor, or has not
made arrangement for payment satisfactory to the City Attorney,
then such expense shall become a lien on the property and shall be
placed upon the tax roll.
§ 5-9-27 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-27
1-1:513
§ 5-9-28. through § 5-9-29. (Reserved)
§ 5-9-30. Sign prohibitions and limitations.
The regulations contained in this section apply to signs in all zoning
districts.
(d) Any sign illegally placed in a public right-of-way shall be subject to
immediate removal and confiscation without notice by the Zoning
Administrator.
(8) See § 5-10-32 for procedures for design review in the Historic
Preservation Overlay District.
(1) Sign prohibitions.
(a) No sign shall be erected at any location where it may, by reason of
its position, shape, color or design, interfere with, obstruct the view
of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device,
nor shall such sign make use of words such as "stop," "look,"
"danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such a
manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse users of streets or
highways.
(b) No fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating, or otherwise moving
signs such as windsocks, motorized signs, pennants, and streamers
shall be permitted. This shall not apply to banner signs as defined
in § 5-9-5(2)(b)2.
(c) No signs shall project above the building parapet or eave.
(d) No flashing, scrolling, or animated signs shall be permitted.
(e) No signs shall be mounted to an unlicensed trailer or other
unlicensed vehicle.
(f) No beacons or search beacons shall be permitted.
(g) No billboards or off-premises advertising signs shall be permitted.
(h) No abandoned signs shall be permitted. See § 5-9-5(5)(a).
(2) Sign limitations.
(a) No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent
free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape, and
no sign shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(b) No sign shall be placed in a manner that would impede vehicular or
pedestrian safety or impede access or visibility. Signs shall meet
the visibility requirements of § 5-7-10.
§ 5-9-27 MONROE CODE § 5-9-30
1-1:514
§ 5-9-31. through § 5-9-32. (Reserved)
§ 5-9-33. Appearance, construction and maintenance of signage.
(c) No private sign shall be attached to or painted on any natural
feature (e.g., tree or rock), fence, fire hydrant, public utility pole,
public light pole, or traffic regulatory structure.
(d) Except for permitted awning, canopy, marquee, blade, and
suspended signs, or unless otherwise allowed by this chapter, no
sign shall be permitted within or extend into a public right-of-way.
(e) No person shall: paste, tape, staple, or otherwise fasten any paper
or other material to, nor paint, stencil, or otherwise write or color
any object, vegetation, or pavement located within any street rightof-
way; nor shall any of such object, vegetation, or pavement be
defaced in any manner. The only exception to these restrictions is
that painting may be allowed on curbs when approved by the
Common Council upon receiving a favorable recommendation from
the Director of Public Works, after his/her investigation of a written
request.
(1) All signs shall be constructed, mounted, and maintained so as to comply
with the appropriate detailed provisions of the Building Code as
adopted by the City relating to the design, structural members and
connections. Signs shall also comply with the applicable provisions of
the Electrical Code as adopted by the City.
(2) The base or support(s) of all ground-mounted signs shall be securely
anchored to a concrete base or footing and shall meet applicable
minimum wind load capabilities.
(3) The footing and related supporting structure of a permanent
freestanding sign, including bolts, flanges, and brackets, shall be
concealed by landscaping using the formula of two landscaping points
for every foot of sign's width as measured on the sign face or sign base,
whichever is greater.
(4) Signs shall be mounted so that the method of installation is concealed.
Signs applied to masonry surfaces should be mechanically fastened to
mortar joints only and not directly into brick or stone. Drilling to
provide electrical service shall follow the same rule.
(5) No sign shall be suspended by chains or other devices that will allow
the sign to swing due to wind action. Signs shall be anchored to
minimize any lateral movement that would cause wear on the sign face
or supporting members or connections.
(6) All permanent signs and their supporting members shall be constructed
of standardized sign materials.
§ 5-9-30 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-33
1-1:515
§ 5-9-34. (Reserved)
§ 5-9-35. Nonconforming signs.
(7) Sign materials should be compatible with the design of the face of the
facade where they are placed and should contribute to the legibility of
the sign.
(8) No combustible materials other than approved plastics shall be used in
the construction of electric signs.
(9) All signage within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall remain in a state
of proper maintenance. Proper maintenance shall be the absence of
loose materials (including peeling paint, paper or other material), the
lack of excessive rust, the lack of excessive vibration or shaking, and
the presence of the original structural integrity of the sign, its frame
and other supports, its mounting, and all components thereof.
(10) Every freestanding or on-building sign hereafter erected shall have
marked in a conspicuous place thereon the date of erection, the
manufacturer's name, the permit number, and the voltage of any
electrical apparatus used in connection therewith.
(11) The repainting, changing of parts, and preventive maintenance of signs
which completely conform to the requirements of this chapter, and
result in absolutely no change in the appearance of the sign from that
originally approved, shall not be deemed alterations requiring a sign
permit.
(12) The owner, lessee, or manager of a sign, and the owner of the land on
which the same is located, shall keep grass or weeds and other growth
cut and debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the site on
which the sign is located.
(13) Any signs which may be, or may hereafter become, rotted, unsafe, or in
a state which is not properly maintained shall be repaired or removed
by the licensee or owner of the sign or owner of the property upon
which the sign stands, upon notice of the Zoning Administrator.
(14) If any sign is suspended or projects above a public right-of-way, the
issuance and continuation of a sign permit shall be conditioned on the
sign owner agreeing to hold the City harmless, and obtaining and
maintaining in force liability insurance for such a sign in such form and
such amount as the City may reasonably from time to time determine,
provided that the amount of such liability insurance shall be at least
$500,000 per occurrence per sign.
(1) Nonconforming signs. Permanent signs existing as of the effective date
of this chapter, which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter,
such as brightness, scrolling, size, height, and location provisions, shall
be nonconforming signs.
§ 5-9-33 MONROE CODE § 5-9-35
1-1:516
§ 5-9-36. (Reserved)
§ 5-9-37. Removal of sign and sign structures where business is no
longer in operation.
(2) Continuation of a nonconforming sign.
(a) Nonconforming signs may be maintained.
(b) Nonconforming signs shall not be altered or moved to a new
location without being brought into compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. See Subsection (3)(a), below, for what
would constitute an alteration of a sign.
(c) When the principal structure located on the site undergoes a
change of land use per the numbered land use categories described
in §§ 5-3-6 through 5-3-16 (i.e., Subsections (1), (2), (3), etc.), all
nonconforming signs shall be brought into conformance with the
provisions of this chapter or shall be removed.
(d) Whenever there is a change in the sign user (excluding off-premises
advertising signs), sign owner, or owner of the property on which
the sign is located, the new sign user, sign owner, or new property
owner shall forthwith notify the Zoning Administrator of the
change. No new sign permit is required unless there is modification
of the sign face or sign structure. The sign will continue to be
considered nonconforming.
(3) Alteration of nonconforming signs.
(a) For the purpose of this section, alteration of a sign is considered to
be any change to the sign's frame, supporting structure, material,
height, location, or any other alterations as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
(b) Altering a sign does not include maintaining the existing
appearance of the sign; changing the appearance of the sign face;
replacing the sign face or the supporting structure with identical
materials, colors, and messages; replacing the sign lighting with
lighting of equal or lower illumination levels; changing the message
of a marquee or institutional information sign; or changing the face
of an off-premises advertising sign.
(c) A tenant sign which comprises part of a group development sign
may be replaced to accommodate a new tenant sign without
triggering the need to bring the entire project identification sign,
or any of its parts, into compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(1) A building, portion of a building, or site shall be determined to be
vacated based on the following criteria: (1) vacancy, (2) cessation of
§ 5-9-35 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-9-37
1-1:517
some or all utilities, or (3) lapse or termination of occupational license.
Vacation of a building, structure or site shall have the following effect:
(a) At 90 days, nonconforming signs shall lose their legal
nonconforming status.
(b) At 90 days, the owner of the property shall take action regarding
any permanent or temporary business signs and/or sign structures
associated with the vacant building, portion of a building, or site
located on the property. At the property owner's option, the
property owner shall do one of the following: remove all such signs
and structures, or replace the face of such signs with a blank sign
face. If the property owner is granted an extension under
Subsection (1)(c) below, the requirement shall not apply during the
extension period.
(c) An extension allowing signs and/or sign structures associated with
vacant buildings, portions of buildings, or sites to remain on the
property for an additional six-month time period after the original
90 days have lapsed may be granted under the following
conditions:
1. The property owner shall submit an application with the
appropriate fee and allow staff to inspect the signs and/or sign
structures on the vacated building, portion of a building, or
site.
2. Staff shall review the application and sign to determine that
the sign will not be a hazard, safety concern, or blight for the
duration of the extended time period.
3. Signs shall be properly blanked out and contain no commercial
message.
4. If the sign has been damaged during the vacated period to the
point it becomes a safety hazard or blight on the property, staff
may have the structure removed.
5. After the original six-month extension, one additional sixmonth
extension may be approved by staff for up to one year
upon submittal of a new application and fee. Any additional
applications for an extension, beyond the first year, shall be
approved by the Plan Commission.
6. Owners of nonconforming signs may also apply for an
extension; however, the sign shall not thereafter be
reestablished except in full compliance with this chapter.
(2) Sign structures that have been left without a sign face, or where the
permit holder no longer has any interest in the site as owner or tenant,
any of which for a continuous period of 90 days, shall be deemed
abandoned and shall be removed by the owner of the sign structure or
§ 5-9-37 MONROE CODE § 5-9-37
1-1:518
§ 5-9-38. through § 5-9-39. (Reserved)
§ 5-9-40. Fees.
The fee for processing an application for issuance of a sign permit under
this chapter shall be established from time to time by resolution of the
Common Council.
Chapter 5-10
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
§ 5-10-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish responsibilities for the
administration of this Title 5, and the enforcement procedures and penalties
for noncompliance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. The
purpose of this chapter is also to establish procedural requirements for
zoning text amendments, Zoning Map amendments, and various
development approvals under this Title 5, including but not limited to
conditional use permits, variances, and site plan review and approval.
§ 5-10-2. Exempt activities.
The following activities do not require review or approval by the City under
this Title 5.
the City shall proceed to remove such sign structure pursuant to the
terms of this chapter if the owner has not been granted an extension.
(3) If the sign and/or sign structure(s) have not been removed, the City
shall send written notification to the property owner of record and/or
last known occupant, via certified mail, return receipt requested,
indicating that said property owner or occupant remove the sign and/or
sign structure or apply for and be granted an extension. If the sign and/
or sign structure have not been removed within 30 days after the City
sends notice, and an extension has not been granted, the City may have
the sign and/or sign structure removed.
(4) Any and all costs incurred by the City in the removal of a sign or sign
structure pursuant to the provisions of this section, which authorized
assessment of the cost, shall constitute a lien against the property upon
which the sign or sign structure existed and shall be collected in the
same manner as provided elsewhere in the regulations of the City of
Monroe.
(1) Official public information street graphics installed by or at the
direction of a governmental unit.
(2) The maintenance or improvement of a public road or railroad track
within the boundaries of the right-of-way.
§ 5-9-37 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-2
1-1:519
§ 5-10-3. through § 5-10-9. (Reserved)
§ 5-10-10. Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated as the administrative and
enforcement officer(s) for the provisions of this Title 5. The general duty
of the Zoning Administrator is to interpret and administer this Title 5.
Examples of duties include:
§ 5-10-11. Plan Commission.
(3) Work by any utility not involving substantial engineering redesign for
the purpose of inspection, repair, renewal or construction on
established rights-of-way of any sewers, mains, pipes, cables, utility
tunnels, power lines, towers, poles, tracks, or the like.
(1) Maintain records of this Title 5, including, but not limited to, all maps,
amendments, conditional uses, temporary uses, site plans, planned
developments, variances, appeals, interpretations, and applications
thereof.
(2) Receive, review, analyze, and develop written reports on all
applications for amendments to this Title 5, zoning map amendments,
conditional use permits, site plans, historic preservation overlay design
review, group and large developments, planned developments, campus
zoning, interpretations, variances, appeals, violations and penalties,
sign permits, or other development matters.
(3) Serve as staff to the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, and
other boards and commissions as assigned.
(4) Issue necessary permits when the requirements of this Title 5 have
been met, and make and maintain records thereof.
(5) Along with any authorized agent, issue citations for the enforcement of
this Title 5.
(6) Coordinate official development review processes among government
offices to the extent feasible.
(7) Conduct inspections to determine compliance with the terms of this
Title 5 and to take remedial action when required.
(8) Make interpretations regarding the provisions of this Title 5 per
§ 5-10-40.
(9) Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of structures
and the use of structures, lands, and waters.
(1) The Plan Commission, together with its other statutory duties, shall
make recommendations relating to the planning and development of
the City to the Common Council, other public officials, and other
§ 5-10-2 MONROE CODE § 5-10-11
1-1:520
§ 5-10-12. Common Council.
§ 5-10-13. Zoning Board of Appeals.
A Zoning Board of Appeals is established to provide an appeal procedure
for persons who deem themselves aggrieved by decisions of administrative
officers in the enforcement of this Title 5.
interested organizations and citizens. The Plan Commission is
established in § 2-4 of the City of Monroe Municipal Code.
(2) Except where they are the final step in the review process as
established by this Title 5, the functions of the Plan Commission are
recommendatory to the Common Council pursuant to guidelines set
forth in this Title 5 as to various matters, and, always being mindful of
the intent and purposes of this Title 5.
(3) See Figure 5-10-20 for a summary of the Plan Commission's role in
administering this Title 5.
(1) The Common Council, the governing body of the City, subject to
recommendations by the Plan Commission, has ultimate authority to
adopt changes and amendments to this Zoning Ordinance and the
Official Zoning Map and other functions as determined by this Title 5.
The Common Council is established in § 1-5 of the City of Monroe
Municipal Code.
(2) See Figure 5-10-20 for a summary of the Common Council's role in
administering this Title 5.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals is established in § 2-5 of the City of
Monroe Municipal Code. Refer to that section for provisions related to
membership, functions, and duties of the Board.
(2) Powers. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the powers established
in Wis. Stats. § 59.694(7). Examples of such powers include:
(a) Hear appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there
is an error in any order, ruling, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator.
(b) Authorize variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases
such variance from the terms of this Title 5 as will not be contrary
to the public interest where, owning to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this Title 5 will result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the Title
shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done.
(c) Extend districts. To permit the extension of a district where the
boundary line of a district divides a lot held in single ownership at
the time of passage of this Title 5.
§ 5-10-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-13
1-1:521
§ 5-10-14. through § 5-10-19. (Reserved)
§ 5-10-20. Review and approval required.
(d) Interpret ordinances. Interpret the provisions of this Title 5 in such
a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this Title 5 as shown
on the Official Zoning Map where the actual street layout on the
ground varies from the street layout on the aforesaid map.
(e) Vary height and area regulations. To vary height and area
regulations where this is an exceptional or unusual physical
condition of the lot, which condition is not generally prevalent in
the neighborhood and which condition when related to the height
and area regulations of this Title 5 would present a reasonable or
sensible arrangement of structures on the lot.
(f) Vary parking regulations. To vary the parking regulations where an
applicant demonstrates conclusively that the specific use of a
structure would make unnecessary the parking spaces required by
this Title 5.
(3) See Figure 5-10-20 for a summary of the role of the Zoning Board of
Appeals in administering this Title 5.
(1) Review procedures vary depending on the type of request; however,
procedures within this chapter generally adhere to three common
elements:
(a) Submittal of a complete application, including fee payment and
appropriate supplemental information.
(b) Review by appropriate City staff and/or officials.
(c) Action by appropriate City officials or staff to approve, conditionally
approve, or deny the request.
(2) Figure 5-10-20 summarizes the procedures, agencies, and personnel
involved in the various procedures authorized by this Title 5. Detailed
zoning procedures are discussed in §§ 5-10-26 through 5-10-42 of this
chapter. Figure 5-10-20 is provided as a convenience for the City and
general public. Where there are conflicts between the text of this Title 5
and Figure 5-10-20, the text shall prevail.
§ 5-10-13 MONROE CODE § 5-10-20
1-1:522
Figure 5-10-20: Review and Approval Activities and Bodies
Application Process
Zoning
Administrator
Plan
Commission
Common
Council
Zoning
Board of
Appeals
Zoning Ordinance
amendment
(§ 5-10-26)
RR RR PH, RE, A
Zoning Map
amendment
(§ 5-10-27)
RR RR PH, RE, A
Conditional use
permit (§ 5-10-28)
RR PH, RE, A Appeal only
Site plan (§ 5-10-31) RE, A
Historic preservation
overlay design review
(§ 5-10-32)
Refer to Figure 5-10-32
Group and large
development (§ 5-7-2)
RR PH, RE, A Appeal only
Planned development:
GDP (§ 5-10-33)
RR RR PH, RE, A
Planned development:
SIP (§ 5-10-33)
RR PM, RE, A
Interpretation
(§ 5-10-40)
RE, A
Variance (§ 5-10-41) RR PH, RE, A
Appeal of zoning
interpretation
(§ 5-10-42)
RR PH, RE, A
Violations and
penalties (§ 5-10-44)
RE, A
Sign permit (§ 5-9-27) RE, IP
Building permit RE, IP
RE =
Review
and
Evaluate
IP = Issue
Permit
RR =
Review
and
Recommend
PH = Hold
Public
Hearing
PM = Hold
Public
Meeting
A = Take
Final
Action
§ 5-10-20 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-21
1-1:523
§ 5-10-21. Notice of public hearings.
In order that the owners of property involved and other legitimately
interested parties may have fair opportunity to be heard, adequate notice
shall be given of any public hearing required by the provisions of this Title
5.
§ 5-10-22. Public meetings.
§ 5-10-23. through § 5-10-25. (Reserved)
§ 5-10-26. Zoning Ordinance amendment.
(1) Notice of any public hearing which the Council, Plan Commission, or
Board of Appeals is required to hold under the terms of this Title 5 shall
specify the date, time, and place of hearing, and the matter to be
presented at the hearing.
(2) The notice for variances shall be published as a Class 1 notice. The
notice for Zoning Ordinance amendments, Zoning Map amendments,
and conditional use permits shall be published as a Class 2 notice.
(3) The notice of public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Monroe before the public hearing, as
prescribed by state statutes or local ordinances.
(4) Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the last known address of
all parties-in-interest before the hearing. Parties-in-interest shall be
defined as the petitioner; the Clerk of any municipality whose
boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any lands included in the petition;
the owners of all lands included in the petition and all lands lying within
100 feet of lands included in the petition; and the owner or operator of
an airport lying within one mile of lands included in the petition. The
failure to give any notice to any property owner shall not invalidate the
action taken by any of the aforementioned bodies.
(1) Public meetings shall provide an opportunity for legitimately interested
parties to thoroughly examine a proposed development or use and
allows the applicant to provide a thorough explanation of the proposal,
answer questions from the public and City, and potentially amend the
proposal based on public input.
(2) Where a public meeting is required, within 90 days of filing of a
complete application, the Plan Commission shall hold a public meeting
to introduce and inform property owners within 100 feet of the subject
property of the proposal to solicit comments and address concerns.
(a) The public meeting shall be noticed.
(b) The public meeting shall be held prior to review and action by the
Plan Commission.
§ 5-10-21 MONROE CODE § 5-10-26
1-1:524
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or
denial, of proposed amendments to the provisions of this Title 5. Refer
also to the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d).
(2) Initiation of request for amendment. Proceedings for amendment of this
Title 5 may be initiated by one of the following four methods:
(a) An application by any member of the general public.
(b) A recommendation by the Plan Commission to the Common
Council.
(c) Action of the Common Council.
(d) A recommendation by City staff.
(3) Application requirements. An application to amend the regulations of
this Title 5 shall contain the following (digital files should be submitted
whenever possible, if applicable):
(a) The section(s) of the current provisions of this Title 5 which are
proposed to be amended.
(b) The text which is proposed to replace the current text.
(c) As an optional requirement, the applicant may provide written
justification for the proposed text amendment, consisting of the
reasons why the applicant believes the proposed text amendment is
in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan.
(d) Any further information needed by the Plan Commission to
facilitate appropriate review and generation of a comprehensive
report to the Plan Commission and Common Council.
(4) Review by the Zoning Administrator.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application
is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Title 5. If the
application is determined to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant and the application will not
be forwarded.
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall review the complete application
and evaluate whether the proposed amendment:
1. Advances the purposes of this Title 5 as outlined in § 5-1-3.
2. Advances the purposes of the general chapter in which the
amendment is proposed to be located.
3. Advances the purposes of the specific section in which the
amendment is proposed to be located.
4. Is in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 5-10-26 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-26
1-1:525
5. Maintains the desired overall consistency of land uses, land
use intensities, and land use impacts within the pertinent
zoning districts.
6. Addresses any of the following factors that may not be
addressed in the current zoning text:
a. A change in the land market, or other factors which
require a new form of development, a new type of land use,
or a new procedure to meet said change(s).
b. New methods of development or types of infrastructure.
c. Changing governmental finances to meet the needs of the
government in terms of providing and affording public
services.
d. Any other factor deemed appropriate by the City.
7. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a written report
addressing items in Subsection (4)(b), above, and forward said
report to the Plan Commission for the Commission's review
and use in making its recommendation to the Common Council.
(If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may
be in conflict with the provisions of this Title 5 or the
Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall note this
determination in the report.)
(5) Review and recommendation by the Plan Commission.
(a) Within 60 days of filing of a complete application, the Plan
Commission shall make its recommendations regarding the
application. Said recommendation may include a formal finding of
facts developed and approved by the Plan Commission concerning
the requirements of Subsection (4)(b), above, and whether the
public benefits outweigh any and all potential adverse impacts of
the proposed amendment.
(b) If the Plan Commission fails to make a recommendation within 60
days of filing of a complete application, the Common Council shall
hold a public hearing within 30 days after the expiration of said
sixty-day period. Failure to receive said recommendation from the
Plan Commission shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions of
the Common Council. If a public hearing is necessary, the Common
Council shall provide notice per the requirements of § 5-10-21.
(6) Public hearing. Within 90 days of filing of a complete application, the
Common Council shall hold a public hearing in compliance with
§ 5-10-21 to consider the request. A public hearing may be held more
than 90 days from the filing of the complete application when requested
by the applicant in writing.
(7) Review and action by the Common Council.
§ 5-10-26 MONROE CODE § 5-10-26
1-1:526
§ 5-10-27. Zoning Map amendment.
(a) The Common Council shall consider the recommendation of the
Plan Commission regarding the proposed amendment. The
Common Council may request further information and/or
additional reports from the Plan Commission, Zoning
Administrator, the applicant, and/or any other entity as it sees fit.
(b) The Common Council may refer the matter back to the Plan
Commission. In such cases, the Common Council shall specify the
issue(s) to be addressed in further detail.
(c) The Common Council may take final action (by ordinance) on the
application at the time of its initial meeting, or may continue the
proceedings by its own decision or the applicant's request. The
Common Council may approve the amendment as originally
proposed, may approve the proposed amendment with
modifications, or may deny approval of the proposed amendment.
(d) If the Common Council wishes to make significant changes in the
proposed text amendment, as recommended by the Plan
Commission, the procedure set forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)
shall be followed prior to Common Council action. Any action to
amend the provisions of proposed amendment requires a majority
vote of the Common Council.
(8) Effect of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or
in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 365 days from the date of
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or material
changes of circumstances.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or
denial, of proposed amendments to provisions of the Official Zoning
Map (rezonings).
(2) Initiation of request for amendment. Proceedings for amendment of the
Official Zoning Map may be initiated by an application of the owner(s)
of the subject property or authorized agent of the owner(s) of the
subject property; a recommendation of the Plan Commission; by action
of the Common Council; or by City staff.
(3) Application. An application to amend the Official Zoning Map shall
contain the following (digital files should be submitted whenever
possible, if applicable):
(a) A map of the subject property to scale depicting:
1. All lands for which the zoning is proposed to be amended and
all other lands within 100 feet of the boundaries of the subject
property.
§ 5-10-26 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-27
1-1:527
2. All parcels numbers for the subject property.
3. Current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and
the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control.
4. All lot dimensions of the subject property.
5. A graphic scale and North arrow.
(b) Legal description of the property.
(c) Written justification for the proposed Official Zoning Map
amendment, including evidence that the application is consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan.
(d) Any further information needed by the Plan Commission to
facilitate the making of a comprehensive report to the Plan
Commission and Common Council.
(4) Review by Zoning Administrator.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application
is complete. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the
Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant and the application
will not be forwarded.
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall review the complete application
and evaluate whether the proposed amendment:
1. Advances the purposes of this Title 5 as outlined in § 5-1-3 and
the applicable rules of Wisconsin Department of
Administration and the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
2. Is in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan.
3. Maintains the desired overall consistency of land uses, land
use intensities, and land use impacts within the pertinent
zoning districts.
4. Addresses any of the following factors that are not properly
addressed on the current Official Zoning Map:
a. The designations of the Official Zoning Map are not in
conformance with the Comprehensive Plan.
b. A mapping mistake was made, including the omission on
the Official Zoning Map of an approved Zoning Map
amendment.
c. Factors have changed (such as new data, infrastructure,
market conditions, development, annexation, or other
zoning changes), making the subject property more
appropriate for a different zoning district.
§ 5-10-27 MONROE CODE § 5-10-27
1-1:528
d. Growth patterns or rates have changed, creating the need
for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a written report
addressing the items in Subsection (4)(b), above, and forward said
report to the Plan Commission for the Commission's review and use
in making its recommendation to the Common Council. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may be in
conflict with the provisions of this Title 5 or the Comprehensive
Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the
report.
(5) Review and recommendation by the Plan Commission.
(a) Within 60 days of filing of a complete application, the Plan
Commission may make a written report to the Common Council
and/or may state in the minutes its recommendations regarding the
application. Said report and/or minutes may include a formal
finding of facts developed and approved by the Plan Commission
concerning the requirements of Subsection (4)(b), above, and
whether the public benefits outweigh any and all potential adverse
impacts of the proposed amendment.
(b) If the Plan Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after
the filing of a complete application, the Common Council shall hold
a public hearing within 30 days after the expiration of said sixtyday
period. Failure to receive said written report from the Plan
Commission shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the
Common Council. If a public hearing is necessary, the Common
Council shall provide notice per the requirements of § 5-10-21.
(6) Public hearing. Within 90 days of filing of a complete application, the
Common Council shall hold a public hearing in compliance with
§ 5-10-21 to consider the request. A public hearing may be held more
than 90 days from the filing of the complete application when requested
by the applicant in writing.
(7) Review and action by the Common Council.
(a) The Common Council shall consider the recommendation of the
Plan Commission regarding the proposed amendment. The
Common Council may request further information and/or
additional reports from the Plan Commission, Zoning
Administrator, the applicant, and/or any other entity as it sees fit.
(b) The Common Council may refer the matter back to the Plan
Commission. In such cases, the Common Council shall specify the
issue(s) to be addressed in further detail.
(c) The Common Council may take final action (by ordinance) on the
application at the time of its initial meeting, or may continue the
proceedings by its own decision or the applicant's request. The
§ 5-10-27 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-27
1-1:529
§ 5-10-28. Conditional use permit procedures.
Common Council may approve the amendment as originally
proposed, may approve the proposed amendment with
modifications, or may deny approval of the proposed amendment.
(d) If the Common Council wishes to make significant changes in the
proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map, the procedure set
forth in Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d) shall be followed prior to Common
Council action. Any action to amend the Official Zoning Map
requires a majority vote of the Common Council, except that in case
of adverse recommendation by the Plan Commission, such
amendment shall not be passed, except by a 3/4 vote of all
members of the Common Council. The Common Council's approval
of the requested amendment shall be considered the approval of a
unique request, and shall not be construed as precedent for any
other proposed amendment.
(8) Effect of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly or
in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 365 days from the date of
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or material
change of circumstances found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or
denial, of proposed conditional uses.
(2) Applicability. There are certain uses which, because of their unique
characteristics, may have a high potential to create undesirable
impacts on nearby properties, public facilities, or the community as a
whole. In these cases, specific standards, regulations, or conditions
may be established.
(3) Initiation of request. Proceedings for approval of a conditional use may
be initiated by an application of the owner(s) of the subject property or
authorized agent of the owner(s) of the subject property.
(4) Application. An application for a conditional use permit should contain
the following (digital files should be submitted whenever possible, if
applicable):
(a) A map of the subject property to scale depicting:
1. All lands for which the conditional use is proposed and all other
lands within 100 feet of the boundaries of the subject property.
2. Current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and
the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control.
3. All lot dimensions of the subject property.
4. A graphic scale and a North arrow.
§ 5-10-27 MONROE CODE § 5-10-28
1-1:530
(b) Written description of the proposed conditional use including the
type of activities, buildings, structures, and off-street parking
proposed for the subject property and their general locations, as
well as the number of employees and the hours of operation.
(c) A site plan of the subject property if proposed for development
conforming to all requirements of § 5-10-31. If the proposed
conditional use is a group or large development (per § 5-7-2), a
proposed preliminary plat or conceptual plat may be substituted for
the required site plan, provided said plat contains all information
required per § 5-10-31.
(d) Written justification for the proposed conditional use, including
evidence that the application is consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan. See Subsection (8), below, for review criteria.
(e) A traffic impact analysis (TIA) meeting Wisconsin Department of
Transportation requirements for content and format may be
required by the City if deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator.
(f) Written description of how the proposed conditional use and all
requirements established by the City relating to the conditional use
are or shall be satisfied.
(5) Review by Zoning Administrator.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application
is complete. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the
Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant.
(b) The Zoning Administrator may coordinate review with other City
Departments.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall review the complete application
and evaluate the proposed conditional use against the findings
listed in Subsection (8), below.
(d) The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a written report
addressing the items under Subsection (8), below, to be forwarded
to the Plan Commission for the Commission's review. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict with
the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning
Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
(6) Public hearing. Within 90 days of filing of a complete application, the
Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing in compliance with
§ 5-10-21 to consider the request. A public hearing may be held more
than 90 days from the filing of the complete application when requested
by the applicant in writing.
§ 5-10-28 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-28
1-1:531
(a) Statements of personal preferences or speculation not based on
substantial evidence must be disregarded by the Plan Commission.
See Subsection (7)(b)2.
(7) Review and action by the Plan Commission.
(a) The Plan Commission may request further information and/or
additional reports from the Zoning Administrator, applicant, and/or
from any other source.
(b) Final action on conditional use permits.
1. The Plan Commission may take final action by resolution on the
application at the time of its initial meeting or may continue
the proceedings. The Plan Commission may approve the
conditional use as originally proposed, may approve the
proposed conditional use with modifications and/or conditions,
or may deny approval of the proposed conditional use.
2. The City's decision to approve or deny the permit must be
supported by substantial evidence. Any condition imposed by
the City must be related to the purpose of the ordinance and be
based on "substantial evidence" as defined in Wis. Stat.
§ 62.23(7)(de)1.b.:
a. "'Substantial evidence' means facts and information, other
than merely personal preferences or speculation, directly
pertaining to the requirements and conditions an applicant
must meet to obtain a conditional use permit and that
reasonable persons would accept in support of a
conclusion."
3. The conditions described under Subsection (7)(b)1, above,
must be reasonable and, to the extent practicable, measurable
and may include conditions such as the permit's duration,
transfer, or renewal.
4. The applicant must demonstrate that the application and all
requirements and conditions established by the City relating to
the conditional use are or shall be satisfied, both of which must
be supported by substantial evidence.
5. If an applicant for a conditional use permit meets or agrees to
meet all of the requirements and conditions specified in this
Title 5 or those imposed by the Plan Commission, the City shall
grant the conditional use permit.
6. Final action by the Plan Commission shall be followed by a
written report which shall include:
a. The formal finding of facts related to the findings listed in
Subsection (8), below, approved by the Plan Commission
concerning the request.
§ 5-10-28 MONROE CODE § 5-10-28
1-1:532
b. Description(s) of the substantial evidence that supports
the Plan Commission's decision to approve or deny the
request.
c. Description(s) of the substantial evidence that supports all
of the condition(s) imposed by the City.
(c) If the Plan Commission wishes to approve significant changes to
the proposed conditional use, then the procedure set forth in Wis.
Stats. § 62.23(7)(d) shall be followed prior to Plan Commission
action.
(8) Findings. In reviewing and taking final action on a proposed conditional
use permit, the Plan Commission shall consider whether the proposed
conditional use:
(a) Is in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Would result in a substantial or undue adverse impact on nearby
property, the character of the neighborhood, environmental
factors, traffic factors, parking, public improvements, public
property or rights-of-way, or other matters affecting the public
health, safety, or general welfare.
(c) Maintains the desired consistency of land uses, land use intensities,
and land use impacts as related to the environs of the subject
property.
(d) The conditional use is located in an area that will be adequately
served by, and will not impose an undue burden on, any of the
improvements, facilities, utilities or services provided by public or
private agencies serving the subject property.
(e) The potential public benefits outweigh any potential adverse
impacts of the proposed conditional use, after taking into
consideration the applicant's proposal and any requirements
recommended by the applicant to ameliorate such impacts.
(9) Limited effect of approval. A ruling by the Plan Commission finding a
particular land use to be conditionally permitted in a specified zoning
district shall be deemed to authorize only that particular use at that
particular location for the period of time for which the ruling was
issued. The ruling shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly
similar use for which a separate ruling has not been issued. A favorable
ruling shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if
the particular use for which it was issued shall, for any reason, be
discontinued for a period of 365 consecutive days or more.
(10) Effects of denial. No application which has been denied (either wholly
or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 365 days from the date of
said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or material
change of circumstances found valid by the Zoning Administrator.
§ 5-10-28 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-28
1-1:533
(11) Appeals of a Plan Commission decision shall be appealed to the
Common Council.
(a) Initiation of request for appeal. Proceedings for an appeal to the
Common Council of a Plan Commission denial of a conditional use
permit, modification of a conditional use permit, or conditions
added to a conditional use permit may be initiated by any person or
by any officer, department, or board of the City affected by said
Plan Commission decision.
(b) Enforcement actions. All enforcement actions related to the subject
property shall be held in abeyance upon appeal action of the
Common Council.
(c) Time limit for filing an appeal. Any appeal to the Common Council
under the provisions of this section shall be made per the
requirements of Subsection (11)(d), below, within a period not
exceeding 45 days from the date of issuance of Plan Commission's
decision regarding the conditional use permit. Failure to initiate
this appeal procedure within this forty-five-day period shall
constitute a final and binding waiver of the right to appeal the Plan
Commission's decision.
(d) Application requirements. An application for an appeal of a Plan
Commission decision shall contain the following (digital files should
be submitted whenever possible):
1. A written statement from the applicant indicating the reasons
why an appeal is justified, with specific reference to the
findings of the Plan Commission. This statement shall be dated
and signed by the applicant.
2. All information that was supplied in the complete application
described in Subsection (4), above.
3. Application filed with the City Clerk.
(e) Review by the Zoning Administrator.
1. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the
application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this
Title 5. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the
Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and
evaluate and comment on the written justification for the
requested appeal to the Common Council as submitted by the
applicant. The Zoning Administrator shall also evaluate the
application to determine whether the requested appeal is in
harmony with the Comprehensive Plan.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall forward a report to the
Common Council for review and action. If the Zoning
§ 5-10-28 MONROE CODE § 5-10-28
1-1:534
Administrator determines that the proposal may be in conflict
with the provisions this Title 5 or the Comprehensive Plan,
the Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the
report.
(f) Review and action by the Common Council.
1. Within 60 days after the filing of the appeal, the Common
Council shall make its findings. Such findings shall be based on
the findings of Subsection (8), above, and shall be based on
substantial evidence. The Common Council may request
further information and/or additional reports from the Plan
Commission, Zoning Administrator, the applicant, and/or any
other entity as it sees fit.
2. If the Common Council fails to make a determination within 60
days after the appeal, then the request for the appeal shall be
considered denied.
(g) Effects of denial. No application for an appeal which has been
denied (either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of
365 days from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of
new evidence or material change of circumstances.
(h) Limited effect on a favorable ruling on an appeal.
1. No ruling by the Common Council on an appeal finding a
particular land use to be conditionally permitted in a specified
zoning district shall be valid for a period of more than 365 days
from the date of issuance of the ruling on the appeal, unless a
building permit is issued and development commenced within
that period, and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion,
or a certificate of occupancy is obtained and a use commenced
within that period.
2. A ruling by the Common Council on an appeal finding a
particular land use to be conditionally permitted in a specified
zoning district shall be deemed to authorize only that
particular use at that particular location for which the ruling
was issued. The ruling shall not be deemed to authorize any
allegedly similar use for which a separate ruling has not been
issued. A favorable ruling shall automatically expire and cease
to be of any force or effect if the particular use for which it was
issued shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of 365
consecutive days or more.
(12) Revocation of an approved conditional use.
(a) Upon approval by the Plan Commission, the applicant must
demonstrate that the proposed conditional use meets all general
and specific conditional use requirements in the site plan required
for initiation of development activity on the subject property per
§ 5-10-28 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-28
1-1:535
§ 5-10-31. Once a conditional use is granted, no erosion control
permit, site plan, certificate of occupancy, or building permit shall
be issued for any development which does not comply with all
requirements of this Title 5.
(b) Any conditional use found not to be in compliance with the terms of
this Title 5 or an approved conditional use permit shall be
considered in violation of this Title 5 and shall be subject to all
applicable procedures and penalties. A conditional use may be
revoked for such a violation by majority vote of the Plan
Commission, following the procedures outlined in Subsections (4)
through (8), above. The City shall provide the property owner with
appropriate served notice to consider revocation. City staff shall
provide written findings of fact in relation to the factors listed in
Subsection (8).
(13) Time limits on the development of conditional use.
(a) Unless extended as a condition of approval, the start of
construction of any and all conditional uses shall be initiated within
365 days of their approval by the Plan Commission and shall be
operational within 730 days of said approval. For the purposes of
this section, "operational" shall be defined as the granting of a
certificate of occupancy for the conditional use.
(b) Failure to initiate development within this period shall
automatically constitute a revocation of the conditional use.
(c) Prior to such a revocation, the applicant may request an extension
of this period. Said request shall require formal approval by the
Zoning Administrator and shall be based upon a showing of
acceptable justification, as determined by the Plan Commission.
However, as a condition of approval, the 365-day and/or 730-day
time limits may be extended for any specific period to
accommodate phased or multistage development.
(14) Discontinuing an approved conditional use. Any and all conditional uses
which have been discontinued for a period exceeding 365 days shall
have their conditional use invalidated automatically. The burden of
proof shall be on the property owner to conclusively demonstrate that
the subject conditional use was operational during this period.
(15) Change of ownership. All requirements and conditions of the approved
conditional use shall be continued regardless of ownership of the
subject property.
(16) Modification, alteration, or expansion.
(a) The Zoning Administrator may authorize a modification, alteration,
or expansion to the site plan for a site with a valid conditional use
permit provided that said modification, alteration, or expansion is
permitted by right by this Title 5.
§ 5-10-28 MONROE CODE § 5-10-28
1-1:536
(b) Modification, alteration, or expansion of any conditional use
without approval by the Plan Commission or Common Council shall
be considered in violation of this Title 5 and shall be grounds for
revocation of said conditional use approval per Subsection (12),
above.
(c) A modification, alteration, or expansion which has been approved
as part of a prior valid conditional use does not require a new
conditional use approval.
(17) Recording of conditional use requirements. Except for conditional use
approvals for temporary uses, a certified copy of the authorizing
resolution, containing identifiable description and any specific
requirements of approval, shall be recorded by the City of Monroe with
the Register of Deeds for the subject property. The City shall record
modifications, alterations and expansions as well as expired or revoked
conditional use permits.
(18) Formerly approved conditional uses. A use now regulated as a
conditional use which was approved as a legal land use, either
permitted by right or as a conditional use, prior to the effective date of
this Title 5, shall be considered as a legal, conforming land use so long
as the previously approved conditions of use and previously approved
site plan are followed. Any modification of the previously approved
conditions of use or site plan shall require application and City
consideration under this section.
(19) Limited conditional uses. A limited conditional use is any development,
activity or operation for which a conditional use permit has been
approved that is limited to a specific operator or property owner, or to a
specific date or event upon which the conditional use permit either
expires or is required to be reviewed and reapproved. The Plan
Commission may require any proposed conditional use request to be a
limited conditional use. The Plan Commission shall specify which of the
following characteristics, based on substantial evidence, are present
that create the need for the limited conditional use:
(a) A particular aspect of the specific land use.
(b) A particular aspect of the proposed operation (including, but not
limited to, operating hours).
(c) A particular aspect of the proposed location.
(d) A particular aspect of the proposed site design.
(e) A particular aspect of the adjacent property or of the surrounding
environs.
(f) Any other reason(s) the Plan Commission deems specially relevant
and material.
(20) Successor conditional uses.
§ 5-10-28 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-28
1-1:537
§ 5-10-29. through § 5-10-30. (Reserved)
(a) Definition. A successor conditional use is a land use which has been
granted a conditional use permit by the City, which is proposed to
undergo one or more of the following changes:
1. Changing from the specific use originally permitted by the
conditional use to another operation of the same use within
365 days of the ending of the original use. For example,
changing from one restaurant to another is permitted.
However, changing from a restaurant to a tavern is not
permitted even though both are considered indoor commercial
entertainment land uses under § 5-3-9(8). Likewise, changing
from a drive-through restaurant to a drive-through bank is not
permitted, even though both are considered drive-through and
in-vehicle sales and service under § 5-3-9(10).
2. A change in the ownership of the subject property.
3. A change in the ownership of the business or other operator of
the land use.
4. Other changes explicitly identified in a previously issued
conditional use permit that are identified as acceptable
successor conditional uses.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to create a process
that:
1. Reduces the costs and time needed to approve a successor
conditional use.
2. Verifies that the proposed change is a valid successor
conditional use.
3. Creates a record that the proposed change is approved.
4. Provides the land use and City with a list of all applicable
requirements.
(c) Proposed expansions are not eligible. Any physical enlargement of
a previously approved conditional use in terms of buildings,
structures, activity areas, and/or any expansion of the conditions of
operation beyond the limits of site plans, floor plans and conditions
of operation approved through the conditional use process shall not
be eligible for treatment as a successor conditional use and must
seek an amendment to its conditional use permit through the
conditional use process.
1. The Zoning Administrator may authorize an expansion to a site
eligible for a successor conditional use (as defined by this
subsection), provided that said expansion is permitted by right
by this Title 5.
§ 5-10-28 MONROE CODE § 5-10-31
1-1:538
§ 5-10-31. Site plan review and approval procedures.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to specify the requirements and
procedures for the review and approval of site plan applications. The
provisions of this section are designed to ensure that proposed land
uses and development activity complies with the requirements of this
Title 5.
(2) Applicability. Site plan review and approval shall be required for
changes to site characteristics in Subsections (4)(c) through (i)
including redevelopment; expansion of building height, footprint, or
floor area; expansion of pavement; and new nonresidential
development, and residential development containing three or more
units. The following shall be exempted from site plan review and
approval:
(a) Residential accessory buildings, decks, and landscape features.
(b) Fences.
(c) Uses within a specific implementation plan in a planned
development in accordance with the procedures of § 5-10-33(4)(d),
provided that the specific implementation plan provides a similar
level of detail and range of plans as a typical site plan submittal
required under this Title 5.
(3) Pre-application conference. Prior to formal submittal of a site plan
application, it is recommended that the applicant confer with the
Zoning Administrator in order to establish mutual understanding as to
the basic concept proposed and to ensure proper compliance with the
technical requirements and procedures for processing the site plan
application. At this time, the Zoning Administrator may waive or modify
(in writing) site plan application requirements based on the nature and
scale of the proposed project. A timetable for project review may also
be discussed.
(4) Application. A site plan application may be considered complete if it
contains all of the requirements of Subsections (4)(a) through (i), below,
unless specific application requirements are waived in writing by the
Zoning Administrator. Maps depicting the following information shall
be prepared (digital files should be submitted whenever possible, if
applicable).
(a) Written description of the intended use describing in reasonable
detail the following:
1. Existing zoning district(s) and proposed zoning district(s), if
different.
2. Existing and proposed land uses.
3. Projected number of residents, employees, and/or daily
customers.
§ 5-10-31 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-31
1-1:539
4. Proposed number of dwelling units and density.
5. Demonstration of compliance with the applicable standards
and requirements of this Title 5.
6. Demonstration of compliance with the City's land dedication
requirements in the Subdivision Regulations the City of
Monroe Municipal Code.
7. Demonstration of consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
8. Fencing materials (§ 5-7-27).
9. Any other information pertinent to adequate understanding of
the intended use and its relation to nearby properties.
(b) A location map showing the subject property and illustrating its
relationship to the nearest street intersection.
(c) Pre-development site information. A map to scale shall depict the
following information:
1. Legal description of the subject property.
2. Existing property lines and setback lines.
3. Existing structures and paved areas.
4. Existing right-of-way lines with bearings and dimensions
clearly labeled.
5. Existing easements and utilities.
6. Existing and proposed topography with a maximum contour
interval of two feet, except where existing ground is on a slope
of less than 2% where one-foot contours shall be shown.
7. The outer edges of all natural resource areas (i.e., floodplains,
floodways, shorelands, wetlands, drainageways, woodlands,
steep slopes).
(d) Proposed post-development site information. A map to scale shall
depict the following information:
1. Property lines and setback lines.
2. Location of all proposed structures and use areas, including
but not limited to paved areas, building entrances, walks,
drives, decks, patios, fences, utility poles, and drainage
facilities.
3. Proposed right-of-way lines with bearings and dimensions
clearly labeled.
§ 5-10-31 MONROE CODE § 5-10-31
1-1:540
4. Proposed access points onto public streets and access drives
on the subject property.
5. Location and dimension of all on-site parking (and off-site
provisions if they are to be employed), including a summary of
the number of parking stalls provided.
6. Location of all proposed parking and traffic circulation areas.
7. Location and configuration of all visibility triangles proposed
on the subject property.
8. Location and dimension of all loading and service areas on the
subject property.
9. Location of all outdoor storage areas and the design of all
screening devices.
10. Location of all rooftop, wall-mounted, and ground-mounted
mechanical equipment, and the design of all screening devices.
11. Location and type of all stormwater facilities and management
approach to be employed.
12. Location of snow storage areas, except for single-family and
two-family residential.
13. Proposed easement lines and dimensions with a key provided
and explained as to ownership and purpose.
14. Location, type, height, size, and lighting of all signage on the
subject property.
15. In the legend, include the following data for the subject
property: lot area, flood area, impervious surface area,
impervious surface ratio, and building heights.
(e) Detailed landscaping plan. If required, a landscape plan depicting
the location, type, and size at time of planting and maturity of all
landscaping features as required in Chapter 8.
(f) Grading and erosion control plan. Depicting existing and proposed
grades, including retention walls and related devices, and erosion
control measures per the approval of the City Engineer.
(g) Elevation drawings. Elevation drawings shall be to scale and shall
include the following information:
1. Elevations of proposed buildings or proposed remodeling of
existing buildings showing finished exterior treatment and all
rooftop, wall-mounted, and ground-mounted mechanical
equipment.
§ 5-10-31 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-31
1-1:541
2. Depict exterior materials, texture, color, and overall
appearance.
3. Perspective renderings of the proposed project and/or photos
of similar structures may also be submitted, but not in lieu of
drawings showing the actual intended appearance of the
building(s).
(h) Photometric plan. The photometric plan shall be to scale and shall
include the following information:
1. Location, type, height, design, illumination power, and
orientation of all exterior lighting on the subject property.
2. Impact of lighting across the entire property to the property
lines rounding to the nearest 0.10 footcandle.
(i) Operational plan.
1. Describe the proposed hours of operation and traffic
generation.
2. Procedures for snow removal, except for single- and two-family
residential.
(5) Review and approval.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the site plan
application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Title 5.
If the application is determined to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant.
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall review and approve or deny the site
plan.
(6) Referral to the Plan Commission. At his/her discretion, the Zoning
Administrator may forward the site plan application to the Plan
Commission for review and final determination.
(7) Adjustments to adopted site plans.
(a) The following adjustments may be approved administratively by the
Zoning Administrator and no additional process is necessary:
1. A proposed adjustment that would add to or relocate amenity
site elements which are not required such as additional
nonrequired landscaping.
2. A proposed adjustment that would erase approved site
development components which are not required such as a
building, a portion of a building, an area of nonrequired
landscaping, or a nonrequired paved area.
§ 5-10-31 MONROE CODE § 5-10-31
1-1:542
§ 5-10-32. Historic Preservation Overlay District design review.
(b) The following adjustments that alter the required components of
the approved site plan require a full site plan review process:
1. A proposed adjustment that would erase and/or relocate
approved site development components which are required
such as a stormwater management feature, required
landscaping, or required paved areas.
2. A proposed adjustment that would expand and/or add any
areas of development (building or paving), whether required or
optional.
(c) If a new site plan is required, and the site plan is a required
component of a conditional use permit or a specific implementation
plan, and amended (in essence, a new) conditional use permit or
specific implementation plan is required.
(d) If the proposed development involves adding one or more land use
categories which are not permitted by right in the zoning district or
under the list of permitted by right uses in a conditional use permit
or general development plan, a new conditional use permit or
general development plan is required.
(1) Purpose and scope. The design standards of this Title 5 are intended to
preserve and enhance the aesthetic qualities (historical and visual) of
the community and attain a consistent visually pleasing image for the
City. Historic Preservation Overlay design review is designed to forward
both aesthetic and economic objectives of the City by controlling the
site design and exterior appearance of development within the district
in a manner which is consistent with sound land use, urban design, and
economic revitalization principles. The application of these standards
will ensure the long-term progress and broad participation toward
these principles.
(2) Procedure for review and approval. There are three categories of
review: renovation review, design alteration review, and project review.
These procedures do not apply to any modifications to the interior of a
building or structure. See Figure 5-10-32 below for a summary of the
processes.
§ 5-10-31 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-32
1-1:543
Figure 5-10-32: Process for Historic Preservation Overlay Design
Review
Type of Proposal
Procedure Renovation1
Design
Alteration2 Project3
1. Consultation with Zoning
Administrator to confirm
type of proposal
Yes Yes Yes
2. Submit proposed and
existing building elevations
No Yes Yes
3. Submit site plan
application
No No Yes
4. Submit Historic Pres.
project review permit
application
No No Yes
5. Review and action by
Zoning Administrator
No Yes No
6. Review and
recommendation by
Historic Preservation
Commission
No Maybe Yes
7. Review and action by Plan
Commission
When conditional use permit
is required
Yes
KEY: Yes = Step is required. No = Step is not required. Maybe = Step may
be required at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator.
1 Only a replacement to or maintenance of the exterior of a property.
2 Only a change in the appearance of a property.
3 Modification to the physical configuration of a property, i.e., new
building, addition, or demolition.
(a) Renovation review. After consultation with the Zoning
Administrator, renovation review projects, as defined in
§ 5-7-8(3)(a)1, may proceed with the project; no additional
processes are required.
(b) Design alteration review. Design alteration review projects, as
defined in § 5-7-8(3)(a)2, are subject to review and approval by the
Zoning Administrator.
1. Procedure. Design alteration review proposals are subject to
the following procedures:
a. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the
design alteration review application is complete and fulfills
§ 5-10-32 MONROE CODE § 5-10-32
1-1:544
the requirements of this Title 5. If the application is
determined to be incomplete, the Zoning Administrator
shall notify the applicant.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall review and approve or
deny the application.
2. Application requirements. In addition to the application
requirements for site plan review, all applications for design
alteration review shall be made to the Zoning Administrator
and shall be accompanied by the building permit application,
and, in addition, shall be accompanied by all of the following,
unless specifically waived in writing by the Zoning
Administrator:
a. A clear depiction of the existing appearance of the
property. Clear color photographs are recommended for
this purpose. Scaled and dimensioned drawings of existing
components such as windows, doors, railings, fencing or
other site components, and/or detailed building elevations
which are proposed for alteration or replacement may be
required by the City.
b. A clear depiction of the proposed appearance of the
property. Paint charts, promotional brochures, and/or
clear color photographs of replacement architectural
components are recommended for this purpose. Scaled
and dimensioned drawings of proposed components such
as windows, doors, railings, fencing or other site
components, and/or detailed building elevations which are
proposed for alteration or replacement may be required by
the City.
c. A written description of the proposed modification,
including a complete listing of proposed components,
materials, and colors.
d. Written justification for the proposed alteration consisting
of the reasons why the applicant believes the requested
alteration is in harmony with the standards of the Historic
Preservation Overlay Zoning District, § 5-7-8.
3. At his/her discretion, the Zoning Administrator may forward
the design alteration review application to the Historic
Preservation Commission for review and final determination.
(c) Project review. Applications which involve modification to the
physical configuration of a property (such as the erection of a new
building, the demolition of an existing building, or the addition or
removal of bulk to an existing building) are subject to project
review by the Zoning Administrator, Historic Preservation
Commission, and the Plan Commission.
§ 5-10-32 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-32
1-1:545
1. Procedure. The process for review and approval of project
review proposals shall be as follows:
a. Review by Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator shall serve as the liaison between the
applicant and the Historic Preservation Commission and
Plan Commission in facilitating the thorough and
expedient review of an application and shall ensure that
the technical and procedural requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance are met.
i. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether
the application is complete. If the application is
determined to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant.
ii. The Zoning Administrator may coordinate review with
other City departments.
iii. The Zoning Administrator shall review the complete
application and evaluate the proposed project review
proposal against Historic Preservation Overlay
District design standards under § 5-7-8. The Zoning
Administrator shall prepare a written report
addressing said design standards to be forwarded to
the Plan Commission for the Commission's review. If
the Zoning Administrator determines that the
proposal may be in conflict with said design
standards, the Zoning Administrator shall note this
determination in the report.
b. Public meeting. Within 90 days of filing of a complete
application, the Historic Preservation Commission shall
hold a public meeting in compliance with § 5-10-22 to
consider the request. A public meeting may be held more
than 90 days from the filing of the complete application
when requested by the applicant in writing.
c. Review and Action by the Historic Preservation
Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
serve as the final discretionary review body on aesthetics,
building design, and the Historic Preservation Overlay
District design standards under § 5-10-32.
i. The Historic Preservation Commission may request
further information and/or additional reports from the
Zoning Administrator, applicant, and/or from any
other source.
ii. The Historic Preservation Commission may take
action (by resolution) on the application at the time of
its initial meeting or may continue the proceedings.
§ 5-10-32 MONROE CODE § 5-10-32
1-1:546
The Historic Preservation Commission may approve
the project review proposal as originally proposed,
may approve the proposed project review proposal
with modifications and/or conditions, or may deny
approval of the proposed project review proposal.
Said final action shall be followed by a written report
which may include a formal finding of facts developed
and approved by the Historic Preservation
Commission concerning the request.
d. Review and action by the Plan Commission. The Plan
Commission shall review project review proposals only if a
conditional use permit is required or if Plan Commission
review is otherwise required per the Zoning Ordinance.
The Plan Commission shall serve as the final discretionary
review body on zoning and operational characteristics and
shall focus its review on the application's compliance with
all sections of the Zoning Ordinance (except § 5-10-32),
including sound land use, site design and economic
revitalization practices. In part, this effort shall be guided
by the Comprehensive Plan and other area plans.
i. The Plan Commission may request further information
and/or additional reports from the Zoning
Administrator, applicant, and/or from any other
source.
ii. The Plan Commission may take final action (by
resolution) on the application at the time of its initial
meeting or may continue the proceedings. The Plan
Commission may approve the project review proposal
as originally proposed, may approve the proposed
project review proposal with modifications and/or
conditions, or may deny approval of the proposed
project review proposal. Said final action shall be
followed by a written report which may include a
formal finding of facts developed and approved by the
Plan Commission concerning the request.
iii. If modifications and/or conditions approved by the
Plan Commission impact the aesthetics, building
design, or other features regulated by Historic
Preservation Overlay District design standards under
§ 5-10-32, the Plan Commission may require the
revised proposal to be reviewed and approved by the
Historic Preservation Commission under Subsection
(2)(c)1.c, above.
2. Application requirements. All applications for project review
shall be made to the Zoning Administrator and shall be
accompanied by the building permit application, and, in
§ 5-10-32 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-32
1-1:547
addition, shall be accompanied by all of the following, unless
specifically waived in writing by the Zoning Administrator:
a. A clear depiction of the existing appearance of the
property. Clear color photographs are recommended for
this purpose. Scaled and dimensioned drawings of existing
components such as windows, doors, railings, fencing or
other site components, and/or detailed building elevations
which are proposed for alteration or replacement may be
required by the City.
b. A clear depiction of the proposed appearance of the
property. Paint charts, promotional brochures, and/or
clear color photographs of replacement architectural
components are recommended for this purpose. Scaled
and dimensioned drawings of proposed components such
as windows, doors, railings, fencing or other site
components, and/or detailed building elevations which are
proposed for alteration or replacement may be required by
the City.
c. For all projects involving a new building, or an addition
exceeding 100 square feet of gross floor area that reduces
or extends a building's footprint or height, a detailed,
scaled site plan which provides the following information:
i. A title block indicating name and address of the
current property owner, developer and project
consultants.
ii. The date of the original plan and the latest date of
revision to the plan.
iii. A North arrow and a graphic scale.
iv. All property lines and existing and proposed right-ofway
lines with dimensions clearly labeled.
v. All existing and proposed easement lines and
dimensions with a key provided and explained as to
ownership and purpose.
vi. All existing and proposed buildings, structures, and
paved areas, including walks, drives, decks, patios,
fences, utility poles, drainage facilities, and walls.
vii. All required building setback lines.
viii. The location, type and size of all signage on the site.
ix. The location, type and orientation of all exterior
lighting on the subject property.
§ 5-10-32 MONROE CODE § 5-10-32
1-1:548
x. The location of all access points, parking and loading
areas on the subject property, including a summary of
the number of parking stalls and labels indicating the
dimension of such areas.
xi. The location of all outdoor storage areas.
xii. The location and type of any green space areas.
xiii. The location of existing and proposed drainage
facilities.
xiv. In the legend, the following data for the subject
property: lot area, floor area, impervious surface area,
impervious surface ratio, and building height.
d. A detailed landscaping plan depicting the location, type,
and size at time of planting and maturity of all landscaping
features as required in Chapter 8.
e. A written description of the proposed project, including a
complete listing of proposed components, materials, and
colors.
f. Written justification for the proposed alteration consisting
of the reasons why the applicant believes the requested
alteration is in harmony with the standards of the Historic
Preservation Overlay Zoning District, § 5-7-8.
(3) Additional recommendations permitted under the Historic Preservation
Overlay design review process.
(a) The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to make
recommendations for, or require modifications to, a proposed
application for renovation review, design alteration review, or
project review.
(b) The Plan Commission is hereby authorized to make
recommendations for or require modifications to any proposals
requiring a conditional use permit and in instances in which Plan
Commission review is otherwise required per the Zoning
Ordinance.
(c) The Historic Preservation Commission is hereby authorized to
make recommendations for or require modifications to a proposed
application for design alteration review and project review.
(4) Appeals. Appeals from the decisions of the Plan Commission may be
made to the Common Council per the provisions of the Municipal Code.
Appeals from the decisions of the Zoning Administrator and Historic
Preservation Commission may be made to the Plan Commission.
§ 5-10-32 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-32
1-1:549
§ 5-10-33. Planned development review and approval procedures.
(5) Penalty. Penalty for violation of the provisions of this Title 5 shall be per
the provisions of § 5-10-44.
(1) Procedure.
Figure 5-10-33: Procedure for Planned Development Review
(2) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
govern the procedures for the review and approval or denial of
proposed planned developments.
(3) Initiation of request. Proceedings for approval of a planned
development may be initiated by any of the following:
(a) An application by the owner(s) of the subject property or
authorized agent of the owner(s) of the subject property;
(b) A recommendation of the Plan Commission to the Common Council;
or
(c) By action of the Common Council.
(4) Procedure for planned development review. The procedure for zoning to
a planned development (PD) district shall follow the Zoning Map
Amendment procedure included in § 5-10-27, except that the planned
development procedure shall be subject to the following additional
requirements.
(a) Pre-application conference. Prior to formal petition for zoning to a
PD district, the applicant shall confer with appropriate City staff in
order to establish mutual understanding as to the basic concept
proposed and to ensure proper compliance with the requirements
of the PD process. Points of discussion and conclusions reached in
this stage of the process shall in no way be binding upon the
§ 5-10-32 MONROE CODE § 5-10-33
1-1:550
applicant or the City, but should be considered as the informal,
nonbinding basis for proceeding to the next step.
(b) Concept plan review. Upon completion of the pre-application
conference, described above, the applicant may decide to prepare
an optional conceptual plan for review with the Plan Commission.
1. The Plan Commission may schedule a workshop as part of a
planned development review. Appropriate topics for discussion
may include any of the information provided in the concept
plan, or other items as determined by the Plan Commission.
Points of discussion and conclusions reached at this stage of
the process shall be in no way binding upon the applicant or
the City, but should be considered as the informal, nonbinding
basis for proceeding to the next step. The preferred procedure
is for one or more iterations of Plan Commission review of the
concept plan to occur prior to introduction of the formal
application for rezoning, which accompanies the general
development plan application [see Subsection (4)(d), below].
2. The concept plan submittal shall include the following items
(digital files should be submitted whenever possible).
a. A location map of the subject property and its vicinity.
b. A general written description of the proposed PD,
including:
i. General project themes and images.
ii. The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land
uses.
iii. Approximate residential densities and nonresidential
intensities as described by dwelling units per acre,
landscaping surface ratio, and/or other appropriate
measures of density and intensity.
iv. General treatment of natural features.
v. Relationship to nearby properties and public streets.
vi. Relationship of the project to the Comprehensive Plan.
vii. Description of exceptions from the requirements of
this Title 5. The purpose of this information shall be to
provide the Plan Commission with information
necessary to determine the relative merits of the
project with respect to private versus public benefit,
and to evaluate the potential adverse impacts created
by making exceptions to standard zoning district
requirements.
§ 5-10-33 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-33
1-1:551
c. A conceptual drawing of the site plan layout, including the
general locations of public streets and/or private drives.
d. The Plan Commission shall accept the concept plan and
inform the applicant to move on to the next step in the PD
process, general development plan.
(c) General development plan review. The applicant shall submit a
general development plan (GDP) to the Zoning Administrator, for
determination of completeness. Upon determination of
completeness by the Zoning Administrator, the GDP shall be placed
on the Plan Commission agenda for review. The GDP establishes
the underlying zoning for the property.
1. The GDP submittal shall include the following items (digital
files should be submitted whenever possible):
a. General location map of the subject site depicting:
i. All lands for which the planned development is
proposed and all other lands within 100 feet of the
boundaries of the subject site.
ii. Current zoning of the subject site and abutting
properties, and the jurisdiction(s) that maintains that
control.
iii. A graphic scale and a North arrow.
b. Generalized site plan showing the pattern or proposed
land uses, including:
i. General size, shape, and arrangement of lots and
specific use areas.
ii. Basic street pattern and pattern of internal drives.
iii. General site grading plan showing preliminary road
grades.
iv. Basic storm drainage pattern, including proposed onsite
stormwater detention.
v. General location of recreational and open space areas,
including designation of any such areas to be
classified as common open space.
c. Statistical data, including:
i. Minimum lot sizes in the development.
ii. Approximate areas of all lots.
iii. Density/intensity of various parts of the development.
§ 5-10-33 MONROE CODE § 5-10-33
1-1:552
iv. Building coverage.
v. Landscaping surface area ratio of all land uses.
vi. Expected staging.
d. Conceptual landscaping plan, noting approximate
locations of foundation, street, yard, and paving
landscaping, and comparing the proposed landscaping
plan to the standard landscaping requirements in Chapter
8.
e. General signage plan, including all project identification
signs and concepts for public fixtures and signs (such as
street light fixtures and/or poles or street sign faces and/or
poles) which may or may not be proposed to vary from City
standards or common practices.
f. General outline of property owners' association,
covenants, easements, and deed restrictions.
g. A written description of the proposed Planned
Development, including:
i. General project themes and images.
ii. The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land
uses.
iii. Approximate residential densities and nonresidential
intensities as described by dwelling units per acre,
landscaping surface area ratio, and/or other
appropriate measures of density and intensity.
iv. General treatment of natural features.
v. General relationship to nearby properties and public
streets.
vi. General relationship of the project to the
Comprehensive Plan or other area plans.
vii. Proposed exceptions from the requirements of this
Title 5.
h. A traffic impact analysis (TIA) that evaluates the adequacy
of the existing and proposed transportation system that
serves the Planned Development may be required by the
City, if deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
i. If required, the TIA should address all elements of the
transportation system as it relates to pedestrians,
bicyclists, transit, vehicular traffic, and adjacent land
development.
§ 5-10-33 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-33
1-1:553
ii. It is noted that the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation (WisDOT) has TIA requirements that
must be followed if a development project has direct
access to the State Trunk Highway System.
i. A utility feasibility analysis.
2. The Plan Commission or Common Council may waive submittal
information listed above, and/or may likewise require
additional information beyond that listed above.
3. If all required application materials are provided, the GDP and
SIP may be submitted and reviewed concurrently.
4. The process for review and approval of the GDP shall be
identical to that for Zoning Map amendments per § 5-10-27.
5. A GDP shall not expire. All portions of an approved GDP not
initiated through granting of a building permit following final
Common Council approval shall remain zoned PD and the
approved GDP shall remain in place.
6. Approval of the General Development Plan.
a. Approval of the GDP shall establish the basic right of use
for the area when in conformity with the approved GDP.
b. Upon final approval of and adoption of the GDP, all plans
submitted as well as other commitments, restrictions, and
other factors pertinent to assuring that the project will be
carried out as approved shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator and shall be referred to in the event of
enforcement or proposed modification to the approved
GDP.
(d) Specific implementation plan. Upon completion of the GDP review
process, described above, the applicant shall submit a specific
implementation plan (SIP) to the Zoning Administrator for
determination of completeness. Upon determination of
completeness by the Zoning Administrator, the SIP shall be placed
on the Plan Commission agenda for SIP review.
1. The SIP submittal shall include the following items. Note that
the area included in a SIP may be only a portion of the area
included in a previously approved GDP (digital files should be
submitted whenever possible).
a. An existing conditions map of the subject site depicting the
following:
i. All lands for which the planned development is
proposed and all other lands within 100 feet of the
boundaries of the subject site.
§ 5-10-33 MONROE CODE § 5-10-33
1-1:554
ii. Current zoning of the subject property and all
abutting properties, and the jurisdiction(s) that
maintains that control.
iii. Existing utilities and recorded easements.
iv. All lot dimensions of the subject site.
v. A graphic scale and a North arrow.
b. A SIP map of the proposed site showing at least the
following:
i. A final plat showing detailed lot layout, intended uses
of each parcel, public dedication, public and private
streets, driveways, walkways, and parking facilities.
ii. The arrangements of buildings.
iii. Specific treatment and location of recreational and
open space areas, including designation of any such
areas to be classified as common open space.
c. Proposed grading plan.
d. Specific landscaping plan for the subject site, specifying
the location, species, and installation size of all plantings.
The landscaping plans shall include a table summarizing
all proposed species.
e. Architectural plans for any nonresidential buildings,
multifamily structures, or building clusters, other than
conventional single-family or two-family homes on
individual lots, in sufficient detail to indicate the floor
area, bulk, and visual character of such buildings.
f. Engineering plans for all water and sewer systems,
stormwater systems, roads, parking areas, and walkways.
g. Signage plan for the project, including all project
identification signs, concepts for public fixtures and signs
(such as street light fixtures and/or poles or street sign
faces and/or poles), and group development signage
themes that may or may not vary from City standards or
common practices.
h. Specific written description of the proposed SIP including:
i. Specific project themes and images.
ii. Specific mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses.
iii. Specific residential densities and nonresidential
intensities as described by dwelling units per acre,
§ 5-10-33 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-33
1-1:555
and landscaping surface area ratio and/or other
appropriate measures of density and intensity.
iv. Specific treatment of natural features, including
parkland.
v. Specific relationship to nearby properties and public
streets.
vi. Statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the
development, the precise areas of all development lots
and pads; density/intensity of various parts of the
development; building coverage, and landscaping
surface area ratio of all land uses; proposed staging;
and any other plans required by the Plan Commission.
vii. A statement of rationale as to why PD zoning is
proposed. This statement shall list the standard
zoning requirements that, in the applicant's opinion,
would inhibit the development project and the
opportunities for community betterment that are
available through the proposed PD project.
viii. A complete list of zoning standards that would not be
met by the proposed SIP and the location(s) in which
such exceptions would occur.
ix. Phasing schedule, if more than one development
phase is intended.
i. Agreements, bylaws, covenants, and other documents
relative to the operational regulations of the development
and particularly providing for the permanent preservation
and maintenance of common open areas and amenities.
j. A written description that demonstrates how the SIP is
consistent with the approved GDP and any and all
differences between the requirements of the approved
GDP and the proposed SIP.
2. The Zoning Administrator, or by majority vote of the Plan
Commission, may waive submittal information listed above,
and/or may likewise require additional information beyond that
listed above.
3. The process for review and approval of the SIP shall be as
follows:
a. Review by Zoning Administrator.
i. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether
the application is complete. If the application is
§ 5-10-33 MONROE CODE § 5-10-33
1-1:556
determined to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant.
ii. The Zoning Administrator may coordinate review with
other City departments.
iii. The Zoning Administrator shall review the complete
application and evaluate the proposed SIP against the
review criteria under Subsection (4)(e), below. The
Zoning Administrator shall prepare a written report
addressing said review criteria to be forwarded to the
Plan Commission for the Commission's review. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal
may be in conflict with said review criteria, the Zoning
Administrator shall note this determination in the
report.
b. Public meeting. Within 90 days of filing of a complete
application, the Plan Commission shall hold a public
meeting in compliance with § 5-10-22 to consider the
request. A public meeting may be held more than 90 days
from the filing of the complete application when requested
by the applicant in writing.
c. Review and action by the Plan Commission.
i. The Plan Commission may request further information
and/or additional reports from the Zoning
Administrator, applicant, and/or from any other
source.
ii. The Plan Commission may take final action (by
resolution) on the application at the time of its initial
meeting or may continue the proceedings. The Plan
Commission may approve the SIP as originally
proposed, may approve the proposed SIP with
modifications and/or conditions, or may deny approval
of the proposed SIP. Said final action shall be followed
by a written report which may include a formal finding
of facts developed and approved by the Plan
Commission concerning the request.
4. A SIP shall not expire. All portions of an approved SIP not fully
developed following final Plan Commission approval shall
remain zoned PD and the approved SIP shall remain in place.
5. Approval of the SIP. Upon final approval of the SIP, all SIP
materials shall be submitted as well as other commitments,
restrictions, and other factors pertinent to assuring that the
project will be carried out as approved shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator and shall be referred to in the event of
enforcement or proposed modification to the approved SIP. All
§ 5-10-33 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-33
1-1:557
covenants, restrictions, or contractual agreements with the
City which have not been previously recorded shall be
recorded with the Green County Register of Deeds office
before final issuance of building permits for the phase.
(e) Criteria for approval: In its review and action an application for a
planned development district, the Plan Commission shall make
findings with respect to the following criteria:
1. The proposed planned development project is consistent with
the overall purpose and intent of this Title 5.
2. The proposed planned development project is consistent with
the City's Comprehensive Plan and other area plans. (It is the
responsibility of the City to determine such consistency.)
3. The proposed planned development project would maintain the
desired relationships between land uses, land use densities
and intensities, and land use impacts in the environs of the
subject site.
4. Adequate public infrastructure is or will be available to
accommodate the range of uses being proposed for the
planned development project, including but not limited to
public sewer and water and public roads.
5. The proposed planned development project will incorporate
appropriate and adequate buffers and transitions between
areas of difference land uses and development densities/
intensities.
6. The proposed planned development project design does not
detract from areas of natural beauty surrounding the site.
7. The proposed architecture and character of the proposed
planned development project is compatible with adjacent/
nearby development.
8. The proposed planned development project will positively
contribute to and not detract from the physical appearance and
functional arrangement of development in the area.
9. The proposed planned development project will produce
significant benefits in terms of environmental design and
significant alternative approaches to addressing development
performance that relate to and more than compensate for any
requested exceptions modifications variation of any standard
or regulation of this Title 5.
10. For planned development projects that are proposed to be
developed in phases, the applicant can provide a timeline for
development and can demonstrate that the project would be
§ 5-10-33 MONROE CODE § 5-10-33
1-1:558
§ 5-10-34. through § 5-10-39. (Reserved)
§ 5-10-40. Interpretations.
successful even if all phases were not or could not be
completed.
(f) Changes or alterations. Any change of the PD plans subsequent to
approval of the SIP shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator.
1. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the change
constitutes a substantial modification, the applicant/developer
will be required to amend the SIP, and if necessary, the GDP,
following the procedures set forth in this section for review
and approvals.
2. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, such changes do
not constitute a substantial modification of either the GDP or
SIP, the change may be accomplished by approval of the Zoning
Administrator. Such approved changes or modifications shall
be documented and recorded in the official file of the City on
the PD.
3. A "substantial modification" includes, but is not limited to:
a. Proposed modification(s) that would require a new site
plan per § 5-10-31. Such modifications would require an
amendment to the SIP.
b. Proposed modification(s) that would involve one or more
land use categories which are not under the list of
permitted uses in the GDP. Such modifications would
require an amendment to the GDP.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to assign responsibility for the
official interpretation of the provisions of this Title 5, and to describe
the required procedure for securing such interpretation.
(2) Initiation of request for an interpretation. Proceedings for an
interpretation may be initiated by any of the following four methods:
(a) An application of the owner(s) of the subject property or authorized
agent of the owner(s) of the subject property.
(b) A recommendation of the Plan Commission to the Common Council.
(c) By action of the Common Council.
(d) By request of the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Application. A zoning interpretation application contains all of the
following:
§ 5-10-33 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-40
1-1:559
(a) Clear indication of the text of this Title 5 for which the
interpretation is requested and the specific questions the applicant
has regarding said text.
(b) If the requested interpretation relates to the application of this
Title 5 to a specific property, the additional following information
may be required (digital files should be submitted whenever
possible):
1. A map of the subject property depicting:
a. All lands for which the interpretation is requested and all
other lands within 100 feet of the boundaries of the subject
property.
b. Current zoning of the subject property and its environs,
and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control.
c. All lot dimensions of the subject property.
d. A graphic scale and a North arrow.
2. A written description of the reason for the requested
interpretation and how the proposed interpretation relates to
type of activities, buildings, and structures currently located
on, and proposed for, the subject property.
3. A site plan of the subject property as proposed for
development. Said site plan shall conform to the requirements
of § 5-10-31.
(c) If the requested interpretation relates to the classification or
treatment of a particular land use under the provisions of this Title
5, a series of written responses to the following questions:
1. How is the subject land use in general harmony with the
purposes, goals, objectives, policies and standards of the City's
Comprehensive Plan, this Title 5, and any other plan, program,
or ordinance adopted or under consideration (pursuant to
official notice) by the City?
2. How is the subject land use in harmony with the purposes,
goals, objectives, policies and standards of the pertinent
zoning district for which the interpretation is being sought?
(4) Review by Zoning Administrator.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application
is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Title 5. If the
application is determined to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant.
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and evaluate
and comment on the written justification for the proposed
§ 5-10-40 MONROE CODE § 5-10-40
1-1:560
interpretation provided in the application to determine whether the
requested variance is in harmony with the City's Comprehensive
Plan.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall forward a report indicating the
interpretation of the Zoning Administrator to the applicant. If the
Zoning Administrator determines that the proposal may be in
conflict with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning
Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
(5) Standards for review. This chapter shall be interpreted in a manner
which is consistent with the purposes intended by the Common Council
as noted in this Title 5 and the Comprehensive Plan. The intent of the
standards and supporting definitions of this Title 5 is to protect both
individual property owners and the general public from adverse
impacts that may result from a proposed, modified, or existing land use.
To this end, those called upon to interpret this Title 5 shall proceed as
follows:
(a) Articulate certain public purpose(s) underlying the standard(s) for
which an interpretation is required. (Rationale: Before any zoning
interpretation is made, there must be an explicit discussion of
certain purpose(s) for which the regulation was initially imposed.
Each zoning regulation is intended to protect the interests of both
present and future neighbors and the general public. Each
standard is developed as a regulatory response to an identifiable
potential negative impact. A sound interpretation of any standard
cannot be ensured without careful analysis of the regulation and
the end toward which it is directed. It is understood that there may
be other public purposes underlying the interpretation which are
not explicitly articulated.)
(b) Articulate the actual impact of various proposed interpretations,
permitting flexibility in design and prohibiting any interpretation
that lowers the protection afforded to the public. There is a critical
distinction between an interpretation which provides a greater
degree of design freedom to achieve a permitted land use, and an
interpretation which permits a new or not previously permitted
use, or which allows a use to be enlarged, or have its intensity
increased beyond the degree specified in the Chapter. Design
freedom is to be encouraged while a lowering of the standards of
this Title 5 is to be prohibited.
(c) Determine whether the proposed interpretation will ensure a just
balance between the rights of the landowner and all others who will
be affected by that person's land use proposal. If an interpretation
would merely allow a design solution that is slightly different from
the one expressly stated or permitted, and if it would result in a
same or greater degree of protection to any affected party (i.e., the
abutting landowners, the public at large, and/or a future property
owner or renter), such an interpretation may be appropriately
§ 5-10-40 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-40
1-1:561
made. Any interpretation which would result in any identifiable loss
of protection for one group to the benefit of others is contrary
to the spirit of this Title 5. Similarly, any interpretation which
would either increase the nuisance potential of any use or alter the
purpose for which the regulation was adopted shall be considered
counter to the legislative intent of this Title 5. Any interpretation
which will result in any reduction of a normally required bufferyard
or increase in intensity beyond that already permitted shall only be
made if the party interpreting this Title 5 has the power to impose
additional restrictions or requirements.
(d) This chapter has been carefully designed by the Common Council
to combine maximum achievement of public goals and the
protection of abutting property owners while providing flexibility
for property owners to use their land for a variety of uses consistent
with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. Great
care has been taken to balance the rights of competing groups
while achieving maximum protection with flexibility and a range of
use options. Persons interpreting this Title 5 should not substitute
their own judgments for the legislative acts of the Common
Council.
(e) In addition to the applicant's response to the questions required by
Subsections (5)(a) through (d), above, the following standards shall
govern the decision on the requested interpretation on land use
interpretation matters:
1. No interpretation shall allow the establishment of any land use
which was previously considered and rejected by the Common
Council on an application for an amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance, the Official Zoning Map, or a previously applied for
appeal from a requested interpretation.
2. No interpretation shall permit a land use listed as a use
permitted by right or a conditional use in another zoning
district if the use is not listed as permitted or conditional in the
zoning district of the subject property (see Chapter 2).
3. No interpretation shall permit a land use in a zoning district
unless evidence is presented which demonstrates that the land
use will comply with any and all regulations applicable to
development in the subject property's zoning district (see
Chapter 2).
4. No interpretation shall permit a land use in a particular zoning
district unless such use is substantially similar to other uses
permitted in that same district and is more similar to such
other uses than to uses either not permitted in said district, or
permitted in a more intensive district in the same zoning
district category (see Chapter 2).
§ 5-10-40 MONROE CODE § 5-10-40
1-1:562
§ 5-10-41. Variances.
5. If the proposed land use is more similar to a land use permitted
only as a conditional use in the subject property's district than
to a use permitted by right, then an interpretation permitting
such use shall be conditioned upon the approval of a
conditional use pursuant to § 5-10-28.
(6) Effect of a favorable land use interpretation. No interpretation finding a
particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a
specific zoning district shall authorize either the establishment of such
use or the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or
moving of any building or structure. A favorable interpretation merely
authorizes the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for
any permits and approvals which may be required by this Title 5. These
permits and approvals include, but are not limited to, required site
plans, special use permits, conditional uses, and certificates of
occupancy.
(7) Limitations on favorable land use interpretation.
(a) No interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or
conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be valid
for a period of more than 365 days from the date of issuance of the
interpretation, unless a building permit is issued and development
has begun within that period, and is thereafter diligently pursued
to completion, or a certificate of occupancy is obtained and a use
commenced within that period.
(b) An interpretation finding a particular land use to be permitted or
conditionally permitted in a specified zoning district shall be
deemed to authorize only that particular use at that particular
location for which the interpretation was issued. The interpretation
shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for
which a separate interpretation has not been issued. A favorable
interpretation shall automatically expire and cease to be of any
force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for
any reason, be discontinued for a period of 365 consecutive days or
more.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
enable the City to hear and decide requests for permitted variation
from the terms of this Title 5 as will not be contrary to the public
interest; where owing to special factors, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this Title 5 would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this Title 5 shall be observed,
public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done; as
provided for by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)(7). In all circumstances, a
property owner bears the burden of proving that the unnecessary
hardship is based on conditions unique to the property, rather than
§ 5-10-40 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-41
1-1:563
considerations personal to the property owner, and that the
unnecessary hardship was not created by the property owner.
(2) Initiation of request for approval of a variance. Proceedings for
approval of a requested variance shall be initiated by an application of
the owner(s) of the subject property or authorized agent of the owner(s)
of the subject property.
(3) Application. Variance applications shall contain the following (digital
files should be submitted whenever possible, if applicable):
(a) A map of the subject property depicting:
1. All lands for which the variance is proposed and all other lands
within 100 feet of the boundaries of the subject property.
2. Current zoning of the subject property and its environs, and
the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that control.
3. All lot dimensions of the subject property.
4. A graphic scale and a North arrow.
(b) A site plan of the subject property as proposed for development.
Said site plan shall conform to the requirements of § 5-10-31.
(c) Written description of the proposed variance, including:
1. Evidence that the application is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan; and
2. Evidence of how the unnecessary hardship is based on
conditions unique to the property, rather than considerations
personal to the property owner, and that the unnecessary
hardship was not created by the property owner.
(4) Review by the Zoning Administrator.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application
is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Title 5. If the
application is determined to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant.
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and prepare
a written report including the following:
1. Evaluate whether the request is in harmony with the
Comprehensive Plan or other relevant plans.
2. Evaluate the request based upon the criteria used by the
Zoning Board of Appeals in their review.
(5) Public hearing. Within 60 days of filing of a complete application, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing in compliance with
§ 5-10-21 consider the request.
§ 5-10-41 MONROE CODE § 5-10-41
1-1:564
(6) Review and action by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(a) Within 60 days after the holding of the public hearing, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall make its findings per the following based on
Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)7:
1. The variance will not be contrary to the public interest.
2. Substantial justice will be done by granting the variance.
3. The variance is needed so that the spirit of the ordinance is
observed.
4. Due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance will result in unnecessary
hardship.
5. The variance will not allow any alteration of an historic
structure, including its use, which would preclude its
continued designation as an historic structure.
(b) The Zoning Board of Appeals may request further information and/
or additional reports from the Zoning Administrator and/or the
applicant. The Zoning Board of Appeals may take final action on
said request for approval of the requested variance at time of its
initial meeting, or said proceedings may be continued from time to
time for further consideration.
(c) If the Zoning Board of Appeals fails to make a determination within
60 days after said public hearing, then the request for the variance
shall be considered denied.
(7) Effect of denial. No application for a variance which has been denied
(either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 365 days
from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence
or material change of circumstances found valid by the Zoning
Administrator.
(8) Limited effect of a variance. Where the Zoning Board of Appeals has
granted a variance, such approval shall neither change the use
classification of the building or premises, nor give it any status as a
nonconforming use other than that which it has as a result of the
variance. Granting of a variance shall be considered as unique to the
variance granted, and shall not be construed as precedent for any other
proposed variance.
(9) Stay of proceedings. An application for a variance shall stay all legal
proceedings furthering enforcement of any provisions of this Title 5
from which the applicant is requesting a variance, unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the request
for the variance has been filed that, by reason of the facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
§ 5-10-41 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-41
1-1:565
§ 5-10-42. Appeals of zoning interpretations.
by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning
Administrator, and on due cause shown. State Law Reference: Wis.
Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)5.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations which
enable the City to hear and decide requests for appeals from the
interpretations of the Zoning Administrator, per § 5-10-40 as provided
for by Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e)(7).
(2) Initiation of request for appeal. Proceedings for the review of an appeal
may be initiated by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department,
board, or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning
Administrator.
(3) Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the request
for the appeal has been filed, that, by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would cause immediate peril to life or property. In
such case, the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals
or by a court of record on application and on notice to the Zoning
Administrator, and on due cause shown.
(4) Time limit for filing an appeal. Any appeal under the provisions of this
section shall be made per the requirements of Subsection (5), below,
within a period not exceeding 45 days from the date of issuance of the
interpretation by the Zoning Administrator. Failure to initiate this
appeal procedure within this forty-five-day period shall constitute a
final and binding waiver of the right to appeal said interpretation.
(5) Application requirements. An application of an appeal of a zoning
interpretation shall contain the following (digital files should be
submitted whenever possible):
(a) A copy of pertinent items in the file on the matter at hand as
identified by the Zoning Administrator and/or the applicant.
(b) A written statement from the applicant indicating the reasons why
an appeal is justified. This statement shall be dated and signed by
the applicant.
(6) Review by the Zoning Administrator.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application
is complete and fulfills the requirements of this Title 5. If the
application is determined to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant.
§ 5-10-41 MONROE CODE § 5-10-42
1-1:566
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and evaluate
and comment on the written justification for the requested appeal
to the Zoning Board of Appeals as submitted by the applicant. The
Zoning Administrator shall also evaluate the application to
determine whether the requested is in harmony with the
Comprehensive Plan or other relevant plans.
(c) The Zoning Administrator shall forward a report to the Zoning
Board of Appeals for review and action. If the Zoning Administrator
determines that the proposal may be in conflict with the provisions
this Title 5 or the Comprehensive Plan or other relevant plans, the
Zoning Administrator shall note this determination in the report.
(7) Public hearing. Within 60 days of filing of a complete application, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing in compliance with
§ 5-10-21 to consider the request.
(8) Review and action by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(a) Within 60 days after the filing of the complete application, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall make its findings. The Zoning Board
of Appeals may request further information and/or additional
reports from the Zoning Administrator and/or the applicant. The
Zoning Board of Appeals may take final action on the application
for appeal at the time of its initial meeting, or may continue the
proceedings at applicant's request. Said final action shall be
followed by a written report or minutes which shall include a
formal finding of facts developed and approved by the Zoning
Board of Appeals concerning the request.
(b) If the Zoning Board of Appeals fails to make a determination within
60 days after the filing of said complete application, then the
request for the appeal shall be considered denied.
(9) Effects of denial. No application for an appeal which has been denied
(either wholly or in part) shall be resubmitted for a period of 365 days
from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new evidence
or material change of circumstances found valid by the Zoning
Administrator.
(10) Limited effect on a favorable ruling on an appeal.
(a) No ruling by the Zoning Board of Appeals on an appeal finding a
particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a
specified zoning district shall be valid for a period of more than 365
days from the date of issuance of the ruling on the appeal, unless a
building permit is issued and development is actually begun within
that period, and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or a
certificate of occupancy is obtained and development commenced
within that period.
§ 5-10-42 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-10-42
1-1:567
§ 5-10-43. Administration and enforcement of performance
standards.
Determinations necessary for administration and enforcement of
performance standards set forth in this chapter range from those which can
be made with satisfactory accuracy by a reasonable person using normal
senses and no mechanical equipment, to those requiring great technical
competence and complex equipment for precise measurement. It is the
intent of this Title 5 that:
(b) A ruling by the Zoning Board of Appeals on an appeal finding a
particular land use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a
specified zoning district shall be deemed to authorize only that
particular use at that particular location for which the ruling was
issued. The ruling shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly
similar use for which a separate ruling has not been issued. A
favorable ruling shall automatically expire and cease to be of any
force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for
any reason, be discontinued for a period of 365 consecutive days or
more.
(1) Where determinations can be made by the Zoning Administrator using
equipment normally available to the City or obtainable without
extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be so made before
notice of violations is issued.
(2) Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it
unreasonable for the City to maintain the personnel or equipment
necessary for making difficult or unusual determinations, procedures
shall be available for causing corrections or apparent violations of
performance standards, for protecting individuals from arbitrary,
capricious, and unreasonable administration and enforcement of
performance standard regulations, and for protecting the general
public from unnecessary costs for administration and enforcement.
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall give written notice to the person or
persons responsible for the alleged violations. The notice shall
describe the particulars of the alleged violation and the reasons
why the Zoning Administrator believes there is a violation in fact,
and shall require an answer or correction of the alleged violation to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator.
(b) The notice shall state that failure to reply or to correct the alleged
violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator within the
time limit set constitutes admission of violation of the terms of this
Title 5. The notice shall further state that upon request of those to
whom it is directed, technical determination as described in this
Title 5 will be made, and that if violations as alleged are found,
costs of such determinations shall be charged against those
responsible for the violation, in addition to such other penalties as
§ 5-10-42 MONROE CODE § 5-10-43
1-1:568
§ 5-10-44. Violations and penalties.
§ 5-10-45. Fees.
Fees for procedures and permits shall be established and amended by the
Common Council.
Chapter 5-11
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND CONSTRUCTION SITE
EROSION CONTROL
§ 5-11-1.
may be appropriate, but that if it is determined that no violation
exists, the cost of the determination will be paid by the City.
(1) Violation of this Title 5. It shall be unlawful to construct or use any land,
engage in any development activity, or construct or use any structure,
land or water in violation of any of the provisions of this Title 5, or
otherwise neglect, refuse or fail to comply with this Title's
requirements.
(2) Penalties. See Chapter 1 of the City of Monroe Municipal Code.
(3) Promulgated correction of violation. In addition to any other penalty
imposed for a violation of the provisions of this Title 5, the City reserves
and maintains the continued right to abate violations of this Title 5.
Costs associated with said abatement shall be charged to the owner of
the property on which said violation has occurred.
(1) Application and administration: applicability. This district overlays
other zoning districts, and its regulations further restrict provisions of
the underlying district.
(a) Application: The requirements of this chapter do not preempt more
stringent stormwater management requirements that may be
imposed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
(b) Exclusions: This chapter is not applicable to activities conducted by
a state agency, or the Office of the District Attorney, if the Office of
the District Attorney enters into a memorandum of understanding
with the Department of Natural Resources.
(c) Administration: The Zoning Administrator shall administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Severability: If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter
is judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall remain in force and not
be affected by such judgment.
§ 5-10-43 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:569
(3) Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AGRICULTURAL FACILITY — A structure associated with beekeeping;
commercial feedlots; dairying and egg production; floriculture; fish or
fur farming; grazing and livestock raising; poultry raising; raising of
grain, grass, mint and seed crops; orchards and raising of fruits, nuts,
berries and vegetables; sod farming; placing land in federal programs
in return for payments in kind; and owning land, at least 35 acres
of which is enrolled in a conservation reserve program under United
States Code title 16, chapter 58.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL — A calendar year of precipitation,
excluding snow, which is considered typical as determined by the
rainfall record for the Madison area between March 12 and December
2, 1981.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — Structural or nonstructural
measures, practices, techniques or devices used to avoid or minimize
soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
BUSINESS DAY — A day the offices of the City are routinely and
customarily open for business.
CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDER — A court-issued order to halt landdisturbing
construction activity.
CONNECTED IMPERVIOUSNESS — An impervious surface directly
connected to a separate storm sewer or water of the state via an
impervious flow path.
CONSTRUCTION SITE — An area upon which one or more landdisturbing
construction activities occur, including areas that are part of
a larger common plan of development or sale where multiple separate
and distinct land-disturbing construction activities may be taking place
at different times on different schedules but under one plan.
CONTAMINANT OF CONCERN — A hazardous substance that is
present at a site or facility in such concentrations that the contaminant
poses an actual or potential threat to human health, safety or welfare
or the environment based upon: a) The toxicological characteristics of
the hazardous substance that influence its ability to adversely affect
human health or the environment relative to the concentration of the
hazardous substance at the site or facility; b) the chemical and physical
characteristics of the hazardous substance which govern its tendency
to persist in the environment and the chemical, physical and biological
characteristics at the site or facility which govern the tendency for the
hazardous substance to persist at the site or facility; c) the chemical
and physical characteristics of the hazardous substance which govern
its tendency to move into and through environmental media; d) the
naturally occurring background concentrations of the hazardous
substance; e) the thoroughness of the testing for the hazardous
substance at the site or facility; f) the frequency that the hazardous
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:570
substance has been detected at the site or facility; and g) degradation
byproducts of the hazardous substance.
DESIGN STORM — A hypothetical discrete rainstorm characterized
by a specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return
frequency and total depth of rainfall.
DEVELOPMENT — An artificial change to improved or unimproved
land.
EFFECTIVE INFILTRATION AREA — The area of the infiltration system
that is used to infiltrate runoff and does not include the area used for
site access, berms or pretreatment.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land is worn away
by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A comprehensive plan
developed to address pollution caused by erosion and sedimentation of
soil particles or rock fragments during construction.
EXCEPTIONAL RESOURCE WATERS — The surface waters designated
in § NR 102.11 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
FINAL STABILIZATION — All land-disturbing construction activities
at the construction site have been completed and that a uniform,
perennial, vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at
least 70% of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered
by permanent structures, or employment of equivalent permanent
stabilization measures.
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE — A performance bond, maintenance bond,
surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit or similar guarantee.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — An area that releases as runoff all or a
large portion of the precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil.
Rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and streets are examples
of areas that typically are impervious.
IN-FILL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land located within existing
development that has no impervious surface.
INFILTRATION — The entry of precipitation or runoff into or through
the soil.
INFILTRATION SYSTEM — A device or practice such as a basin, trench,
rain garden or swale designed specifically to encourage infiltration, but
does not include natural infiltration in an area that releases as runoff a
small portion of the precipitation that falls on it such as lawns, gardens,
parks, forests or other similar vegetated areas, redirection of rooftop
downspouts onto lawns or minimal infiltration from practices, such as
swales or roadside channels, designed for conveyance and pollutant
removal only.
KARST FEATURE — An area or surficial geologic feature subject to
bedrock dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:571
groundwater, and includes caves, enlarged fractures, mine features,
exposed bedrock surfaces, sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets.
LAND-DISTURBING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any man-made
alteration of the land surface resulting in a change in the topography
or existing vegetative or nonvegetative soil cover that may result in
runoff and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment
into waters of the state. Land-disturbing construction activities include
clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering,
filling and grading activities.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legal document that provides for
long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — A level of implementing best
management practices to achieve the performance standards specified
in this chapter which takes into account the best available technology,
cost effectiveness and other competing issues such as human safety and
welfare, endangered and threatened resources, historic properties and
geographic features. Maximum extent practicable allows flexibility in
the way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the
performance standards and site conditions.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Any development resulting from the
conversion of previously undeveloped land or agricultural land uses.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from many diffuse
sources including rainfall, snowmelt or irrigation water that picks up
and carries away natural and human-made pollutants and deposits such
in the waters of the state.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the site as designated in the permit
application.
ON-SITE — Located within the site as designated in the permit
application.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK — The point on the stream bank
or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is
so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion,
destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of
aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic. Where the
stream bank or shore at any particular place is of such character that it
is difficult or impossible to determine where the point of ordinary highwater
mark is, recourse may be had to the opposite stream bank of a
stream or to other places on the shore of a lake or flowage to determine
whether a given stage of water is above or below the ordinary highwater
mark.
OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS — Surface waters designated in
§ NR 102.10 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
PERCENT FINES — The percentage of a given sample of soil, which
passes through a # 200 sieve.
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:572
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A narrative or measurable number
specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for a facility or practice.
PERMIT — A written authorization made by the Zoning Administrator
to the applicant to conduct land-disturbing construction activity or to
discharge post-construction runoff to waters of the state.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive substances, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rocks, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal
and agricultural waste discharged into water.
POLLUTION — Contaminating or rendering unclean or impure the
waters of the state, or making the same injurious to public health,
harmful for commercial or recreational use, or deleterious to fish, bird,
animal or plant life.
POST-CONSTRUCTION — Completion of land-disturbing construction
activity and final site stabilization of a construction site.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT — The land cover types present before the
initiation of land-disturbing construction activity, assuming that all land
uses before development activity are managed in an environmentally
sound manner.
REDEVELOPMENT — Areas where development is replacing older
development.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any person holding fee title to the property or
other person contracted or obligated by other agreement to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
RUNOFF — Stormwater or precipitation including rain, snow, ice melt
or similar water that moves on the land surface via sheet or channelized
flow.
SEDIMENT — Settleable solid material that is transported by runoff,
suspended within runoff or deposited by runoff away from its original
location.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of conveyances
including roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains, which meets all
of the following criteria: a) is designed or used for collecting water or
conveying runoff; b) is not part of a combined sewer system conveying
both sanitary sewage and stormwater runoff; c) is not draining to a
stormwater treatment device or system; and d) discharges directly or
indirectly to waters of the state.
SITE — The entire area included in the legal description of the land on
which the land-disturbing construction activity occurs or occurred.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the Zoning Administrator
which requires that all construction activity on the site be stopped.
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:573
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan
designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from
stormwater after the site has undergone final stabilization following
completion of the construction activity.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — Any measure, practice,
technique, device or structure used to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A comprehensive
plan designed to reduce the discharge of runoff and pollutants from
hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale.
STREAM BANK — The land surface abutting the bed of any navigable
waterway which, either before any project or alteration of land contours
or as a result of the proposed project or alteration, slopes or drains
without complete interruption into the waterway.
TECHNICAL STANDARD — A document that specifies design,
predicted performance and operation and maintenance specifications
for a material, device or method.
TOP OF THE CHANNEL — An edge, or point on the landscape,
landward from the ordinary high water mark, where the slope of the
land begins to be less than 12% continually for at least 50 feet. If
the slope of the land is 12% or less continually for the initial 50 feet
landward from the ordinary high water mark, the top of the channel is
the ordinary high water mark.
TR-55 — The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, and Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, second edition, Technical Release 55, June 1986.
TYPE II DISTRIBUTION — A rainfall type curve as established in the
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Technical Paper 149, published 1973.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake
Superior within the boundaries of this state, and all lakes, bays, rivers,
streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes,
watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or
groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within this state or
its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS — An area, whether natural, mitigated or restored, where
water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to be capable
of supporting aquatic or hydrophilic vegetation and which has soils
indicative of wet conditions.
WETLANDS IN AREAS OF SPECIAL NATURAL RESOURCE INTEREST
— Those wetlands both within the boundary of designated areas of
special natural resource interest and those wetlands which are in
proximity to or have a direct hydrologic connection to such designated
areas. Areas of special natural resource interest include: a) cold water
communities including all trout streams and their tributaries and trout
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:574
lakes; b) Lakes Michigan and Superior and the Mississippi River; c)
state and federal designated wild and scenic rivers, designated state
riverways and state designated scenic urban waterways; d) unique
and significant wetlands identified in special area management plans,
special wetland inventory studies, advanced delineation and
identification studies and areas designated by the United States
environmental protection agency; e) calcareous fens; f) habitat used
by state or federally designated threatened or endangered species; g)
state parks, forests, trails and recreation areas; h) state and federal fish
and wildlife refuges and fish and wildlife management areas; i) state
and federally designated wilderness areas; j) designated or dedicated
state natural areas; k) wild rice waters; and l) any other surface waters
identified as outstanding or exceptional resource waters.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The Zoning Administrator for the City.
(4) Post-construction stormwater management:
(a) Applicability. This section applies to land-disturbing construction
activities, including those land-disturbing construction activities
that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such
activities are part of a larger common plan of development or sale,
even though multiple, separate and distinct land-disturbing
construction activities may take place at different schedules, that
meet any of the following applicability criteria:
1. Land-disturbing construction activities on construction sites,
which have one or more acres of land-disturbing construction
activity, except as provided under Subsection (4)(a)3 of this
section.
2. Post-construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of the
Zoning Administrator, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds
the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving
body of water, cause undue channel erosion, increase water
pollution by scouring, transport particulate matter or endanger
property or public safety.
3. Sites that meets any of the criteria in Subsection (4)(a)1 of this
section are exempt from the requirements of this section if one
of the following is met:
a. A redevelopment post-construction site with no increase in
any impervious surfaces;
b. A post-construction site with less than 10% connected
imperviousness based upon complete development of the
post-construction site, provided the cumulative area of all
parking lots and rooftops is less than one acre;
c. Nonpoint source pollution from agricultural facilities or
silviculture activities;
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:575
d. Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of
land-disturbing construction activity if performed to
maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of the facility; or
e. Underground utility construction such as water, sewer and
fiber optic lines. This exemption does not apply to the
construction of any aboveground structures associated
with utility construction.
(b) Technical standards: The following technical standards shall be
used in designing the water quality, peak flow shaving and
infiltration components of stormwater practices:
1. Technical standards identified, developed or disseminated by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources; or
2. Where technical standards have not been identified or
developed by the Wisconsin department of natural resources,
other technical standards may be used if the methods have
been approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(c) Plan: The responsible party shall develop and implement a written
post-construction stormwater management plan for each postconstruction
site.
1. Plan requirements: The plan shall contain the following
information:
a. Name, address, and telephone number for the following or
their designees: landowner, developer, project engineer
for practice design and certification, person or persons
responsible for installation of stormwater management
practices, and person or persons responsible for
maintenance of stormwater management practices before
the transfer, if any, of maintenance responsibility to
another party.
b. A proper legal description of the property proposed to be
developed, referencing the U.S. public land survey system
or to block and lot numbers within a recorded land
subdivision plat.
c. Pre-development conditions, including:
i. One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one
inch equals 50 feet. The site map shall show the
following:
a) Site location and legal description;
b) Predominant soil types and hydrologic soil
groups;
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:576
c) Existing cover type and condition;
d) Topographic contours of the site at a scale not to
exceed two feet;
e) Topography and drainage network including
enough of the contiguous properties to show
runoff patterns onto, through, and from the site;
f) Watercourses that may affect or be affected by
runoff from the site;
g) Flow path and direction for all stormwater
conveyance sections;
h) Watershed boundaries used in hydrology
determinations to show compliance with
performance standards;
i) Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and
other watercourses on and immediately adjacent
to the site;
j) Limits of the 100-year floodplain; and
k) Location of wells and wellhead protection areas
covering the project area and delineated under
§ NR 811.16 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
ii. Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as
needed to show compliance with performance
standards. All major assumptions used in developing
input parameters shall be clearly stated. The
geographic areas used in making the calculations
shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required map
or maps.
d. Post-development site conditions including:
i. Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use
natural topography and land cover features to
minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates and
volumes to surface waters and wetlands.
ii. Explanation of any restrictions on stormwater
management practices in the development area
imposed by wellhead protection plans and this section.
iii. One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one
inch equals 50 feet. The site map shall show the
following:
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:577
a) Post-construction pervious areas including
vegetative cover type and condition;
b) Impervious surfaces including all buildings,
structures and pavement;
c) Post-construction topographic contours of the site
at a scale not to exceed two feet;
d) Post-construction drainage network including
enough of the contiguous properties to show
runoff patterns onto, through and from the site;
e) Locations and dimensions of drainage easements;
f) Locations of maintenance easements specified in
the maintenance agreement;
g) Flow path and direction for all stormwater
conveyance sections;
h) Location and type of all stormwater management
conveyance and treatment practices, including
the on-site and off-site tributary drainage area;
i) Location and type of conveyance system that will
carry runoff from the drainage and treatment
practices to the nearest adequate outlet such as a
curbed street, storm drain or natural drainage
way;
j) Watershed boundaries used in hydrology and
pollutant loading calculations and any changes to
lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches and
other watercourses on and immediately adjacent
to the site;
k) Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as
needed to show compliance with performance
standards. The computations shall be made for
each discharge point in the development, and the
geographic areas used in making the calculations
shall be clearly cross-referenced to the required
map or maps;
l) Results of investigations of soils and groundwater
required for the placement and design of
stormwater management practices. Detailed
drawings including cross-sections and profiles of
all permanent stormwater conveyance and
treatment practices.
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:578
e. A description and installation schedule for the stormwater
management practices needed to meet the performance
standards in Subsection (4)(d) of this section.
f. A maintenance plan meeting the requirements of
Subsection (4)(f) of this section developed for the life of
each stormwater management practice including the
required maintenance activities and maintenance activity
schedule.
g. Cost estimates for the construction, operation and
maintenance of each stormwater management practice.
h. Other information requested in writing by the Zoning
Administrator to determine compliance of the proposed
stormwater management practices with the provisions of
this section.
i. All site investigations, plans, designs, computations and
drawings shall be certified by a licensed professional
engineer to be prepared under accepted engineering
practice and requirements of this section.
2. Alternate requirements. The Zoning Administrator may
prescribe alternative submittal requirements for applicants
seeking an exemption to on-site stormwater management
performance standards under Subsection (4)(d)8. of this
section.
(d) Performance standards. The plan required under subsection (4)(c)
of this section shall meet the following performance standards:
1. Total suspended solids. Best management practices shall be
designed, installed and maintained to control total suspended
solids carried in runoff from the post-construction site as
follows:
a. For new development, by design, to reduce to the
maximum extent practicable the total suspended solids
load by 80% based on the average annual rainfall, as
compared to no runoff management controls. No person
shall be required to exceed an eighty-percent total
suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements of
this subsection.
b. For redevelopment, by design, to reduce to the maximum
extent practicable the total suspended solids load by 40%,
based on the average annual rainfall, as compared to no
runoff management controls. No person shall be required
to exceed a forty-percent total suspended solids reduction
to meet the requirements of this subsection.
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:579
c. For in-fill development under five acres that occurs within
10 years after the effective date of this chapter, by design,
to reduce to the maximum extent practicable the total
suspended solids load by 40%, based on an average annual
rainfall, as compared to no runoff management controls.
No person shall be required to exceed a forty-percent total
suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements of
this subsection.
d. For in-fill development that occurs 10 or more years after
the effective date of this chapter, by design, to reduce to
the maximum extent practicable the total suspended solids
load by 80%, based on an average annual rainfall, as
compared to no runoff management controls. No person
shall be required to exceed an eighty-percent total
suspended solids reduction to meet the requirements of
this subsection.
e. Notwithstanding Subsections (4)(d)1.a through d of this
section, if the design cannot achieve the applicable total
suspended solids reduction specified, the stormwater
management plan shall include a written and site-specific
explanation why that level of reduction is not attained and
the total suspended solids load shall be reduced to the
maximum extent practicable.
2. Peak discharge:
a. At a minimum, the two-year, ten-year, and 100-year
twenty-four-hour design storms shall be used in comparing
peak flow discharge rates for pre-development and postdevelopment
conditions. The two-year and ten-year
twenty-four-hour post-development runoff rates shall be
maintained to the two-year and ten-year twenty-four-hour
pre-development runoff rates and the 100-year twentyfour-
hour post-development design runoff shall be
controlled at the ten-year twenty-four-hour predevelopment
runoff rate.
b. Pre-development conditions shall assume "good hydrologic
conditions" for appropriate land covers as identified in
TR-55 or an equivalent methodology. The meaning of
"hydrologic soil group" and "runoff curve number" are as
determined in TR-55. However, when pre-development
land cover is cropland, rather than using TR-55 values for
cropland, the runoff curve numbers in Table 1 shall be
used.
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:580
Table 1 — Maximum pre-development runoff curve
numbers for cropland area
Hydrologic
Soil Group
A B C D
Runoff Curve
Number
55 68 77 80
c. Subsection (4)(d)2.a through b of this section do not apply
to any of the following:
i. A post-construction site where the change in
hydrology due to development does not increase the
existing surface water elevation at any point within
the downstream receiving water by more than 0.01
feet for the two-year twenty-four-hour storm event;
ii. A redevelopment post-construction site; and
iii. An in-fill development area less than five acres.
3. Infiltration. Best management practices shall be designed,
installed and maintained to infiltrate runoff to the maximum
extent practicable under the following, except as provided in
Subsection (4)(d)3.e through h of this section.
a. For residential developments one of the following shall be
met:
i. Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume shall be at least 90%
of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on
an average annual rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this
requirement, no more than 1% of the project site is
required as an effective infiltration area; or
ii. Infiltrate 25% of the post-development runoff from the
two-year twenty-four-hour design storm with a Type II
distribution. Separate curve numbers for pervious and
impervious surfaces shall be used to calculate runoff
volumes and not composite curve numbers as defined
in TR-55. However, when designing appropriate
infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more
than 1% of the project site is required as an effective
infiltration area.
b. For nonresidential development, including commercial,
industrial and institutional development, one of the
following shall be met:
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:581
i. Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment
infiltration volume shall be at least 60%
of the pre-development infiltration volume, based on
an average annual rainfall. However, when designing
appropriate infiltration systems to meet this
requirement, no more than 2% of the project site is
required as an effective infiltration area; or
ii. Infiltrate 10% of the runoff from the two-year twentyfour-
hour design storm with a Type II distribution.
Separate curve numbers for pervious and impervious
surfaces shall be used to calculate runoff volumes, and
not composite curve numbers as defined in TR-55.
However, when designing appropriate infiltration
systems to meet this requirement, no more than 2% of
the project site is required as an effective infiltration
area.
c. Pre-development conditions shall be the same as in
Subsection (4)(d)2 of this section.
d. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required
for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road
construction in commercial, industrial and institutional
areas that will enter an infiltration system. The
pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration
system from clogging before scheduled maintenance and
to protect groundwater quality under Subsection (4)(d)3.h
of this section. Pretreatment options may include oil and
grease separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration,
swales or filter strips.
e. Exclusions. The runoff from the following areas are
excluded from meeting the requirements of Subsection
(4)(d)3 of this section:
i. Areas associated with tier one industrial facilities
identified in § NR 216.21(2)(a) of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, including storage, loading,
rooftop and parking;
ii. Storage and loading areas of tier two industrial
facilities identified in § NR 216.21(2)(b) of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code;
iii. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas;
iv. Areas within 1,000 feet upgradient or within 100 feet
downgradient of karst features;
v. Areas with less than three feet separation distance
from the bottom of the infiltration system to the
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:582
elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top
of bedrock, except this subsection does not prohibit
infiltration of roof runoff;
vi. Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and
institutional parking lots and roads and residential
arterial roads with less than five feet separation
distance from the bottom of the infiltration system to
the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top
of bedrock;
vii. Areas within 400 feet of a community water system
well as specified in § NR 811.16(4) of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, or within 100 feet of a private
well as specified in § NR 812.08(4) of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, for runoff infiltrated from
commercial, industrial and institutional land uses or
regional devices for residential development;
viii. Areas where contaminants of concern are present in
the soil through which infiltration will occur; and
ix. Any area where the soil does not exhibit one of the
following soil characteristics between the bottom of
the infiltration system and the seasonal high
groundwater and top of bedrock: at least a three-foot
soil layer with 20% fines or greater; or at least a fivefoot
soil layer with 10% fines or greater. This
subsection does not apply where the soil medium
within the infiltration system provides an equivalent
level of protection. This subsection does not prohibit
infiltration of roof runoff.
f. Exemptions. The following are not required to meet the
requirements of Subsection (4)(d)3 of this section:
i. Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than
0.6 inches per hour measured at the site;
ii. Parking areas and access roads are less than 5,000
square feet for commercial and industrial
development;
iii. Redevelopment post-construction sites;
iv. In-fill development areas less than five acres;
v. Infiltration areas during periods when the soil on the
site is frozen;
vi. Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land
areas and arterial residential roads.
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:583
g. Where alternate uses of runoff are used and approved by
the Zoning Administrator, such as for toilet flushing,
laundry or irrigation, such alternate uses shall be given
equal credit toward the infiltration volume required by
Subsection (4)(d)3 of this section.
h. Infiltration systems designed under Subsection (4)(d)3 of
this section shall, to the extent technically and
economically feasible, minimize the level of pollutants
infiltrating to groundwater and shall maintain compliance
with the preventive action limit at a point of standards
application as those terms are used in Chapter NR 140 of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code. However, if site
specific information indicates that compliance with a
preventive action limit is not achievable, the infiltration
best management practice may not be installed or shall be
modified to prevent infiltration to the maximum extent
practicable. Discharge from pretreatment best
management practices shall remain below the
enforcement standard at the point of standards
application.
4. Protective areas: This subsection applies to post-construction
sites located within a protective area, except those areas
exempted pursuant to Subsection (4)(d)4.c of this section.
"Protective area" means an area of land that commences at the
top of the channel of lakes, streams and rivers, or at the
delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the
following widths, as measured horizontally from the top of the
channel or delineated wetland boundary to the closest
impervious surface but does not include any area of land
adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such
that runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location.
a. The extent of the protective area is as follows:
i. For outstanding resource waters, exceptional
resource waters and for wetlands in areas of special
natural resource interest, 75 feet.
ii. For perennial and intermittent streams identified on a
United States geological survey 7.5-minute series
topographic map or a county soil survey map,
whichever is more current, 50 feet.
iii. For lakes, 50 feet.
iv. For highly susceptible wetlands, 50 feet. Highly
susceptible wetlands include the following: fens,
sedge meadows, bogs, low prairies, conifer swamps,
shrub swamps, other forested wetlands, fresh wet
meadows, shallow marshes, deep marshes and
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:584
seasonally flooded basins. Wetland boundary
delineations made by other agencies and consultants
may be relied upon. This paragraph does not apply
to wetlands that have been completely filled under
all applicable state and federal regulations. The
protective area for wetlands that has been partially
filled under all applicable state and federal
regulations shall be measured from the wetland
boundary delineation after fill has been placed.
v. For less susceptible wetlands, 10% of the average
wetland width, but no less than 10 feet and nor more
than 30 feet. Less susceptible wetlands include
degraded wetlands dominated by invasive species
such as reed canary grass.
vi. For concentrated flow channels with drainage areas
greater than 130 acres, 10 feet.
vii. In Subsections (4)(d)4.a.i, iv and v of this section,
determinations of the extent of the protective area
adjacent to wetlands shall be made on the basis of the
sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of the wetland
under the standards and criteria in § NR 103.03 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
b. The following requirements shall be met:
i. Impervious surfaces shall be kept out of the protective
area to the maximum extent practicable. The
stormwater management plan shall contain a written
site-specific explanation for any parts of the protective
area that are disturbed during construction.
ii. Where land-disturbing construction activity occurs
within a protective area, and where no impervious
surface is present, adequate sod or self-sustaining
vegetative cover of 70% or greater shall be
established and maintained. The adequate sod or selfsustaining
vegetative cover shall be sufficient to
provide for stream bank stability, maintenance of fish
habitat and filtering of pollutants from upslope
overland flow areas under sheet flow conditions.
Nonvegetative materials, such as rock riprap, may be
applied on the stream bank as necessary to prevent
erosion, such as on steep slopes or where high velocity
flows occur.
iii. Best management practices such as filter strips,
swales or wet detention basins that are designed to
control pollutants from nonpoint sources may be
located in the protective area.
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:585
c. Subsection (4)(d)4 of this section does not apply to:
i. Redevelopment post-construction sites;
ii. In-fill development areas less than five acres;
iii. Structures that cross or access surface waters such as
boat landings, bridges and culverts;
iv. Post-construction sites from which runoff does not
enter the surface water, except to the extent that
vegetative ground cover is necessary to maintain
stream bank stability; and
v. Structures constructed under special zoning
permission for the construction or placement of a
structure of property in a shoreland setback area if:
a) The part of the structure that is nearest to the
water is located at least 35 feet landward from the
ordinary high water mark;
b) The total floor area of all of the structures in the
shoreland setback area of the property will not
exceed 200 square feet, in calculating this square
footage boathouses shall be excluded;
c) The structure that is the subject of the request for
special zoning permission has no sides or has
open or screened sides; and
d) The county approved a plan that will be
implemented by the owner of the property to keep
or establish a vegetative buffer zone that covers
at least 70% of the half of the shoreland setback
area that is nearest to the water.
5. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas: Fueling and vehicle
maintenance areas shall, to the maximum extent practicable,
have best management practices designed, installed and
maintained to reduce petroleum within runoff, such that the
runoff that enters waters of the state; that contains no visible
petroleum sheen. A combination of the following best
management practices may be used: oil and grease separators,
canopies, petroleum spill cleanup materials or any other
structural or nonstructural method of preventing or treating
petroleum in runoff.
6. Swale treatment for transportation facilities: Except as
provided in Subsection (4)(d)6.c of this section, transportation
facilities that use swales for runoff conveyance and pollutant
removal shall meet all of the requirements of this subsection.
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:586
Swales designed to the maximum extent practicable shall do
the following:
a. Be vegetated. However, where appropriate, nonvegetative
measures may be used to prevent erosion or provide for
runoff treatment, such as rock riprap stabilization or check
dams.
b. Carry runoff through a swale for 200 feet or more in length
that is designed with a flow velocity no greater than 1.5
feet per second for the peak flow generated using either a
two-year twenty-four-hour design storm or a two-year
storm with a duration time equal to the time of
concentration as appropriate. If a swale of 200 feet in
length cannot be designed with a flow velocity of 1.5 feet
per second or less, then the flow velocity shall be reduced
to the maximum extent practicable.
c. Additional requirements. The Zoning Administrator may,
consistent with water quality standards, require that other
provisions of this section be met on a transportation
facility with an average daily travel of greater than 2,500
vehicles and where the initial surface water of the state
that the runoff directly enters any of the following:
i. An outstanding resource water;
ii. An exceptional resource water;
iii. Waters listed in § 303(d) of the Clean Water Act, 33
U.S.C. § 1313, that are identified as impaired in whole
or in part, due to nonpoint source pollution impacts;
or
iv. Waters where targeted performance standards are
promulgated by rule of the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources to meet water quality standards.
7. General considerations for on-site and off-site stormwater
management measures. The following considerations shall be
observed in managing runoff:
a. Natural topography and land cover features such as
natural swales, natural depressions, native soil infiltrating
capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas shall be
preserved and used to the extent possible to meet the
requirements of this section;
b. Emergency overland flow for all stormwater facilities shall
be provided to prevent exceeding the safe capacity of
downstream drainage facilities and prevent endangerment
of downstream property or public safety; and
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:587
c. In areas draining to a land-locked pond, best management
practices shall be designed to maintain or reduce the
existing maximum 100-year floodplain elevation of the
area adjacent to the pond unless the entire 100-year
floodplain lies within the owner's property. This condition
may be waived if the owner obtains the legal right to
increase flood elevations on all properties where the
floodplain is increased due to development activities.
8. Location and regional treatment option:
a. The best management practices may be located on-site or
off-site as part of a regional stormwater device, practice or
system.
b. Post-construction runoff within a nonnavigable surface
water that flows into a best management practice, such as
a wet detention pond, is not required to meet the
performance standards of this section. Post-construction
best management practices may be located in
nonnavigable surface waters.
c. The discharge of runoff from a best management practice,
such as a wet detention pond, or after a series of such best
management practices is subject to this chapter.
d. Except as allowed under Subsection (4)(d)8.e of this
section, post-construction runoff from new development
shall meet the post-construction performance standards
before entering a navigable surface water.
e. Post-construction runoff from any development within a
navigable surface water that flows into a best management
practice is not required to meet the performance
standards of this section if:
i. The best management practice was constructed
before the effective date of this chapter and the best
management practice either received a permit issued
under Chapter 30 of the Wisconsin Statutes or the
best management practice did not require such
permit; and
ii. The best management practice is designed to provide
runoff treatment from future upland development.
f. Runoff from existing development, redevelopment and
undeveloped areas of land located within existing
development shall meet the post-construction
performance standards under Subsection (4)(d)8 of this
section in accordance with the following:
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:588
i. To the maximum extent practicable, best management
practices shall be located to treat runoff before
discharge to navigable surface waters.
ii. Post-construction best management practice for such
runoff may be located in a navigable surface water if
allowable under all other applicable federal, state and
local regulations.
g. The Zoning Administrator may approve off-site
management measures if all of the following conditions are
met:
i. The Zoning Administrator determines that the postconstruction
runoff is covered by a stormwater
management system plan that is approved by the City
and that contains management requirements
consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter.
ii. The off-site facility meets all of the following
conditions:
a) The facility is in place;
b) The facility is designed and adequately sized to
provide a level of stormwater control equal to or
greater than that which would be achieved by onsite
practices meeting the performance standards
of this section; and
c) The facility has a legally obligated entity
responsible for its long-term operation and
maintenance.
h. Where a regional treatment option exists such that the
Zoning Administrator exempts the applicant from all or
part of the minimum on-site stormwater management
requirements, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee
in an amount determined by the Zoning Administrator and
approved by the Board of Public Works. In determining the
fee for post-construction runoff, the Zoning Administrator
shall consider an equitable distribution of the cost for land,
engineering design, construction and maintenance of the
regional treatment option.
9. Alternate requirements: The Zoning Administrator may
establish stormwater management requirements more
stringent than those set forth in this section if the Zoning
Administrator determines that an added level of protection is
needed to protect sensitive resources.
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:589
(e) Permit: No responsible party may undertake a land-disturbing
construction activity without receiving a post-construction
stormwater permit from the Zoning Administrator before
commencing the proposed activity.
1. Permit application and fees: Unless specifically excluded by
this chapter, any responsible party desiring a permit shall
submit to the Zoning Administrator a permit application made
on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator for that
purpose. A permit application must be accompanied by a postconstruction
stormwater management plan, a maintenance
agreement and a nonrefundable permit fee paid to the Zoning
Administrator. The plan and maintenance agreement shall be
prepared to meet the requirements of this section.
2. Review and approval of permit application: The Zoning
Administrator shall review any permit application that is
submitted and the following approval procedures shall be
used:
a. Within 15 business days of receipt of a complete permit
application, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the
applicant whether the application, plan and maintenance
agreement are approved or disapproved.
b. If the permit application, plan and maintenance agreement
are approved, or if an agreed-upon payment of fees in lieu
of stormwater management practices is made, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue the permit.
c. If the permit application, plan or maintenance agreement
is disapproved, the Zoning Administrator shall detail in
writing the reasons for disapproval.
d. The Zoning Administrator may request additional
information from the applicant. If additional information is
submitted, the Zoning Administrator shall have 10
business days from the date the additional information is
received to inform the applicant that the plan and
maintenance agreement are either approved or
disapproved.
e. Failure by the Zoning Administrator to inform the permit
applicant of a decision within 60 business days of a
required submittal shall be considered an approval and the
applicant may proceed as if a permit had been issued.
3. Permit conditions: All permits issued under this section shall
be subject to the following conditions and the holders of
permits issued under this section shall be considered to have
accepted these conditions.
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:590
a. The responsible party must comply with all applicable
federal, state and local laws and regulations.
b. The responsible party shall design and install all structural
and nonstructural stormwater management measures
under the approved stormwater management plan and
permit.
c. The responsible party shall notify the Zoning
Administrator at least five business days before
commencing any work in conjunction with the postconstruction
stormwater management plan, and within
five business days upon completion of the stormwater
management practices. If required as a special condition
under Subsection (4)(e)3.m of this section, the responsible
party shall make additional notifications according to a
schedule set forth by the Zoning Administrator so that
installation of stormwater management practices can be
inspected during construction.
d. Installation of stormwater management practices required
as part of this chapter shall be certified "as built" by a
licensed professional engineer. Completed stormwater
management practices must pass a final inspection by the
Zoning Administrator or designee to determine if they
conform to the approved stormwater management plan
and this chapter. The Zoning Administrator or designee
shall notify the responsible party in writing of any changes
required and such practices to bring them into compliance
with the conditions of this permit.
e. The responsible party shall notify the Zoning
Administrator of any significant modifications it intends to
make to an approved stormwater management plan. The
Zoning Administrator may require that the proposed
modifications be submitted to it for approval before
incorporation into the stormwater management plan and
execution by the responsible party.
f. The responsible party shall maintain all stormwater
management practices under the post-construction
stormwater management plan until such practices either
become the responsibility of the City, or are transferred to
private owners as specified in the approved maintenance
agreement.
g. The responsible party authorizes the Zoning Administrator
to perform any work or operations necessary to bring
stormwater management practices into conformance with
the approved post-construction stormwater management
plan, and consents to a special assessment or charge
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:591
against the property or to charging such costs against the
posted financial guarantee.
h. If directed by the Zoning Administrator, the responsible
party shall repair at the responsible party's expense all
damage to adjoining municipal facilities and drainage
ways caused by runoff, where such damage is caused by
activities that are not in compliance with the approved
stormwater management plan.
i. The responsible party shall permit property access to the
Zoning Administrator or designee for inspecting the
property for compliance with the approved postconstruction
stormwater management plan and permit.
j. Where site development or redevelopment involves
changes in direction, or increases in peak rate or total
volume of runoff from a site, the Zoning Administrator may
require the responsible party to make appropriate legal
arrangements with affected property owners concerning
the prevention of endangerment to property or public
safety.
k. The responsible party is subject to the enforcement
actions and penalties detailed in Subsection (7) of this
chapter, if the responsible party fails to comply with the
terms of this permit.
l. The Zoning Administrator may suspend or revoke a permit
for violation of a permit condition following written
notification of the responsible party. Any action by the
Zoning Administrator to suspend or revoke this permit
may be appealed under Subsection (9) of this chapter.
m. Permits issued under this section may include conditions
established by the Zoning Administrator in addition to the
requirements needed to meet the performance standards
in Subsection (4)(d) of this section or a financial guarantee
in Subsection (4)(e) of this section.
4. Permit duration: Permits issued under this section shall be
valid from the date of issuance through the date the Zoning
Administrator notifies the responsible party that all
stormwater management practices have passed the final
inspection required under Subsection (4)(e)3.d of this section.
(f) Maintenance agreement: The maintenance agreement is an
agreement between the City and the responsible party to provide
for maintenance of stormwater management practices beyond the
duration period of the permit.
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:592
1. Maintenance agreement filed: The maintenance agreement
shall be filed with the Green County Register of Deeds as a
covenant so that it binds all owners of the land served by the
stormwater management practices.
2. Maintenance agreement provisions: The maintenance
agreement shall contain the following information and be
consistent with the stormwater management plan:
a. Identification of the stormwater facilities and designation
of the drainage area served by the facilities.
b. Schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the
stormwater management system consistent with the postconstruction
stormwater management plan.
c. Identification of the responsible party or parties,
organization, city, town, village or county responsible for
long-term maintenance of the stormwater management
practices identified in the stormwater management plan.
d. Requirement that the responsible party or parties,
organization, city, town, village or county shall maintain
stormwater management practices under the schedule
included in Subsection (4)(f)2.b of this section.
e. Authorization for the Zoning Administrator or designee to
access the property to conduct inspections of stormwater
management practices as necessary to determine that
such practices are being maintained and operated as
required by the agreement.
f. Requirement on the City to maintain public records of the
results of the site inspections, to inform the responsible
party responsible for maintenance of the inspection
results, and to specifically set forth any corrective actions
required to bring the stormwater management practice
into proper working condition.
g. Agreement that the party designated under Subsection
(4)(f)2.c of this section as responsible for long term
maintenance of the stormwater management practices
and shall be notified by the City of maintenance problems
which require correction. The specified corrective actions
shall be undertaken within a reasonable time frame as set
by the City.
h. Authorization of the City to perform the corrected actions
identified in the inspection report if the responsible party
designated under Subsection (4)(f)2.c of this section does
not make the required corrections in the specified time
period. The City shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:593
and collect the money as a special assessment against the
property.
(g) Financial guarantee: The Zoning Administrator may require the
submittal of a financial guarantee.
1. Establishment of the guarantee: The financial guarantee shall
be in an amount, form and type determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be the estimated cost of construction and the
estimated cost of maintenance of the stormwater management
practices during the period which the designated party in the
maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The
financial guarantee shall give the Zoning Administrator the
authorization to use the funds to complete the stormwater
management practices if the responsible party defaults or does
not properly implement the approved stormwater management
plan, and upon written notice to the responsible party by the
Zoning Administrator that the requirements of this chapter
have not been met.
2. Conditions for release: Conditions for the release of the
financial guarantee are as follows:
a. The Zoning Administrator shall release the portion of the
financial guarantee established, less any costs incurred by
the City to complete installation of stormwater
management practices, upon submission of "as built plans"
by a licensed professional engineer. The City may make
provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the financial
guarantee based on the completion of various
development stages.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall release a portion of the
financial guarantee to assure maintenance of stormwater
management practices, less any costs incurred by the
Zoning Administrator, at such time that the responsibility
for stormwater management practice maintenance is
passed onto another entity via an approved maintenance
agreement.
(5) Erosion and sediment control:
(a) Applicability: This section applies to the following land-disturbing
construction activities except as provided under Subsection (5)(a)7
of this section:
1. The construction of houses or commercial, industrial or
institutional buildings on lots of approved subdivision plats and
certified survey maps.
2. The grading, removal of protective ground cover or vegetation,
excavation, land filling or other land-disturbing activity
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:594
affecting 400 cubic yards or more of dirt, sand or other
excavation or fill material.
3. The excavation or filling or a combination thereof affecting 400
cubic yards or more of dirt, sand or other excavation of fill
material.
4. The construction enlargement, relocating or reconstruction of
streets, highways, roads or bridges.
5. The laying, repairing, replacing or enlarging of an
underground pipe or facility for a distance of 300 feet or more.
6. This section does not apply to the following activities:
a. The construction of a building that is regulated under
§§ SPS 321.125 and SPS 350.115 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
b. A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes
or regulations from the requirement to have a national
pollutant discharge elimination system permit for landdisturbing
construction activity.
c. Nonpoint source pollution from agricultural facilities and
silviculture activities.
d. Routine maintenance for project sites under five acres of
land-disturbing construction activity if performed to
maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of the facility.
7. Notwithstanding the applicability requirements in Subsection
(5)(a)1 through 6 of this section, this section applies to
construction sites of any size that, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, are likely to result in runoff that exceeds the
safe capacity of the drainage facilities or receiving body of
water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water
pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate
matter, or that endangers property or public safety.
(b) Technical standards: All best management practices required to
comply with this section shall meet the design criteria, standards
and specifications based on the following:
1. Design guidance and technical standards identified or
developed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources;
2. Average annual basis calculated by using the appropriate
annual rainfall or runoff factor, also referred to as the R factor,
or an equivalent design storm using a type II distribution, with
consideration given to the geographic location of the site and
the period of disturbance; and
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:595
3. Other technical standards not identified or developed in
Subsection (5)(b)1 or 2 of this section, that have been approved
by the Zoning Administrator.
(c) Plan. The responsible party shall develop and implement a written
erosion and sediment control plan for each construction site
identified in Subsection (5)(a) of this section that incorporates the
requirements of this section.
1. Plan requirements. The erosion and sediment control plan shall
be prepared and submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The
erosion and sediment control plan shall be designed to meet
the erosion control performance standards and other
requirements of this section, and address pollution caused by
soil erosion and sedimentation during construction and up to
final stabilization of the site.
a. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include the
following:
i. Statement that briefly describes the site and the best
management practices that will be used, including the
site development schedule.
ii. Names and addresses of the owner or developer of the
site, and of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant, and the name of the applicant's principal
contact at such firm.
iii. Start and end dates for construction.
iv. Description of the site and the nature of the landdisturbing
construction activity, including a
representation of the limits of land-disturbing
construction activity on a United States geological
service 7.5-minute series topographic map.
v. A sequence of construction of the development site,
including stripping and clearing, rough grading,
construction of utilities, infrastructure, buildings and
final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall
identify the expected date on which clearing will
begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared
areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary
erosion and sediment control measures, and
establishment of permanent vegetation.
vi. Estimates of the total area of the site and the total
area of the site that is expected to be disturbed by
land-disturbing construction activities.
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:596
vii. Estimates, including calculations, if any, of the runoff
coefficient of the site before and after land-disturbing
construction activities are completed.
viii. Calculations to show the expected percent reduction
in the average annual sediment load carried in runoff
as compared to no sediment or erosion controls.
ix. Existing data describing the surface soil as well as
subsoils.
x. Depth to groundwater, as shown by natural resources
conservation service soil information where available.
xi. Name of the immediate named receiving water from
the United States geological service 7.5-minute series
topographic maps.
xii. Site map. The site map shall include the following
items and shall be at a scale not greater than 100 feet
per inch and at a contour interval not to exceed five
feet. The site map shall include the following:
a) Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and
engineered drainage systems, roads and surface
waters including lakes, streams, wetlands,
channels, ditches and other watercourses on and
immediately adjacent to the site, and any
identified 100-year flood plains, flood fringes and
floodways.
b) Boundaries of the construction site.
c) Drainage patterns and approximate slopes
anticipated after major grading activities.
d) Areas of soil disturbance.
e) Location of major structural and nonstructural
controls identified in the plan.
f) Location of areas where stabilization practices
will be used.
g) Areas which will be vegetated following
construction.
h) Extent of wetland acreage on the site and
locations where stormwater is discharged to a
surface water or wetland.
i) Locations of all surface waters and wetlands
within one mile of the construction site.
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:597
j) An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the
entire construction site map.
xiii. Description of appropriate controls and measures that
will be performed at the site to prevent pollutants
from reaching waters of the state. The plan shall
clearly describe the appropriate control measures for
each major activity and the timing during the
construction process that the measures will be
implemented. The description of erosion controls shall
include, when appropriate, the following minimum
requirements:
a) Description of interim and permanent
stabilization practices, including a practice
implementation schedule. Site plans shall ensure
that existing vegetation is preserved where
attainable and that disturbed portions of the site
are stabilized.
b) Description of structural practices to divert flow
away from exposed soils, store flows or otherwise
limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from
the site. Unless otherwise specifically approved in
writing by the Zoning Administrator, structural
measures shall be installed on upland soils.
c) Management of overland flow at all sites, unless
otherwise controlled by outfall controls.
d) Trapping of sediment in channelized flow.
e) Staging construction to limit bare areas subject to
erosion.
f) Protection of downslope drainage inlets where
they occur.
g) Minimization of tracking at all sites.
h) Clean up of off-site sediment deposits.
i) Proper disposal of building and waste materials at
all sites.
j) Stabilization of drainage ways.
k) Control of soil erosion from dirt stockpiles.
l) Installation of permanent stabilization practices
as soon as possible after final grading.
m) Minimization of dust to the maximum extent
practicable.
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:598
b. The erosion and sediment control plan shall require that
velocity dissipation devices be placed at discharge
locations and along the length of any outfall channel, as
necessary, to provide a nonerosive flow from the structure
to a watercourse so that the natural physical and
biological characteristics and functions are maintained
and protected.
2. The applicant shall amend the plan if any of the following
occur:
a. There is a change in design, construction, operation or
maintenance at the site which has a reasonable potential
for the discharge of pollutants to the waters of the state
and which has not otherwise been addressed in the plan.
b. The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts
of pollutants carried by construction site runoff.
c. The Zoning Administrator notifies the applicant of changes
needed in the plan.
d. Permit: No responsible party may commence a landdisturbing
construction activity under this section without
receiving prior approval of an erosion and sediment
control plan for the site and a permit from the City.
i. Permit application and fees: At least one responsible
party desiring to undertake a land-disturbing
construction activity subject to this section shall
submit an application for a permit, an erosion and
sediment control plan and pay a fee. By submitting an
application, the applicant is authorizing the Zoning
Administrator to enter the site to obtain information
required for the review of the erosion and sediment
control plan.
ii. Review and approval of permit application: The
Zoning Administrator shall review any complete
permit application. The following approval procedure
shall be used:
a) Within 15 business days of the receipt of a
complete permit application, the Zoning
Administrator shall inform the applicant whether
the application and plan are approved or
disapproved based on the requirements of this
chapter.
b) If the permit application and plan are approved,
the Zoning Administrator shall issue the permit.
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:599
c) If the permit application or plan is disapproved,
the Zoning Administrator shall state in writing the
reasons for disapproval.
d) The Zoning Administrator may request additional
information from the applicant. After additional
information is submitted, the Zoning
Administrator shall have 10 business days from
the date the additional information is received to
inform the applicant that the plan is either
approved or disapproved.
e) Failure by the Zoning Administrator to inform the
permit applicant of a decision within 60 business
days of a required submittal shall be considered
an approval of the submittal and the applicant
may proceed as if a permit had been issued.
iii. Surety bond: As a condition of approval and issuance
of the permit, the Zoning Administrator may require
the applicant to deposit a surety bond or irrevocable
letter of credit to guarantee a good-faith execution of
the approved erosion control plan and any permit
conditions.
iv. Permit conditions: All permits require the responsible
party to:
a) Notify the Zoning Administrator within 48 hours
of commencing any land-disturbing construction
activity.
b) Notify the Zoning Administrator of completion of
any best management practices within 14 days
after their installation.
c) Obtain permission in writing from the Zoning
Administrator before any modification under
Subsection (5)(c)2 of this chapter of the erosion
and sediment control plan.
d) Install all best management practices.
e) Maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater
drainage systems, best management practices
and other facilities.
f) Repair any siltation or erosion damage to
adjoining surfaces and drainage ways resulting
from land-disturbing construction activities and
document repairs in a site erosion control log.
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:600
g) Inspect the best management practices within 24
hours after each rainfall of 0.5 inches or more
which results in runoff during active construction
periods, and at least once each week to make
needed repairs and document the findings of the
inspections in a site erosion control log with the
date of inspection, the name of the person
conducting the inspection and a description of the
present phase of the construction at the site.
h) Allow the Zoning Administrator to enter the site
for inspecting compliance with the erosion and
sediment control plan or for performing any work
necessary to bring the site into compliance with
the control plan.
i) Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment control
plan at the construction site.
j) Include conditions established by the Zoning
Administrator in addition to the requirements set
forth in Subsection (5)(d)4.a through i of this
section, where needed to assure compliance with
the performance standards in Subsection (5)(e) of
this section.
v. Permit duration: Permits issued under this section
shall be valid for 180 days or the length of the building
permit or other construction authorizations,
whichever is longer, from the date of issuance. The
Zoning Administrator may extend the period one or
more times for up to an additional 180 days. The
Zoning Administrator may require additional best
management practices as a condition of the extension
if they are necessary to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
vi. Maintenance: The responsible party throughout the
duration of the land-disturbing construction activities
shall maintain all best management practices
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter
until the site has undergone final stabilization.
e. Performance standards: The plan required under
Subsection (5)(c) of this section shall meet the following
requirements.
i. Plan requirements: The erosion and sediment control
plan shall include the following performance
standards:
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:601
a) Best management practices that, by design,
achieve to the maximum extent practicable a
reduction of 80% of the sediment load carried in
runoff, on an average annual basis, as compared
with no sediment or erosion controls until the
construction site has undergone final
stabilization. No person shall be required to
exceed an eighty-percent sediment reduction to
meet the requirements of this subsection. Erosion
and sediment control best management practices
may be used alone or in combination to meet the
requirements of this subsection. Credit toward
meeting the sediment reduction shall be given for
limiting the duration or area or both of landdisturbing
construction activity or other
appropriate mechanism.
b) Notwithstanding Subsection (5)(e)1.a of this
section, if best management practices cannot be
designed and implemented to reduce the
sediment load by 80%, on an average annual
basis, the plan shall include a written and sitespecific
explanation as to why the eighty-percent
reduction goal is not attainable and the sediment
load shall be reduced to the maximum extent
practicable.
c) Where appropriate, the plan shall include
sediment controls to prevent or protect all of the
following to the maximum extent practicable:
[A] Tracking of sediment from the construction
site onto roads and other paved surfaces.
[B] Discharge of sediment as part of site dewatering.
[C] Separate storm drain inlet structures from
receiving sediment.
d) The use, storage and disposal of chemicals,
cement and other compounds and materials used
on the construction site shall be managed during
the construction period to prevent their entrance
into waters of the state. However, projects that
require the placement of these materials in
waters of the state, such as constructing bridge
footings or best management practice
installations, are not prohibited by Subsection
(5)(e)1 of this section.
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:602
ii. Location: The best management practices used to
comply with this section shall be located before runoff
entering waters of the state.
iii. Alternate requirements: The Zoning Administrator
may establish erosion and sediment control
requirements more stringent than those set forth in
this section if the Zoning Administrator determines
that an added level of protection is needed for
sensitive resources.
(6) Inspection: If land-disturbing construction activities are being carried
out without a permit as required by this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator may enter the land pursuant to a special inspection
warrant.
(7) Enforcement and penalties:
(a) Violation: Any land-disturbing construction activity or postconstruction
runoff initiated after the effective date of this chapter
by any person subject to this chapter shall be considered a violation
unless conducted under the requirements of this chapter.
(b) Noncompliance notice: The Zoning Administrator shall notify the
responsible party by certified mail of any noncomplying landdisturbing
construction activity or post-construction runoff.
Noncompliance includes bad-faith implementation and failure to
meet conditions of the permit.
1. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial
actions necessary, a schedule for remedial action and
additional enforcement action which may be taken.
2. Upon receipt of the noncompliance notice, the responsible
party shall correct work that does not comply with the
approved plan or other provisions of the permit. The
responsible party shall make corrections as necessary to meet
the specifications and schedule set forth by the Zoning
Administrator in the noncompliance notice. If noncompliance is
likely to result in damage to properties, public facilities or
waters of the state, the Zoning Administrator may enter the
land and take emergency actions necessary to prevent such
damage.
3. If the responsible party does not correct work to comply with
this chapter and with an approved plan or other provisions of
the permit within 15 days after the scheduled deadline in the
noncompliance notice, the Zoning Administrator shall:
a. Recommend that any person, firm, association or
corporation who does not comply with the provisions of
this chapter be subject to a Class 1 forfeiture. Each day
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:603
that the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense;
and
b. Post a stop-work order on all land-disturbing construction
activity being undertaken without a permit or in violation
of this chapter. After posting a stop-work order, the Zoning
Administrator may issue a notice of intent to the
responsible party of the Zoning Administrator's intent to
perform work necessary to comply with this chapter. The
Zoning Administrator and designees may go on the land
and commence the work after issuing the notice of intent.
4. If the responsible party does not comply this chapter, the
noncompliance notice or a stop-work order, the Zoning
Administrator shall revoke the permit issued under this
chapter 30 days after the scheduled deadline in the
noncompliance notice.
5. The Zoning Administrator may refer any violation of this
chapter or a stop-work order issued pursuant to this chapter to
the City Attorney for the commencement of further legal
proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction. It shall not
be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease-and-desist
order before resorting to injunction proceedings.
(c) Duration: Any permit revocation, stop-work order or cease-anddesist
order may remain in effect unless retracted by the Zoning
Administrator or by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(d) Costs: The costs incurred by the Zoning Administrator under
Subsection (7)(b) of this section, plus interest and legal costs, shall
be billed to the responsible party. The Zoning Administrator shall
keep a detailed accounting of the costs and expenses of performing
work. These costs and expenses shall be deducted from any
financial guarantee posted under Subsection (4)(h) of this chapter.
Where such a guarantee has not been posted, or where such a
guarantee is insufficient to cover these costs, the costs and
expenses may be entered on the tax roll as a special assessment
against the property and collected with any other taxes levied
thereon for the year in which the work is completed.
(8) Fee schedule: The fees referred to in this chapter shall be established
by the Council.
(9) Appeals: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
made by any aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board or
bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator
where it is alleged that there is error in any order, decision or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator in administering this
chapter. Upon appeal, the Zoning Board of Appeals may authorize
variances from the provisions of this chapter that are not contrary to
the public interest, and where owing to special conditions a literal
§ 5-11-1 MONROE CODE § 5-11-1
1-1:604
Zoning Map
ZONING MAP 2018
Title 6, Subdivision Regulations
Chapter 6-1
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PROCEDURES
§ 6-1-1. Title and purpose. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
This title shall be known as and may be cited as the land subdivision
regulations of the city of Monroe. The purpose of these regulations is to
regulate and control the division of land within the corporate limits and
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the city to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of the community. These regulations are
designed to lessen congestion in the streets and highways; to further the
orderly layout and use of land; to insure proper legal description and proper
monumenting of subdivided land; to secure safety from fire, panic and other
dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding
of land and avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the
further resubdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. These
regulations are formulated to facilitate enforcement of development
standards as outlined in this code, the comprehensive plan and official map
of the city.
§ 6-1-2. Applicability. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
Any subdivision of land within the city, or its extraterritorial plat approval
jurisdiction, shall be, and any other division may be, surveyed and a plat
thereof approved and recorded as required by this title and chapter 236,
Wisconsin statutes. The provisions of this title shall not apply to:
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary
hardship.
(A) Transfer of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order.
(B) Leases for a term of not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or easements.
(C) Sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
properties, if additional lots are not thereby created and if the resulting
lots are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by chapter 236,
Wisconsin statutes, or this code.
(D) Division of land for agricultural purposes of parcels of more than 10
acres not involving new streets or easements for access.
§ 5-11-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 6-1-3
1-1:605
§ 6-1-3. Definitions. [4-20-1976; 4-16-1996; 2016 Code]
In this title:
COLLECTOR STREETS — Means those streets which carry traffic from
minor streets to the major system of major streets and highways and
includes the principal entrance streets to residential developments and
streets for circulation within such developments.
EXTRATERRITORIAL PLAT APPROVAL JURISDICTION — Means the
unincorporated area within 1 1/2 miles of the corporate limits of the city (a
fourth class city). When the city becomes a third class city, this area will be
three miles from the corporate limits.
LOT DIVISION — Means the division of a parcel into lots or parcels, any one
of which is less than three acres in area for the purpose of sale or building
development.
MAJOR STREETS AND HIGHWAYS — Means those streets which are used
primarily for fast or heavy through traffic.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Means those streets which are parallel
and adjacent to major streets and highways and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
MINOR STREETS — Means those streets which are used primarily for
access to abutting properties.
STREET — Means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a
street, highway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or
however otherwise designated.
SUBDIVISION — Means a division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the
owner thereof or the owner's agent for the purpose of sale or of building
development, where: a) the act of division creates five or more parcels or
building sites of 1 1/2 acres each or less in area; or b) five or more parcels
or building sites of 1 1/2 acres each or less in area are created by successive
divisions within a period of five years.
§ 6-1-4. Procedure for subdividing. [4-20-1976; 11-21-1989
2-17-1993; 2016 Code]
(A) Sales of lots, preliminary plat and final plat required. No person
proposing to make a subdivision within the territorial limits of these
regulations shall enter into any contract for the sale of, nor shall offer to
sell the subdivision or any part thereof, nor shall proceed with any
construction work, other than grading on the proposed subdivision,
until he or she has obtained from the plan commission and the council
the approval of the preliminary and final plat of the proposed
subdivision as required by this chapter.
(B) City engineer, consultation. Before preparing and submitting the
preliminary plat to the plan commission, the subdivider, or his or her
engineer, shall consult with the city engineer while the plat is in sketch
§ 6-1-3 MONROE CODE § 6-1-4
1-1:606
form to determine the locations of proposed highways or major streets,
parks, playgrounds and other planned developments.
(C) Compliance with design principles required. In planning and
developing a subdivision, the subdivider or his or her agent shall
comply with the general principles of design and minimum
requirements for the layout of subdivisions set forth in this Title, as well
as chapter 236 of the Wisconsin statutes, and such other regulations as
from time to time become applicable.
(D) School facilities. The owner or subdivider, when seeking approval of a
preliminary plat or division of land, shall offer proof as to the name of
the school district or districts in which the subdivision is to be located
and shall verify that all plans have been submitted to the school district.
(E) Public sites, open space, park land area or park land development
funding. All subdivisions, lot divisions and integrated planned
developments of lands zoned A-1, A-2, R-1, R-2 or R-3 under title 5 of
this code must provide, in a manner selected by the city plan
commission, for the development, including purchase if necessary, of
park lands, playgrounds or other public spaces as herein provided. At
the option of the plan commission, the subdivider or developer, as the
case may be, shall provide one of the following:
(1) Dedication of area equal in amount to at least five percent of the
area of every subdivision, lot division or integrated planned
development, exclusive of streets and alleys. The city plan
commission shall have the option of dictating the lands to be used
to satisfy this requirement; or
(2) Payment of monies to a nonlapsing fund for park land development.
The plan commission may require the subdivider or developer to
pay to the city a sum of money, on a per lot basis, or on a per unit
basis in the case of a planned unit development, for the
development of park lands or playgrounds. All monies paid
thereunder shall be paid to a nonlapsing fund maintained by the
city and administered by the council, for the purchase and
development of park lands or playgrounds. The sum of money to be
paid by the subdivider or developer shall be $100.00 for each lot or
unit to be developed for single-family residential use. For lots zoned
to allow more than one family unit, an additional $50.00 per unit
shall be assessed.
A) If payment of a fee is required by the plan commission, such
fee shall be assessed when, and as a condition for, plan
commission approval of a plat, certified survey or subdivision.
Such fee shall either be payable in cash upon approval of the
plat, certified survey or subdivision or the subdivider shall
execute or cause to be executed and properly recorded with
the register of deeds for Green County a mortgage to the city
for the total sum due the city pursuant to this section together
§ 6-1-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 6-1-4
1-1:607
§ 6-1-5. Penalties. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
Chapter 6-2
PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS
§ 6-2-1. Preliminary plat procedure. [4-20-1976; 6-16-2015; 2016
Code]
with interest at a rate equal to the rate last charged property
owners upon assessments for improvements to sidewalks or
curb and gutter. Interest shall accrue from the date of the plat,
certified survey or subdivision is approved. If the subdivider
provides a mortgage in lieu of cash, the subdivider shall, as
a further condition of approval of the plat, certified survey or
subdivision, pay all charges for recording of the mortgage and
shall provide the city with an opinion of legal counsel directed
to and for the benefit of the city showing such lien is first in
priority subject only to real estate taxes or liens having the
same priority as real estate taxes. The city shall be obligated
to satisfy such lien only if appropriate documents in proper
form are presented to the city for signature with payment of
a sum equal to the fee assessed upon any parcel for which a
satisfaction of lien is solicited plus accrued interest to the date
of payment. The city shall not be obligated to pay recording
fees or other charges associated with either the creation or
satisfaction of any such lien.
B) The treasurer is hereby authorized to execute on behalf of the
city any documents necessary to satisfy any mortgage lien
created pursuant to this section.
(A) A person who violates any provision of this title shall upon conviction be
subject to a Class 2 forfeiture. Each day a violation exists or continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) In addition to the penalty set forth in subsection (A), the remedies
provided by sections 236.30 and 236.31 of the Wisconsin statutes shall
be available to the city.
(A) Preparation and application for approval. The subdivider shall prepare
a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision which shall conform to
the requirements set forth in this title and chapter 236 of the Wisconsin
statutes, and shall file with the city engineer an application in writing
for the approval of the preliminary plat accompanied by 10 black line or
photostatic copies at least 15 days before the meeting of the city plan
commission at which action is desired.
(B) Review by other agencies. The preliminary plat will be checked by the
city plan commission as to its conformity with the comprehensive plan
§ 6-1-4 MONROE CODE § 6-2-1
1-1:608
and the principles, standards and requirements set forth in this title
and copies of the preliminary plat shall be referred for
recommendations or other action as follows:
(1) Plats within the city. In the case of plats within the city, to the city
engineer for checking of matters within his or her jurisdiction, and
to the director of public works for checking of matters within his or
her jurisdiction, and approval of the improvements proposed to be
installed.
(2) Plats outside the city. In the case of plats outside the corporate
limits of the city, to the appropriate county board, commission or
agency for checking of matters within the jurisdiction of the
county; to the city engineer for checking of matters within his or
her jurisdiction, to the director of public works for checking of
matters within his or her jurisdiction and to the board of the town
in which the subdivision is located for checking of matters within
the jurisdiction of the town.
(3) Plats containing five or more parcels. In the case of plats containing
five or more parcels or building sites of 1 1/2 acres each or less, or
where such are created by successive divisions within a period of
five years, to all proper agencies of the state of Wisconsin as are
required by law to review all or pertinent sections of subdivisions.
(C) Preliminary plat approval.
(1) Upon receipt of the recommendations or other action concerning
matters covered in subsection (b) of this section, the city plan
commission shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat, or
approve it with modifications noting thereon any changes that will
be required. One copy will be returned to the subdivider with the
date of said approval or disapproval endorsed thereon. Similar
copies shall be transmitted to the city engineer and the
superintendents of utilities. The approval of the preliminary plat by
the plan commission is to be considered only as an approval of the
general layout with the understanding that the city engineer or
other officials having jurisdiction, including the plan commission
and the council, may modify any engineering or construction
details proposed by the subdivider whenever required for the
protection of the public interest and before approval of the final
plat.
(2) The city plan commission may refuse to approve a plat submitted
by a subdivider which conforms to the minimum development
standards of the city for the following reasons:
A) The preliminary or final plat is not concerned with the best use
of the land for the area.
§ 6-2-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 6-2-1
1-1:609
§ 6-2-2. Preliminary plat specifications. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
B) It is not the intent of the city to allow subdivisions to be
developed in exact accordance with the minimum standards
established by the city.
C) A proposed or final plat as prepared by the subdivider has not
concerned itself with the aesthetic values of the area which the
city desires.
D) The unavailability of, or inability of the city to provide,
adequate services for the area when the plat is submitted for
consideration.
E) The possible adverse effect that such plat would cause upon
the city property tax base or the school tax base of the joint
district number 3682.
F) Such other reasons determined by the city plan commission.
(A) Vicinity sketch. A vicinity sketch at a scale of 400 feet or more to the
inch shall be drawn on or accompany the preliminary plat. The sketch
shall show all existing subdivisions, the street and tract lines or acreage
parcels of land, and the name of record owners of parcels immediately
adjoining the proposed subdivision and between it and the nearest
existing highways or thoroughfares. It shall also show the streets and
alleys in neighboring subdivisions or unplatted property involved in
producing the most advantageous development of the entire
neighborhood.
(B) Scale and profiles. The horizontal scale of the preliminary plat shall be
50 feet or less to the inch, and the vertical scale of street and sewer
profiles, 10 feet or less to the inch.
(C) Features to be shown. The preliminary plat shall clearly show the
following features and information:
(1) Name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or
closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the city.
(2) Designation. The tract designation according to real estate records
of the register of deeds of Green County.
(3) Owners of record. The names and addresses of the owner of record,
the subdivider and the engineer or surveyor.
(4) Abutting owners. The name of adjacent subdivisions and the names
of record owners of adjacent parcels of unplatted land.
(5) Boundary lines. The boundary lines, accurate in scale of the tract to
be subdivided.
§ 6-2-1 MONROE CODE § 6-2-2
1-1:610
§ 6-2-3. Final plat requirements and procedures. [4-20-1976;
5-18-1993; 2016 Code]
(6) Streets and other features. The locations, width and names of all
existing or platted streets, or other public ways within or adjacent
to the tract, and other important features including existing
structures, trees that are 12 inches or more in diameter,
watercourses, railroad lines, city boundary lines and town
boundary lines.
(7) Existing utilities. Existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other
underground structures within the tract and immediately adjacent
thereto with pipe sizes and grades indicated.
(8) Topography and soil characteristics. Contours normally with
intervals of two feet reference to USGS datum and soil
characteristics as shown on U.S. soil maps.
(9) Proposed design, streets, drainage, etc. The layout, names and
widths of proposed streets, alleys and easements; the location and
approximate sizes of catch basins, culverts and other drainage
structures, including storm sewer; and the layout, numbers and
approximate dimensions of proposed lots. Proposed street names
shall not duplicate or closely approximate any existing street
names in the city except extension of existing streets.
(10) Zoning. Zoning boundary lines if any; proposed uses or property
and proposed front yard setback lines.
(11) Public uses. All parcels of land intended to be dedicated or
temporarily reserved for public use, or to be reserved in the deeds
for the common use of property owners in the subdivision, with the
purpose, condition or limitations of such reservation indicated.
(12) North point, etc. North point, scale, date, title.
(D) Restrictive covenants. Copies of any private restriction that is planned
to be included shall be attached to the preliminary plat.
(E) Construction plans. Construction plans shall be furnished with the
preliminary plat.
(F) Easements. Easements shall be shown separately or on the preliminary
plat; where practical utility easements for poles or underground
conduits for electric or telephone lines shall be provided along rear lot
lines.
(A) Surety bond. Before the final plat of the subdivision is approved, the
subdivider shall file with the city plan commission a surety bond in a
sum sufficient to cover 10 percent of the costs of the completion of all
required work as demanded by this Title, including required streets and
utility improvements. In the case of a phased development of public
§ 6-2-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 6-2-3
1-1:611
improvements, the subdivider shall file with the city plan commission
a surety bond in a sum sufficient to cover 10 percent of the cost of
each phase of the subdivision. Said bond shall be executed before the
commencement of each phase of the subdivision. Such bond shall be
executed by the subdivider as principal, and a corporation authorized to
do so under the laws of the state as surety, payable to the city and shall
be conditioned on the faithful performance of all work encompassed in
this title.
(B) Cash in lieu of bond. In lieu of bond, the subdivider may deposit with
the city a sum of money in cash equal to 10 percent of the estimated
cost of the work as established by the city engineer. In the case of a
phased development of public improvements, in lieu of bond, the
subdivider may deposit with the city a sum of money in cash equal to 10
percent of the estimated cost of the public improvements of each phase
of the subdivision as established by the city engineer. Said cash shall be
deposited before the commencement of each phase of the subdivision.
(C) Deposit and approval of cash or bond. Said bond, or the cash
equivalent, shall be deposited with the city by submitting the same to
the city clerk and must be approved by the council before approval of
the final plat by the city plan commission. Said bond or the cash
equivalent deposit shall be conditioned that if the subdivider fails to
complete all work required in the subdivision within a reasonable time,
the city, at its option, may cause all work to be completed and the
parties executing the bond shall be firmly bound for the payment of all
necessary costs therefor.
(D) Number of copies, certificate of title. The subdivider shall file with the
city plan commission 10 black line or blueprints or photostatic copies of
the final or record plat which shall conform in every respect with the
requirements specified in this title and in chapter 236 of the Wisconsin
statutes. These shall be accompanied by a certification of title showing
the ownership of all lands to be dedicated to the public and that the title
thereof is free and unencumbered. Filing of the plat with the Plan
Commission shall be accompanied only by delivery of the copies to the
city engineer. No action on said plat shall be taken by the city plan
commission unless the copies have been deposited with the city
engineer for 15 days and the city engineer has submitted his or her
report to the city plan commission under subsection (E) of this section.
(E) Checking by city engineer. A copy of the final plat thus filed shall be
transmitted to the city engineer who will check the final plat. The city
engineer shall provide a copy of the final plat to the director of public
works, or his or her designee, for review and approval. If found
satisfactory, he or she shall deliver the plat to the city plan commission,
with a certificate showing that the technical details of the plat have
been checked and found satisfactory, a statement indicating the
necessary work that must be performed by the subdivider before the
completion of the subdivision and a statement of the estimated cost of
§ 6-2-3 MONROE CODE § 6-2-3
1-1:612
§ 6-2-4. Final plat specifications. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
§ 6-2-5. Final plat acceptance. [9-4-2001; 2016 Code]
Upon approval of the final plat, the plan commission shall transmit said
plat, and all certificates and notations required by law, to the council. The
council shall approve, disapprove or partially approve the plat. Acceptance
of the plat by the council shall constitute acceptance by the public of the
dedication of any street or other proposed public way or space shown on
said plat. In the case of a subdivision outside the corporate limits of the city,
the plat shall be referred to the county officials and the town board of the
town in which the subdivision is located for such action as may be necessary
to accept the plat. Nothing contained in this section shall be considered
acceptance by the city of the improvements placed upon said property, the
requirements of which are set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 6-2-6. Final plat filing. [9-4-2001; 2016 Code]
The subdivider shall file with the city clerk and city engineer a true copy of
the final recorded plat. No bond or cash in lieu of bond shall be returned
until the final recorded plat has been filed with the city clerk and city
engineer, and the other requirements of this chapter have been met.
Chapter 6-3
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
all said projects to establish the basis of the bond required by this
section.
(F) Review by other agencies. Where a preliminary plat is subject to review
by any state agency, the final plat shall also be submitted to such
agency.
(G) Final plat approval. If no objection to final plat is made by any of the
state agencies concerned or after 20 days from the date of submission
of the plat to said agencies, and after a copy of the final plat and the
certificate required by subsection (E) of this section has been received
by the city plan commission and if the final plat is found to conform with
the preliminary plat as tentatively approved or as modified by the city
officials, the city plan commission may approve the final plat and enter
such approval thereon in writing by its chairperson and secretary.
(A) Submittal of final plat. The final plat shall be delivered to the city
engineer and the city plan commission in a form meeting all of the
requirements which are listed in chapter 236 of the Wisconsin statutes.
(B) Number of copies, format. Ten black line or blueprints or photostatic
copies of the final plat of the subdivision, or of any part of a larger
subdivision, shall be submitted to the city plan commission for
approval.
§ 6-2-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 6-3-1
1-1:613
§ 6-3-1. Agreement for installation of improvements. [4-20-1976;
5-18-1993; 2016 Code]
§ 6-3-2. Roadways. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
The subdivider shall be responsible for the structural maintenance of all
roadways for one year after they have been accepted by the city. The
(A) Subdivider to provide all public improvements. No final plat for the
subdivision of land shall be approved until the subdivider enters into a
contract with the city agreeing that the subdivider shall provide within
the subdivision the utilities and street improvements as set forth in this
chapter. All of the work required for the improvements and all costs of
material, engineering, inspection, legal, clerical and other costs shall
be paid in full by the subdivider except as otherwise specified in this
chapter.
(B) Phased construction.
(1) A subdivider or developer may apply to the city plan commission for
phased construction of public improvements. The Plan Commission
shall not consider any application for phased construction of public
improvements unless the application has been submitted with the
preliminary plat. The application shall be in writing and shall
include a general plan for phasing the subdivision and any other
data required by the city plan commission.
(2) For purposes of this chapter "phased construction of public
improvements" means the division and construction of the utilities
and street improvements and other public improvements of the
subdivision as required under this Title in at least two separate
projects. Nothing in this subsection relieves the subdivider from
any liability, obligation or duty under any contract executed
pursuant to subsection (A) of this section.
(3) Upon approval of an application for phased construction of public
improvements by the city plan commission, the contract as
provided by subsection (A) in this section between the city and the
subdivider may provide for phased construction of public
improvements.
(4) Before the commencement of each phase, the plan commission
shall review and approve a phase implementation plan. Said plan
shall be in writing and shall indicate the lots, public dedications,
public and private streets, sidewalks, walkways and driveways
which will be constructed in that phase. The subdivider shall
provide any other information requested by the Plan Commission in
its review of the phase implementation plan.
(C) Surety. The subdivider shall file with the city a surety bond or cash
equivalent as required by this title. The estimates for the total cost of all
such work shall be established by the city engineer.
§ 6-3-1 MONROE CODE § 6-3-2
1-1:614
roadways of every subdivision shall have curb and gutter and shall be
surfaced as follows:
100 foot - 120 foot right of way: 12 inch crushed rock base, 7 inch crown,
2 1/2 inch asphalt surface.
80 foot right of way: 12 inch crushed rock base, 6 inch crown, 2 1/2 inch
asphalt surface.
60 foot right of way: 12 inch crushed rock base, 6 inch crown, 2 1/2 inch
asphalt surface.
§ 6-3-3. Water. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
The subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution system
adequate to serve the area platted including connections for each lot,
and appropriately spaced fire hydrants under the requirements of the fire
insurance underwriters association. The entire system shall be designed
to meet the approval of the officials having jurisdiction. The subdivider
shall pay for the entire cost according to the city water utility rules and
regulations F, schedule X-1c, amendment 7, letter 4-29-52, filed with the
public service commission of Wisconsin.
§ 6-3-4. Storm sewers. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
Storm water sewerage or surface drainage system shall be provided to
serve adequately the area being platted; considering, but not limited to the
following:
(A) Whenever possible, existing drainage channels shall be used. A
drainage easement, in addition to the provided right-of-way width, may
be required where streets parallel streams or drainage areas. Such
easement width shall be determined by the city engineer.
(B) The design of the drainage system shall consider and show:
(1) Storm drainage area of which the subdivision is a part.
(2) Calculations as to volume and frequency of water to be handled.
(3) A scheme of culverts sufficient in size to eliminate flooding or
ponding of water.
(4) Grades or conditions which may result in erosion or ponding.
(5) Existing watercourses.
(C) Where recommended by the city engineer and required by the council,
the developer or subdivider shall construct storm sewers including
manholes, catch basins and catch basin leads. The size, design and type
of construction shall be approved by the city engineer. The storm
sewers shall meet the following minimum standards:
§ 6-3-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 6-3-4
1-1:615
§ 6-3-5. Sanitary sewers. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
The subdivision shall be provided with a complete sanitary sewer system
connected with a public sanitary sewer main, including the lateral
connection for each lot. Where sewer mains larger than eight inches in
diameter are required or desired by the city, the difference in the cost of
pipe only between the eight inch pipe and the larger main as installed shall
be borne by the city.
§ 6-3-6. Monuments. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
Permanent and other monuments shall be placed as directed by the city
engineer.
(1) Inlets shall be located not more than 500 feet apart and shall be the
type specified by the city engineer. Inlets shall be located on the
upstream side of the sidewalk or future sidewalk intersections.
(2) Storm sewers shall not be less than 12 inches in diameter.
(D) Where ditches are used for storm drainage, they shall meet the
following minimum standards:
(1) Sod or seed with jute mesh, in the discretion of the city engineer,
the bottom and banks of ditches with mean velocities up to five feet
per second for depths of flow of six inches or more.
(2) Provide rip-rap or other approved ditch lining with mean velocities
greater than five feet per second for a depth of flow of six inches or
more.
(3) Culverts at all street or driveway intersections sized to eliminate
flooding or ponding of water.
(E) In the event the city determines that a sewer lift pump is necessary for
proper functioning of the storm water drainage system caused or to be
caused by the proposed subdivision, such sewer lift pump, whether
located in or out of the subdivision proper, shall be purchased and
installed solely at the expense of the subdivider. The location and
installation shall be subject to the approval of the city through its
appropriate agency.
(F) Where storm sewers are constructed, the city will bear the difference in
cost of pipe only between 24 inch diameter storm sewer and larger
sizes required.
(G) The subdivider and the city shall enter into a recordable agreement
whereby the subdivider agrees to indemnify the city as an insurer of
any claims by any federal, state or municipal subdivision or any
downstream landowners due to any washouts or any other conditions
that might occur due to the drainage of runoff from proposed
subdivisions.
§ 6-3-4 MONROE CODE § 6-3-7
1-1:616
§ 6-3-7. Construction and grading plans. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
Construction and grading plans, including the following for improvements
to be installed, shall be furnished and shall receive approval of the city
engineer before grading is started or improvements are installed.
§ 6-3-8. Inspection. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
Before starting any of the work covered by the approved plans,
arrangements shall be made to provide for inspection of the work sufficient
in the opinion of the city engineer to start the work. Fees for such inspection
shall be assessed against the subdivider. The city engineer shall inspect and
approve all completed work before approval and acceptance of the required
improvements or release of the sureties.
§ 6-3-9. Later sewer hookup costs. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
The full cost of construction of sewer mains along the side of exterior streets
or exterior roads created by the act of subdivision shall be the expense
of the subdivider. Any person requesting hookup of said utilities who is
not located in the subdivision at the time of hookup shall be charged a
hookup charge not exceeding the amount that would have been chargeable
to said properties to be served on a special assessment basis at the time
of installation, said amount of hookup charge to in turn be forwarded to
the subdivider at the subdivider's request, following deduction of the city's
(A) The profile of each proposed street, and locations and size of utility
mains.
(B) The cross section of each proposed street, and locations and size of
utility mains.
(C) The plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewers and storm water
sewers, with grades and sizes indicated.
(D) Plan and profile of the proposed water distribution system showing pipe
sizes and the location and valves and fire hydrants.
(E) All open cuts of ground shall be returfed in a satisfactory manner. Sod
shall be provided for any open cut subject to excessive erosion, which
sod shall be laid out in strips at intervals and at right angles to the flow
of water, to prevent erosion. To aid in preserving and protecting the
natural beauty and character of the landscape, no major change in the
topography of any land shall be made without the consent of the
abutting property owner or owners and the approval of the city plan
commission, or which would alter the drainage in any way as to
adversely affect the adjoining property. No slope shall exceed the
normal angle of slippage of the material involved, and all slopes shall be
protected against erosion. Removing and hauling away any top soil,
washing or hauling away of gravel shall not be permitted without
approval of the city engineer.
§ 6-3-7 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 6-3-9
1-1:617
administrative expenses incurred. This reimbursement period shall last for
10 years from the date of the city's acceptance of the sewer installation.
§ 6-3-10. Reimbursement for sewer lines exceeding requirements.
[4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
When a subdivider has installed a sewer lift or pressure line in compliance
with subdivision regulations, which facilities are of a greater capacity than
required for the subdivision, and which facilities may be used to capacity
by a later subdivider, the original subdivider shall be reimbursed therefor,
according to the following formula, with the city acting as collecting agent
and arbitrator:
§ 6-3-11. Underground installation of utility services. [4-20-1976;
2016 Code]
Facilities for distribution of electric, telephone and gas utility service
located within a subdivision shall be installed underground except where
the council, upon recommendation of the city plan commission, finds that
adverse soil conditions or problems of utility distribution make such
installation prohibitively expensive or impractical. Transformers, junction
boxes, meter points or similar equipment may be installed upon the ground
surface. Any landscape screening plan required for such aboveground
equipment shall be submitted to the utility for approval.
§ 6-3-12. Street lighting. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
In a newly platted area the subdivider shall provide for the location of all
street lights within the area being developed, upon consultation with the
electric utility serving the subdivision and as approved by the property
authority.
§ 6-3-13. Extension of improvements not in proposed subdivision.
[3-15-1994; 2016 Code]
In the event the proposed subdivision is not immediately adjacent to any
of the improvements required by this title or to sidewalk as provided
in section 11-1-9 of this code, the city plan commission and the council
(A) Pressure line. Cost of the line per family unit number capacity times
number of family units to be connected.
(B) Sewer lift exclusive of motor. Cost of installation per family unit number
capacity times number of family units to be connected.
(C) Sewer lines or extensions. Same formulas as subsections (A) and (B) of
this section.
(D) Sewer lift pump motor; no reimbursement. The city shall not be
considered as one of the parties subject to reimbursement with respect
to any installation the city may have made in the form of sewer lift pump
or similar items as referred to in the particular section.
§ 6-3-9 MONROE CODE § 6-3-13
1-1:618
shall require the subdivider to extend any or all of the improvements or
sidewalk to the subdivision in question at no cost to the city. When an
abutting property owner either hooks on or otherwise uses any of the said
improvements or sidewalk, the abutting owner shall pay the subdivider
who has installed the improvements or sidewalk the actual cost of the
improvements subject to city approval for all such charges made by the
subdivider. The reimbursement period shall last 10 years from the date of
the city's acceptance of the improvements.
Chapter 6-4
DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 6-4-1. General principles. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
In laying out a subdivision, the subdivider shall comply with the following
general principles and requirements set forth in this chapter. The
subdivision layout shall conform to the Official Map or Master Plan.
Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of a highway or
thoroughfare, so designated on the map or comprehensive plan, such part
of such public way shall be platted by the subdivider in locations and at the
width indicated on the official map or comprehensive plan.
§ 6-4-2. Street and block layout. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
(A) The street layout of this subdivision shall be in general conformity with
a plan for the most advantageous development of adjoining area and for
the entire neighborhood.
(B) Where appropriate to the design, proposed streets shall be continuous
and in alignment with existing, planned or platted street with which
they are to connect.
(C) Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to
be subdivided, unless prevented by the topography or other physical
conditions or unless in the opinion of the city plan commission such
extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the
layout of the subdivision with the existing layouts or the most
advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. Dead-end streets
of reasonable length (normally not over 500 feet may be approved
where necessitated by topography or where, in the opinion of the city
plan commission, they are appropriate to the type of development
contemplated.
(D) Proposed streets shall intersect one another as nearly at right angles as
topography and other limiting factors of good design permit.
(E) Wherever there exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided a dedicated
or platted and recorded half-width street or alley, the other half-width of
such street or alley shall be platted.
§ 6-3-13 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 6-4-2
1-1:619
§ 6-4-3. Arrangement of streets. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
(F) Alleys shall be platted in business districts. To provide safe access to
residential lots fronting on thoroughfares, or major streets, alleys shall
be platted in the rear of such lots or service drives provided in front
thereof. Alleys will not be approved in other locations in residence
districts, unless required by unusual topography or other exceptional
conditions.
(G) Lands abutting a highway or principal thoroughfare should be platted
with the view of making the lots, if for residential use, desirable for
such use by cushioning the impact of heavy traffic on such trafficways
as well as the accident hazard. This may be accomplished in several
ways, as follows:
(1) By platting the lots abutting such a trafficway at very generous
depths, and by providing vehicular access to them by either alleys
or service drives in the rear, or frontage access roads next to the
highway, connected therewith at infrequent intervals; or
(2) By not fronting the lots on the highway but on a minor street
paralleling the highway at a distance of a generous lot depth with
private driveways connecting with such minor street; or
(3) By platting a collector street more or less parallel with the highway,
600 feet to 1,000 feet distant therefrom, from which loop streets or
dead-end streets extend toward the highway, the ends of which give
access to the lots abutting the highway to the rear. Selection in the
specific case among the foregoing or other methods for
accomplishing the purposes in view must necessarily be made in
consideration of topography and other physical conditions, the
character of existing and contemplated developments and other
pertinent factors that apply in each case.
(H) A subdivision abutting a stream or lake shall have roads at least 60 feet
wide providing access to the low water mark so that there will be roads
at one-half mile intervals as measured along the stream or lake shore.
(I) Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of
appropriate depth. The lengths of blocks shall be such as, in the opinion
of the city plan commission are appropriate for the locality and the type
of development contemplated, but shall not exceed 1,500 feet where
the average size of lots does not exceed two acres in area.
In any block over 900 feet in length the city plan commission may
require that a crosswalk or pedestrian way, not less than 10 feet wide,
be provided near the center and entirely across such block.
The number of intersecting streets along highways and thoroughfares
shall be held to a minimum. Wherever practicable, blocks along such
trafficways shall be not less than 600 feet in length.
§ 6-4-2 MONROE CODE § 6-4-3
1-1:620
§ 6-4-4. Minimum right-of-way width of streets, alleys and
easements for utilities. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
Street rights of way shall be of the following widths:
§ 6-4-5. Minimum street surface widths. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
Minimum street surface widths of the roadway and graded and seeded
center strips, required to be installed, at the subdivider's expense, shall be
as follows:
(A) (1) Major streets and highways shall be properly integrated with the
existing and proposed system of major streets and highways and
insofar as practicable shall be continuous and in alignment with
existing, planned as platted streets with which they are to connect.
(2) Collector streets shall be properly related to the mass transit
system, to special traffic generating from facilities such as schools,
churches and shopping centers, to population concentration, and to
the major streets into which they feed.
(3) Minor streets shall be designed to conform to the topography, to
discourage use by through traffic, to permit the design of efficient
drainage and sewer systems; and to require the minimum amount
of street necessary to provide convenient safe access to abutting
property.
(B) Treatment of railroad right of way or limited access highways. Where a
subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way or limited
access highway right of way, the city plan commission may require a
street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right of way at
a distance suitable for the approximate use of the intervening land as
for park purposes, in residential districts or for commercial or
industrial purposes in other districts. Location of minor streets
immediately adjacent and parallel to railroad rights of way shall be
avoided.
(A) Highways and primary thoroughfares, not less than 100 feet.
(B) Major thoroughfares, not less than 80 feet.
(C) Collector streets, 66 feet.
(D) Minor streets and dead-end streets, 60 feet. All dead-end streets shall
terminate in a circular turn-around having a minimum right-of-way
diameter of 100 feet and a roadway turn-around of 90 feet in diameter
unless the city plan commission approves a "T" or "Y" shaped paved
space in place of the required turning circle.
(E) Where easements are required for utilities, their width shall be at least
10 feet along rear or side lot lines.
§ 6-4-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 6-4-5
1-1:621
Type of Street R.O.W. Width Roadway Width
Primary Thoroughfare 100' 77'
Major Thoroughfare 80' 44'
Collector Streets 66' 40'
Minor Streets 60' 32'
Alleys 30' 24'
§ 6-4-6. Street grades, curves and sight distance. [4-20-1976; 2016
Code]
The grades of streets shall not exceed the following, except that where
unusual or exceptional conditions exist, the city plan commission may
modify these regulations:
§ 6-4-7. Intersections. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
§ 6-4-8. Lots. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
(A) Grades. The grade of major and collector streets shall not exceed six
percent unless necessitated by exceptional topography and approved
by the city plan commission. The grade of all other streets shall not
exceed eight percent. The grade of any street shall in no case exceed 10
percent or be less than 0.5 percent.
(B) Radii of curvature. A minimum sight distance with clear visibility,
measured along the center line, shall be provided as follows: at least
300 feet on the major streets, 200 feet for collector streets and 100 feet
on minor streets. When a continuous street centerline deflects at any
one point more than 10 degrees, a circular curve shall be introduced
having a radius of curvature on said centerline of not less than the
following:
Major Streets: 300 feet.
Collector Streets: 200 feet.
Minor Streets: 100 feet.
(C) Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on major and collector streets.
(A) At street and alley intersections property line corners shall be rounded
by an arc, the minimum radius of which shall be 10 feet and five feet,
respectively. In business districts a chord may be substituted for such
arc.
(B) Street curb intersections may be rounded by radii of at least 20 feet.
(C) The minimum radii required by this section shall be increased when the
smallest angle of intersection is less than 60 degrees.
§ 6-4-5 MONROE CODE § 6-4-8
1-1:622
Chapter 6-5
MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS; ENFORCEMENT
§ 6-5-1. Modifications and exceptions. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
The general principles and design and the minimum requirements for the
laying out of the subdivisions, stipulated in chapter 4 of this title may be
varied by the city plan commission in the case of a subdivision large enough
to constitute a more or less self-contained neighborhood to be developed
under a comprehensive plan safeguarded by appropriate restrictions, which
in the judgment of the city plan commission make adequate provisions
for all essential community requirements; provided, however, that no
modification shall be made by the city plan commission which would conflict
with the proposals of the thoroughfare plan, official plan for schools, parks
and other open public grounds or with other features of the city
(A) The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
location of the proposed subdivision and for the type of development
contemplated.
(B) Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A proportion of
two to one shall normally be considered as appropriate, except in the
case of narrow lots.
(C) Every lot shall abut on a street.
(D) A lot shall comply with all of the minimum requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located, including area, width and all other zoning
requirements. The city plan commission under section 6-5-1 of this title
may relax certain of these requirements under specific sets of facts.
(E) Double frontage lots and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided.
(F) Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the right-of-way
line of the street on which the lot faces.
(G) Corner lots for residential use shall be platted wider than interior lots to
permit conformance with the front yard setback on the side street
required by the zoning regulations.
(H) Residential lots fronting or abutting on highways, thoroughfares and
other important trafficways should have extra depth to permit deep
setbacks for the building from such trafficways.
(I) Lands annexed to the city after 1969 shall be developed in the manner
required by title 5 of this code.
(J) Every lot or parcel in a residential district not of record or under
contract of purchase on April 20, 1976 shall have an area of not less
than 7,200 square feet and a mean frontage of not less than 60 feet.
§ 6-4-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 6-5-1
1-1:623
comprehensive plan, or with the intent and purpose of the general
principles of design and minimum requirements.
§ 6-5-2. Compliance with building code, other regulations.
[4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
Chapter 6-6
MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
§ 6-6-1. Jurisdiction. [4-20-1976; 2016 Code]
This chapter shall apply within the corporate limits of the city and within the
unincorporated area within 1 1/2 miles beyond the corporate limits. When
the city becomes a third class city this area will be three miles from the
corporate limits.
§ 6-6-2. Applicability. [4-20-1976; 1977 Code; 2-17-1993; 2016
Code]
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the following:
(A) Where the subdivider can show that, by reason of exceptional
topographic or other physical conditions, strict compliance with any
requirement of these regulations would cause practical difficulty or
exceptional or undue hardship, the city plan commission may relax such
requirements to the extent considered just and proper, so as to relieve
such difficulty or hardship, provided such relief may be granted without
detriment to the public good and without impairing the intent and
purpose of these regulations or the desirable general development of
the neighborhood and the community under this comprehensive plan
and the zoning regulations.
(B) Any modifications thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of the
city plan commission setting forth the reasons which, in the opinion of
the city plan commission, justify the modification.
(A) Compliance. The provisions of this title and the enforcement thereof
shall be subject to all other provisions of this code, except those
portions that may be in conflict directly therewith. In extraterritorial
jurisdictional areas wherein the permission of the city is necessary to
the authorization and issuance of a final plat approval, in the absence of
any building code in the city as to location, subsequent compliance with
the terms of the building code of the city shall be a condition
subsequent to authorization by the city with respect to any approval of
such final plat.
(B) Building permits. No building permits shall be issued for erection of a
structure on any lot of record until all the requirements of this Title
have been met. The city engineer shall notify the building inspector as
to the compliance with this title of the lot in question.
§ 6-5-1 MONROE CODE § 6-6-2
1-1:624
§ 6-6-3. Procedure. [4-20-1976; 3-3-2015; 2016 Code]
§ 6-6-4. Certified survey map. [2-17-1993; 2016 Code]
The certified survey map must be delivered to the city plan commission in a
form meeting all the requirements of chapter 236 of the Wisconsin statutes.
§ 6-6-5. Dedication of rights of way and easements. [2-17-1993;
2016 Code]
The council may, upon recommendation of the city plan commission, require
the dedication of any rights of way or easements for the public ways,
utilities or other purposes, before approving the certified survey map.
§ 6-6-6. Improvements. [2-17-1993; 2016 Code]
Where considered to be in the public interest the council, upon the
recommendation of the city plan commission, may require such
improvements as are reasonably necessary for sewerage disposal, lot
access, local traffic circulation and drainage needs. The construction of any
such improvements may be accomplished as provided in this chapter.
§ 6-6-7. Recording of certified survey map. [2-17-1993; 2016 Code]
Upon approval of the certified survey map by the council, the owner of
the land involved may record the certified survey map in the office of the
register of deeds and thereupon proceed with the sale of the property.
Title 7, Fire Regulations
Chapter 7-1
(A) The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous units
on the last preceding tax roll, into two or not more than four parcels or
building sites of five acres each or less for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership; or
(B) The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential or
nonresidential purposes involving the division of land for the opening,
widening or extension of any street, utility easement or other public
way.
(A) No person shall make or cause to be made a division of land that is
governed by this chapter until he or she has obtained approval by the
council, upon recommendation of the city plan commission, of a
certified survey map reflecting such division.
(B) No lot area shall be reduced by any means so as to create a lot of less
than the required size or so that the existing offsets, setbacks, open
space or lot area would be reduced below that required by the
regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located.
§ 6-6-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 6-6-7
1-1:625
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 7-1-1. Enabling code. [4-19-1988; 6-4-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016
Code]
(A) Fire department established. A department is hereby established to be
known as the city of Monroe fire department. This department shall be
responsible for the fire protection for the citizens and property within
the city of Monroe.
(B) Goals of the fire department.
(1) The first and foremost objective of the fire department is to serve,
without prejudice or favoritism, all of the community's citizens by
safeguarding collectively and individually, their lives against the
death dealing and injurious effects of fires and explosions.
(2) The second most important objective of the fire department is the
safeguarding of the general economy and welfare of the community
by preventing major conflagrations and the destruction by fire of
large payroll, economically essential industries and businesses.
(3) The third objective of the fire department is to serve all of the
community's citizens and property owners by protecting their
individual material wealth and economic well being against the
destructive effects of fire and explosions. In meeting this objective,
all property deserves to have an equivalent degree of protection,
commensurate with the actual property hazard involved and not
with geographical location or monetary value.
(4) The fourth objective of the fire department is to provide a hazard
and disaster mitigation service to the city with fire department
manpower and equipment resources. Serious or imminent
conditions posing a threat to life and property posed by storm, fire
or other serious peril shall require fire department services to
cause rapid mitigation of the hazard and facilitate recovery in
conjunction with other emergency services.
(5) The fifth objective of the fire department shall be to perform
services and emergency response as placed upon the Monroe fire
department or fire departments as a matter of law or order of a
court of law having jurisdiction.
(C) Council responsibilities. The council has three primary responsibilities
relating to the fire department: the first is to encourage activities which
will reduce the incidence of fires and resulting loss of life and property;
the second and third are the provision of the necessary funds and the
establishment of the scope and level of service provided by the fire
department.
§ 6-6-7 MONROE CODE § 7-1-2
1-1:626
§ 7-1-2. Selection, removal and disciplinary actions. [4-19-1988;
6-4-1991; 3-5-2002; 3-20-2007; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
§ 7-1-3. Subordinates; reemployment and disciplinary actions.
[6-4-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
Subsections (4) and (5) of section 62.13 of the Wisconsin statutes are hereby
adopted by reference.
§ 7-1-4. Compensation. [4-19-1988; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
The firefighters of the fire department shall receive such compensation as
may be established from time to time by resolution passed by the council.
§ 7-1-5. Authority of fire chief; powers and administration.
[4-19-1988; 12-20-2005; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
(A) The fire department shall consist of:
(1) One fire chief to be known as the chief of the fire department,
(2) One deputy or assistant fire chief, and
(3) Such other officers and firefighters as from time to time are
approved by the city's board of police and fire commissioners.
(B) A fire chief shall be appointed by the city board of police and fire
commissioners. The fire chief shall be appointed for an indefinite term
and shall be removed only for cause according to rules and regulations
adopted by the board of police and fire commissioners.
(C) The fire chief shall be selected based upon the individual's
demonstrated qualifications in fire prevention, control and
management.
(A) The fire chief shall be responsible for the overall administration of the
fire department.
(B) The fire chief shall be administratively responsible to the city
administrator. The fire chief shall carry out proper planning,
coordination and control within the fire department as well as with
other departments of the city.
(C) The fire chief shall be responsible for the development of an
organizational structure and related policies and procedures to carry
out the goals of the department.
(D) The fire chief shall be responsible for the appointment, assignment and
promotion of individuals to positions within the department under
personnel policies of the city and section 62.13 of the Wisconsin
statutes.
§ 7-1-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 7-1-5
1-1:627
§ 7-1-6. Control of fire alarm system. [4-19-1988; 2-17-2016; 2016
Code]
(E) The fire chief shall be responsible to develop a policy to provide and to
operate with the highest possible levels of safety and health for
department personnel. The prevention and reduction of accidents,
injuries, and occupational illness are goals of the fire department and
shall be primary consideration at all times. This concern for safety and
health applies to all department personnel and to any other persons
who may be involved in fire department activities.
(F) The fire chief shall be responsible for the development and
administration of the annual fire department budget.
(G) The fire chief shall be responsible for identifying, negotiating, and
drafting mutual aid agreements with agencies of other communities to
measurably raise the degree of emergency preparedness to each
community. Such agreements shall be submitted to the council for
review and consideration for approval. Mutual aid agreements in effect
at the time of adoption of this chapter are not affected by this chapter.
(H) The fire chief shall be responsible for maintaining liaison with other city
departments on matters of importance to the goals of the fire
department.
(I) The fire chief shall have command of all members of the department
while they are on duty.
(J) The fire chief shall have the custody of all apparatus and equipment of
the department, and it shall be the chief's duty to see that the apparatus
and equipment receive proper care and are at all times maintained in a
serviceable condition and ready for instant use.
(K) The chief shall perform all duties imposed upon the chief by the
Wisconsin statutes and this code.
(L) At the end of each calendar year, the chief shall submit to the council a
report on the operations of the fire department during the year, and his
or her recommendations for maintenance, improvement and such other
matters as relate to the effective operation of the department in the
public interest.
(M) The fire chief shall be required to attend public safety committee
meetings and any other special meetings upon request.
(A) The city fire frequency transmitter, radios and home fire alert units
shall be under the control and management of the fire chief. He or she
shall be responsible for the constant good repair and working of the
same.
§ 7-1-5 MONROE CODE § 7-1-6
1-1:628
§ 7-1-7. Fire inspection. [12-17-1991; 3-5-2002; 2-17-2016; 2016
Code]
(B) The chief of the fire department shall have custody and control of all
alert units and shall keep a record of all such units and shall take
receipt for the same.
(C) The electric fire and civil defense alarm sirens shall be under the
control and supervision of the city fire department who shall have
entire care and management of the same. They shall be responsible for
the constant good repair and working of the same.
(A) Fire inspectors. The chief of the fire department shall designate one or
more fire inspectors who may or may not be firefighters of the Monroe
fire department to exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by this chapter.
(B) Approval of appointment. All such appointments shall be approved by
the board of police and fire commissioners and fire inspector so
appointed shall hold office unless removed for cause.
(C) Compensation. Compensation of fire inspector or inspectors shall be
fixed by resolution of the council.
(D) Inspection schedule. The fire chief may establish the schedule of fire
inspections. The fire chief shall base the frequency of the inspections on
hazard classification, the proportion of public area, the record of fire
code violations, the ratio of occupancy to size and any other factor the
chief considers significant. Property other than residential property
with 4 dwelling units or less shall be inspected at least once annually or
more often if required by state law.
(E) Powers and duties.
(1) The fire inspectors are hereby given power and authority to enter
any building in the city, except the interior of private dwellings, at
any reasonable hour in the performance of their duties under this
chapter. The fire inspectors may enter the interior of private
dwellings at the request of the owner or renter as provided in
section 101.14(1)(bm) of the Wisconsin statutes.
(2) Fire inspectors shall inspect all business buildings in the city to
determine the general character of the premises with respect to
the disposition of debris, rubbish, wastepaper, rags, oils, waste,
explosives and all kinds of inflammable material and the means of
access from one part of the building to another, and they may
inspect any building in the city to determine if any danger from fire
exists by reason of defective chimneys, flues, stoves, ovens,
furnaces, boilers, electric wiring, ash houses and receptacles or by
reason of any cause.
§ 7-1-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 7-1-7
1-1:629
§ 7-1-8. General authority; combat fires and related emergencies.
[12-17-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
(3) All parts of business buildings shall be cleaned daily and kept free
from all inflammable waste material except that combustible
material not in actual use may be neatly arranged in a manner to
provide passageways and aisles for the convenient movement of
the fire department force.
(4) All doors and openings, external and internal, in all business
buildings shall be kept free from goods, and means of access and
free movement shall be provided for the convenient work of the fire
department.
(5) There shall be no waste rubbish, waste excelsior, waste shavings,
wastepaper or other like inflammable materials left in any part of
the business buildings over one day except that such materials may
be stored within a fireproof room provided with standard fireproof
doors and all material of such character shall be destroyed,
removed or placed within such fireproof room at the close of each
day.
(6) The term "business buildings" as used in this section includes
hotels, lodging houses, stores, office buildings, warehouses, mills,
breweries, factories and public buildings.
(7) If the fire inspectors, on such inspection, discover that any
provisions of this chapter are being violated, the fire chief is hereby
required to give notice thereof in writing to the owners or
occupants of such building, requiring them to comply with the
provisions of this chapter within 48 hours.
(8) If the fire inspectors, on such inspection, discover any danger from
fire by reason of any defective condition set forth in subsection
(D)2. of this section or from any other cause, the fire inspectors
shall give notice in writing to the owner or occupants of any such
building of such defects requiring them to make reasonable
changes and repairs within 48 hours, and to render the premises as
safe as possible from fire.
(9) A person who fails to comply with the requirements of any notice
given under this section shall upon conviction be subject to a Class
3 forfeiture. A separate offense exists each calendar day during
which any noncompliance occurs or continues.
(A) The fire official conducting operations to extinguish and control of any
fire, explosion or other emergency shall have full power and authority
to direct all operations of fire extinguishment or control and to take the
necessary precautions to save life, protect property and prevent further
injury or damage. In the pursuit of such operations, including the
investigation of the cause of such emergency, the fire official may
§ 7-1-7 MONROE CODE § 7-1-8
1-1:630
§ 7-1-9. False alarms. [4-19-1988; 4-4-1990; 12-17-1991; 2-17-2016;
2016 Code]
Chapter 7-2
FIRE PREVENTION; LIMITS AND REGULATIONS
§ 7-2-1. Wisconsin administrative code adopted. [2-17-2016; 2016
Code]
control or prohibit the approach to the scene of such emergency by any
vehicle, vessel, aircraft or thing and all persons.
(B) No person shall obstruct the operations of the fire department while
working to extinguish any fire, or while responding to other
emergencies, or disobey any lawful command of the fire official in
charge of the emergency, or any part thereof, or any lawful order of a
police officer assisting the fire department.
(C) The fire official in charge of an emergency scene shall have the
authority to establish fire line barriers to control access in the vicinity
of such emergency, and to place or cause to be placed, ropes, guards,
barricades or other obstructions across any street or alley to delineate
such fire line barrier. No person, except as authorized by the fire official
in charge of the emergency, may cross such fire line barriers.
(D) No person except a person authorized by the fire official in charge of
any emergency scene or a public officer acting within the scope of
public duty shall remove, unlock, destroy or tamper with or otherwise
molest in any manner any locked gate, door barricade, chain, enclosure,
sign, tag or seal which has been lawfully installed by the fire
department or by its order or under its control.
(E) A person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a
Class 2 forfeiture.
(A) No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
fire.
(B) A person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a
Class 2 forfeiture.
(A) The following chapters of the Wisconsin administrative code are hereby
adopted by reference, including amendments, additions and recodifications
thereto:
SPS 305: Licenses, certification and registration
SPS 307: Explosives and fireworks
SPS 310: Flammable, combustible and hazardous liquids
§ 7-1-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 7-2-1
1-1:631
§ 7-2-2. Depositories of ashes. [1969 Code; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
All depositories of ashes within the city limits shall be built of brick, stone
or other fireproof material.
§ 7-2-3. Dry grass, weeds, bushes or foliage. [1969 Code; 2-17-2016;
2016 Code]
The fire chief may order, by written notice, that the owner or occupant of
any lot or parcel of land within the city remove therefrom any uncut grass,
weeds, bushes or foliage if, in his or her opinion, such grass, weeds, bushes
or foliage create a fire hazard. If the uncut grass, weeds, bushes or foliage
are not removed within 24 hours after the delivery of such notice, the fire
chief shall cause such grass, weeds, bushes or foliage to be removed and the
expenses of such removal shall be charged to the owner of the lot or parcel
of land from which the grass, weeds, bushes or foliage were removed.
Chapter 7-3
VOLATILE, TOXIC, GASEOUS, FLAMMABLE MATERIAL, OR
OTHER HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
§ 7-3-1. Parking of volatile, toxic, gaseous, flammable material, or
other hazardous substances transport vehicles. [2-17-2016; 2016
Code]
No person shall park or leave standing within 50 feet of any residence
between the hours of 8:00 PM and 6:00 AM any vehicle with the capacity
to transport volatile, toxic, gaseous, flammable material or other hazardous
substances, excluding vehicles' own fuel tank which is required for its
operation.
SPS 314: Fire prevention
SPS 316: Electrical
SPS 318: Elevators, escalators and lift devices
SPS 328: Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors
SPS 340: Gas systems
SPS 345: Mechanical refrigeration
SPS 361-366: Commercial Building Code
SPS 375-379: Buildings Constructed Prior to 1914
(B) Any act required to be performed or prohibited by any section of the
Wisconsin administrative code adopted by reference is required or
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 7-2-1 MONROE CODE § 7-3-2
1-1:632
§ 7-3-2. Penalty. [12-17-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
A person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a
class 4 forfeiture. A separate offense exists each calendar day during which
a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 7-4
RAPID ENTRY KEY LOCK BOX SYSTEM
§ 7-4-1. Rapid entry key lock box system. [4-5-2006; 2-17-2016;
2016 Code]
(A) Definition. When used in this Chapter "Rapid entry key lock box" means
a high security key vault master keyed to the key configuration
provided by the Monroe fire department.
(B) Required installation of rapid entry key lock boxes. The following
structures shall be equipped with a rapid entry key lock box at a highly
visible location approved by the fire chief or his or her designee at or
near the main entry to the structure:
(1) All buildings within the city having an automatic alarm system or
equipped with an automatic fire suppression system, except one,
two or three family residential structures.
(2) All multiple family residential structures containing four or more
living units, whether rental units or condominiums.
(3) All buildings or structures having floors at or above 50 feet above
ground level.
(4) All commercial and industrial buildings identified by fire officials as
difficult to access during an emergency.
(C) Permitted installation of rapid entry key lock boxes. Any structure may
be equipped with a rapid entry key lock box. If so equipped the rapid
entry key lock box shall be placed at a highly visible location approved
by the fire chief or his or her designee at or near the main entry to the
structure.
(D) Rapid entry key lock box contents.
(1) Required keys. The owner of a structure required to have a rapid
entry key lock box shall at all times keep a key or keys in the rapid
entry key lock box for access to all of the following:
A) Common lobbies or vestibules.
B) Common hallways.
C) Rooms or spaces housing mechanical equipment serving the
structure.
§ 7-3-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 7-4-1
1-1:633
§ 7-4-2. Penalty. [4-5-2006; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction
be subject to a Class 5 forfeiture.
Chapter 7-5
OUTDOOR BURNING, OPEN BURNING AND BURNING OF
REFUSE
§ 7-5-1. Purpose. [3-3-2009; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare
and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the city due to the air pollution and fire hazards associated
with open burning, outdoor burning and refuse burning.
§ 7-5-2. Applicability. [3-3-2009; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
This chapter does not apply to the following:
D) Alarm panels for any fire or entry alarm systems.
(2) Permitted keys. The owner of a structure required to have a rapid
entry key lock box may keep a key or keys in the rapid entry key
lock box for access to individual spaces within the structure.
(3) Marking and placement of keys. Keys placed in a rapid entry key
lock box shall be clearly marked and their placement in the in a
rapid entry key lock box shall be organized in a manner approved
by the fire chief or his or her designee.
(E) New construction. All new construction subject to the requirements of
this chapter shall have a rapid entry key lock box installed before the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(F) Existing structures. All structures in existence on the effective date of
this chapter to which the regulations of this chapter apply shall have six
months from the effective date of this chapter to have a rapid entry key
lock box installed and operational.
(A) Outdoor grilling or cooking using charcoal, wood, propane or natural
gas in cooking or grilling appliances upon any lot on which the principal
structure is a one or two family dwelling.
(B) Burning in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a
building used for human or animal habitation unless the material being
burned includes refuse.
(C) The use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in a
device that is intended for heating, construction or maintenance
activities.
§ 7-4-1 MONROE CODE § 7-5-3
1-1:634
§ 7-5-3. Severability. [3-3-2009; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
Should any portion of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not
be affected.
§ 7-5-4. Definitions. [3-3-2009; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
CAMPFIRE — Means a small outdoor fire intended for recreation or
cooking, not including a fire intended for disposal of Refuse.
CHIMNEY — Means a flue that carries off exhaust from an outdoor wood
fired furnace firebox or burn chamber.
CLEAN WOOD — Means natural wood which has not been painted,
varnished or coated with a similar material, has not been pressure treated
with preservatives and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or
other composite wood products.
CONFIDENTIAL PAPERS — Means printed material containing personal
identification or financial information that the owner wishes to destroy.
DNR — Means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
EPA OWHH PHASE 1 PROGRAM — Means an EPA OWHH (outdoor woodfired
hydronic heater program) phase 1 program administered by the
United States environmental protection agency.
EPA OWHH PHASE 1 PROGRAM QUALIFIED — Means an outdoor woodfired
hydronic heater that has been EPA OWHH phase 1 program qualified,
the model has met the EPA OWHH phase 1
FIRE CHIEF — Means the chief of the Monroe fire department, or such
other person as he or she shall designate.
MODEL — Means emission level and has the proper qualifying label and
hangtag.
NEW OUTDOOR WOOD FIRED FURNACE — Means an outdoor wood-fired
furnace that is first installed, established or constructed after the effective
date of this chapter.
OPEN BURNING — Means kindling or maintaining a fire where the
products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without
passing through a stack or a chimney.
OUTDOOR BURNING — Means open burning or burning in an outdoor
wood-fired furnace.
OUTDOOR GRILLING — Means use of a natural gas, LP gas, charcoal
or hibachi grill or other similar device for cooking where the products
of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or a chimney.
§ 7-5-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 7-5-4
1-1:635
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED FURNACE — Means any equipment, device,
application or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed, affixed or
situated outdoors for the primary purpose of combustion of fuel to produce
heat or energy used as a component of a heating system providing heat for
any interior space or water source. An outdoor wood-fired furnace may also
be referred to as an outdoor wood boiler or outdoor wood-fired hydronic
heater.
REFUSE — Means any waste material, except clean wood, including, but
not limited to, food wastes, food wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint
or painted materials, furniture, composite shingles, construction or
demolition debris or other household or business wastes.
§ 7-5-5. General prohibition on open burning, outdoor burning and
refuse burning. [3-3-2009; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
Except as expressly authorized by this chapter, outdoor burning is
prohibited within the city.
§ 7-5-6. Materials that may not be burned except with permit.
[3-3-2009; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
(A) The following materials may not be burned in an open fire, incinerator,
outdoor wood-fired furnace, burn barrel, furnace, stove or any other
indoor or outdoor incineration or heating device without a permit
issued by the city authorizing such burning:
(1) Refuse, except used oil burned in a heating device for energy
recovery, subject to the restrictions in Chapter NR 590, Wisconsin
administrative code.
(2) Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
(3) Treated or painted wood including, but not limited to, plywood,
composite wood products or other wood products that are painted,
varnished or treated with preservatives.
(4) Any plastic material including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films
and plastic containers.
(5) Rubber including tires and synthetic rubber-like products.
(6) Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper
and other materials that must be recycled under chapter 3 of title 8
of this code.
(B) No permit may be issued under this section unless the person
requesting such permit produces written approval thereof by the fire
chief, and only such burning as has been authorized in such written
approval shall be authorized by such permit.
§ 7-5-4 MONROE CODE § 7-5-7
1-1:636
§ 7-5-7. Open burning of leaves, brush, clean wood and other
vegetative debris. [3-3-2009; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
Except as expressly allowed in this section, Open Burning of leaves, weeds,
brush, stumps, clean wood, trees and other vegetative debris is prohibited.
(A) Except for barbecue, gas and charcoal grills, no open burning shall be
undertaken during periods when the fire chief has issued a burning ban
applicable to the area.
(B) Campfires and small outdoor bonfires for cooking, ceremonies or
recreation are allowed, if the fire is confined by an Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc. approved control device. Bonfires are allowed only if
approved by, or under guidelines of, the fire chief.
(C) Burning of trees, limbs, stumps, brush or weeds for clearing or
maintenance of a right-of-way is allowed if approved by the fire chief
and if such burning complies with all other requirements of this
chapter.
(D) In emergency situations, such as natural disasters, burning that would
otherwise be prohibited is allowed if specifically approved by the fire
chief.
(E) Open burning under this section shall be conducted only pursuant to a
permit issued under this chapter.
(F) Open burning under this section shall only be conducted at a location
that is at least 50 feet from the nearest building which is not on the
same property.
(G) Except for campfires and permitted bonfires, open burning shall only be
conducted during daylight hours.
(H) Open Burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a
competent person of at least 18 years of age until the fire is
extinguished and is cold. The person shall have readily available for use
such fire extinguishing equipment as may be necessary for the total
control of the fire.
(I) No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or sidewalk
or on the ice of a lake, pond, stream or other body of water.
(J) Except for outdoor grilling, no burning shall be undertaken within 20
feet from any combustible material, combustible wall or partition, or
exterior building wall penetration, including, without limitation,
windows, doors and heating and cooling ducts, unless authorized by the
fire chief.
(K) Outdoor grilling shall not be undertaken on any balcony, under any
overhanging portion of a structure, or within 10 feet of a structure.
§ 7-5-7 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 7-5-7
1-1:637
§ 7-5-8. Outdoor wood-fired furnaces. [3-3-2009; 2-17-2016; 2016
Code]
An outdoor wood-fired furnace may not be installed and used in the city
except as provided by this section:
(L) No open burning may be conducted on days when the DNR has
declared an ozone action day applicable to the city.
(A) No person shall construct, install, establish, operate or maintain an
outdoor wood-fired furnace in a way other than in compliance with the
applicable sections of this chapter.
(B) No person shall operate an outdoor wood-fired furnace unless such
operation conforms to the manufacturer's instructions regarding such
operation and the requirements of this chapter.
(C) Each new outdoor wood-fired furnace shall be constructed, established,
installed, operated and maintained in conformance with the
manufacturer's instructions and the requirements of this chapter. In the
event of a conflict between the requirements of this chapter and the
manufacturer's instructions, the stricter requirement shall apply.
(D) The owner of a new outdoor wood-fired furnace shall produce the
manufacturer's owner's manual or installation instructions to the fire
chief or his or her designee to review before installation.
(E) Each new outdoor wood-fired furnace shall be laboratory tested and
listed to appropriate safety standards such as UL, CAN/CSA, ANSI or
other applicable safety standards.
(F) An outdoor wood-fired furnace shall not be located closer than 50 feet
from the nearest building which is not on the same property as the
outdoor wood-fired furnace.
(G) Each outdoor wood-fired furnace shall have a chimney that extends at
least 15 feet above the ground surface. If there are any residences
within 100 feet of the outdoor wood-fired furnace, the chimney shall
also extend at least as high above the ground surface as the height of
the roofs of all such residences. The building inspector may approve a
lesser height on a case by case basis if necessary to comply with
manufacturer's recommendations and if the smoke from the lower
chimney height does not create a nuisance for neighbors.
(H) If an outdoor wood-fired furnace creates a nuisance, then the owner of
such outdoor wood-fired furnace shall abate such nuisance by:
(1) Relocating the outdoor wood-fired furnace;
(2) Extending the chimney;
(3) Both relocating the outdoor wood-fired furnace and extending its
chimney; or
§ 7-5-7 MONROE CODE § 7-5-8
1-1:638
§ 7-5-9. Fire department practice burns. [3-3-2009; 2-17-2016; 2016
Code]
Notwithstanding contrary provisions of this chapter, the Monroe fire
department is hereby authorized to burn a standing building if necessary for
firefighting practice and if the practice burn complies with state regulations
applicable to such practice burn.
§ 7-5-10. Exemption for burning certain papers. [3-3-2009;
2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this chapter, paper and
cardboard products may be used as a starter fuel for a fire that is allowed
under this chapter.
(4) Ceasing all operations of the outdoor wood-fired furnace until
reasonable steps can be taken to ensure that the outdoor woodfired
furnace will not be a nuisance.
(I) Outdoor wood-fired furnaces shall be constructed, established,
installed, operated and maintained as follows:
(1) Fuel burned in an outdoor wood-fired furnace shall be only clean
wood, wood pellets, corn products, biomass pellets or other fuels
specifically permitted by the manufacturer's instructions such as
fuel oil, natural gas or propane backup.
(2) Use of the following fuels in an outdoor wood-fired furnace is
prohibited:
A) Rubbish or garbage including, but not limited to, food wastes,
food packaging and food wraps.
B) Plastic materials including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic
films and plastic containers.
C) Rubber, including tires or other synthetic rubber-like products.
D) Newspaper, cardboard, or any paper with ink or dye products.
E) Any other items not specifically allowed by this chapter.
(3) New outdoor wood-fired furnaces, other than EPA OWHH phase 1
program qualified models, shall be located on the property as
follows:
A) At least 25 feet from the property line.
B) In compliance with the manufacturer's recommendations and
or requirements for clearance to combustible materials.
C) At least 50 feet from any residence that is not served by the
outdoor wood-fired furnace.
§ 7-5-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 7-5-11
1-1:639
§ 7-5-11. Burning permits. [3-3-2009; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
Except as expressly allowed in this section, no person shall start or maintain
any open burning without a burning permit issued by the fire chief.
§ 7-5-12. Liability. [3-3-2009; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
A person who ignites open burning, or maintains or intentionally allows
open burning to continue, under circumstances where such person could
extinguish open burning, shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs
and any other liability resulting from damage caused by the fire.
§ 7-5-13. Right of entry and inspection. [3-3-2009; 2-17-2016; 2016
Code]
The fire chief or any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative
of the city, may inspect any property to enforce, or determine compliance
with, the provisions of this chapter.
§ 7-5-14. Enforcement and penalties. [3-3-2009; 2-17-2016; 2016
Code]
(A) An outdoor campfire does not require a permit, if the fire complies with
all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(B) Any person responsible for burning leaves, brush, clean wood or other
vegetative debris shall obtain a burning permit before starting the fire.
(C) When weather conditions warrant, the fire chief may declare a burning
moratorium on all open burning and suspend previously issued burning
permits for open burning.
(D) A burning permit issued under this section shall require compliance
with all applicable provisions of this chapter and any additional special
restrictions considered necessary to protect public health and safety.
(E) Any violation of the conditions of a burning permit shall be considered a
violation of this chapter. Any violation of this chapter or the burning
permit shall void the permit.
(A) Enforcement. The fire chief, building inspector and any sworn police
officer are authorized to enforce this chapter.
(B) Penalties.
(1) A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a Class 4 forfeiture for the first violation.
(2) A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a Class 3 forfeiture upon conviction for the second violation of
this chapter within a 12 month period.
§ 7-5-11 MONROE CODE § 7-5-14
1-1:640
Chapter 7-6
FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS
§ 7-6-1. Purpose. [2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe regulations or the construction
and placement of fire hydrants and fire department connections that are
consistent with nationally recognized standards in order to facilitate the
protection of life, environment, and property from the hazards of fire.
§ 7-6-2. Definitions. [2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTION — Means a piped connection outside a
structure for the use of the fire department to supply water to a sprinkler
system or standpipe.
NATIONAL STANDARD THREAD — Means a) for a 2 1/2 pipe a screwthread
configuration having an outside diameter of 3.0686 inches and 7.5
threads per inch b) for a 4 1/2 pipe a screw-thread configuration having an
outside diameter of 5.010 inches and 4.0 threads per inch.
§ 7-6-3. Minimum fire hydrant specifications. [2-17-2016; 2016
Code]
Fire hydrants shall conform to the following minimum specifications:
(3) A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a Class 2 forfeiture upon conviction for the third or subsequent
violation of this chapter within a 12 month period.
(4) In addition to payment of the forfeiture, a person who violates any
provision of this chapter shall pay to the city the reasonable cost
incurred by the city for prosecution of such violation.
(A) Fire hydrants in commercial and industrial areas. All fire hydrants in
commercial or industrial areas shall have two national standard thread
hose outlets of 2 1/2 inches in diameter, and one national standard
thread hose outlet of 4 1/2 inches in diameter, with a five-inch storz
adapter and cap.
(B) Fire hydrants serving fire department connections. Fire hydrants
serving fire department connections, wherever located, shall have two
national standard thread hose outlets of 2 1/2 inches in diameter, and
one national standard thread hose outlet of 4 1/2 inches in diameter,
with a five-inch storz adapter and cap.
(C) Location of fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be located as follows:
§ 7-5-14 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 7-6-3
1-1:641
§ 7-6-4. Minimum fire department connection specifications.
[2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
Fire department connections shall conform to the following minimum
specifications:
§ 7-6-5. Unobstructed access to structures. [2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
Fire hydrants and fire department connections shall be located so that hose
connections do not obstruct access to a structure and the hose lay does not
cross a roadway or fire lane.
(1) A distance from any building of not less than 1 1/2 times the height
of the building. The fire chief may approve a lesser distance if the
distance specified in this paragraph cannot be achieved due to site
conditions.
(2) A distance from a fire department connection of not less than 35
feet or more than 150 feet. The fire chief may approve a lesser or
greater distance if the distance specified in this paragraph cannot
be achieved due to site conditions.
(3) A distance from the curb of a fire lane, or the paved street surface if
no curb exits, of between two and five feet.
(4) If possible, fire hydrants shall be located off a corner of the building
and out of any potential collapse zone.
(5) Fire Hydrants shall be spaced no more than 600 feet apart in
commercial areas.
(D) Clear space. A three-foot clear space shall be maintained around the
circumference of each fire hydrant.
(A) Location. Fire department connections shall be a minimum three feet
and maximum 35 feet from the fire lane and an unobstructed path at
least five feet in width approved by the fire chief or his or her designee
shall be provided and maintained.
(B) Clear space. A three-foot clear space shall be maintained around the
circumference of each fire department connection.
(C) Connector requirements. Every fire department connection shall have a
5 inch storz connector with a 30 degree angle elbow (if applicable) and
must be provided with a fire department connection cap approved by
the fire chief or his or her designee.
(D) Signage. A metal sign with raised capital letters at least 2 inches tall
shall be mounted on all fire department connections serving automatic
sprinklers, standpipes or fire pump connections. Such sign shall read:
"AUTOMATIC SPRINKLERS" or "STANDPIPES" or "TEST
CONNECTION" or a combination thereof as applicable.
§ 7-6-3 MONROE CODE § 7-6-6
1-1:642
§ 7-6-6. Painting or color coding of fire hydrants. [2-17-2016; 2016
Code]
All fire hydrants, including those existing on the effective date of this
chapter, shall be painted yellow. The bonnet and the caps of the fire hydrant
shall be painted in color code to indicate the available fire flow conforming
to N.F.P.A. standard no 291 (2010 edition) and any subsequent editions
amendatory and supplemental thereto. No person shall repaint, decorate,
block or attempt to obscure a hydrant in any way without the approval of
the fire chief.
§ 7-6-7. Nonconforming fire hydrants and fire department
connections. [2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
Any fire hydrant or fire department connection that does not meet the
requirements of this chapter on the effective date hereof shall be upgraded
when such fire hydrant or fire department connection is replaced.
Title 8, Health and Sanitation
Chapter 8-1
GENERAL HEALTH AND SANITATION REGULATIONS
§ 8-1-1. Abatement of nuisances. [6-16-2015; 2016 Code]
Any police officer, whenever it may be considered necessary or required to
protect the public health, may enter any premises and examine the same
to determine any source of filth or cause of sickness that may exist, and
examine the condition and the number of persons inhabiting such premises,
and if in his or her opinion a condition exists which is such as to endanger
the health of residents of the city, it shall be considered a nuisance and
the officer shall order the owner or occupant of the premises where such
nuisance may be found to remove or abate the same. Such order to abate
the nuisance may also be served upon the person who may have been the
cause of such nuisance. Any person who after 24 hours has failed to obey
the order shall be subject to a Class 5 forfeiture for every 24 hours such
failure continues. When the owner, occupant or agent of any lot or premises
in or upon which any nuisance may be found, is unknown or cannot be
found, the police officer shall order the removal and abatement of such
nuisance and the cost thereof shall be charged to the property and collected
in the manner provided for the collection of special assessments.
§ 8-1-2. Communicable diseases. [1969 Code; 6-16-2015; 2016
Code]
(A) Duty of practicing physician to give notice of persons afflicted with
contagious diseases. Whenever any physician in the city shall know that
any person whom he or she has been called upon to visit is afflicted with
any communicable disease, he or she shall immediately give notice
§ 7-6-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-1-2
1-1:643
§ 8-1-3. Spitting in public. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
No person shall spit or deposit any spit, mucous or tobacco upon the floor,
stairway or wall of any theater, public hall, store or public building, or public
conveyance, or upon any sidewalk within the city. In this section "public
conveyance" means a vehicle to which the public or a portion of the public
has access and a right to use for transportation.
§ 8-1-4. Smoking prohibited. [7-6-2010; 2016 Code]
thereof to the city. Any physician who shall refuse or neglect to give
such notice within 24 hours shall upon conviction be subject to a Class
4 forfeiture for each day of such refusal or neglect continues after the
first 24 hours.
(B) Removal of persons afflicted with communicable diseases. The chief of
police, or any police officer of the city, and each of them may remove or
cause to be removed any person afflicted with any communicable
disease, to such place as may be considered expedient, and he or she
shall destroy any furniture, clothing or other property, or cause it to be
removed or disinfected.
(C) Persons quarantined not to leave premises. No person, whether
afflicted or not with any communicable disease, shall visit or depart
from any premises which shall have been quarantined by the proper
officer, until given permission by the proper officer.
(A) Section 101.123 of the Wisconsin statutes adopted. The provisions in
section 101.123 of the Wisconsin statutes, describing and defining
regulations with respect to smoking, except any provisions relating to
penalties to be imposed and except any regulations for which the
statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment, are hereby adopted
by reference.
(B) Penalty. The following penalties shall apply for violations of this section:
(1) Any person who violates section 101.123(2)(a) of the Wisconsin
statutes, adopted by reference, shall upon conviction be subject to
a Class 4 forfeiture.
(2) Except as provided in paragraphs (3) or (4) of this subsection, any
person who violates section 101.123(2m)(b) to (d) of the Wisconsin
statutes, adopted by reference, shall upon conviction be subject to
a Class 4 forfeiture.
(3) For violations subject to the forfeiture under paragraph (2) of this
subsection, if the person in charge has not previously received a
warning notice for a violation of section 101.123(2m)(b) to (d) of
the Wisconsin statutes, the law enforcement officer shall issue the
person in charge a warning notice and may not issue a citation.
§ 8-1-2 MONROE CODE § 8-1-4
1-1:644
§ 8-1-5. Slaughterhouses. [6-16-2015; 2016 Code]
It shall be unlawful for any person, without first having obtained the written
permit therefor approved by the council:
§ 8-1-6. Liquid/solid discharges, dumping or spills prohibited.
[3-4-1980; 12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
(4) No person in charge may be required under paragraph (3) of this
subsection to forfeit more than $100 in total for all violations of
section 101.123(2m)(b) to (d) of the Wisconsin statutes occurring
on a single day.
(A) To boil, heat, dry, store or manufacture any offal, swill, bones, fat,
tallow, lard, skin or other animal substance having an offensive odor,
within the city; or
(B) To slaughter any pig, sheep, lamb, cow, ox, calf, horse or other domestic
animal; or
(C) To slaughter any turkey, goose, duck, chicken or other fowl within the
city; or
(D) To carry on the business of rendering, bone boiling, bone burning, gut
cleaning, skinning, glue making from blood, scrap, fat, grease or hides
within the city; or
(E) To conduct any business or occupation within the city that will or does
generate unwholesome, offensive or deleterious odors, gas, smoke or
exhalation, or that is or would be detrimental to life, health, sight or
comfort; provided, that as to subsection (C) of this section, no written
permit shall be required except from meat dealers.
(F) Such permit shall be issued by the city clerk upon approval by the
council and the payment of a permit fee set by resolution of the council.
(A) No person shall discharge, dump, spill, deposit, place or cause to be
discharged, dumped, spilled, deposited or placed into or on any public
or private property within the city any of the following:
(1) Any whole milk, cream, skim milk, buttermilk, whey and all other
wastes or by-products from the handling or processing of milk or
any by-products thereof;
(2) Any oils, fats or waxes;
(3) Any petroleum products or dry cleaning fluids;
(4) Any cement, or concrete or any cement or concrete residue from
cleaning of implements used in preparation or delivery thereof;
except that such materials may be deposited, dumped or placed at
or on construction sites requiring such materials for the completion
of such construction.
§ 8-1-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-1-6
1-1:645
§ 8-1-7. Emptying of drains and sewers. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
No person shall permit any drain or sewer from the dwelling, house, barn,
stable, shop or other building upon the premises occupied by him or her to
empty or run into any open sewer or gutter, or into any of the streets or
public alleys or upon or over any sidewalk; and no person shall construct or
maintain any privy vault or excavation within the city.
§ 8-1-8. Cesspools and privies. [1969 Code; 6-16-2015; 2016 Code]
(5) Any fertilizer, ammonias, herbicides, pesticides, agricultural limes
or manure; except in the practice of husbandry of garden and lawn
maintenance.
(6) Any materials having a stabilized pH lower than 6.0 or higher than
8.0., or having any other corrosive or acidic property capable of
causing damage or causing damage or hazards to structures,
equipment, property or persons.
(7) Any other materials, not limited to those set forth in this section,
the presence of which will be detrimental, harmful or which may
cause harm to structures, equipment, property or persons.
(B) Except as otherwise specifically stated in this section, any of the
materials that are subject to subsection (A) of this section may be
placed or stored in the containers or containment areas specifically
designed for holding such material and which are sufficiently designed
to prevent materials once contained from dispersing outside the
containers.
(C) Violation, penalty, damages.
(1) A person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a Class 1 forfeiture. A separate offense
exists each calendar day during which a violation occurs or
continues.
(2) Any damages which occur to public or private property as a result
of any violation of this section and which must be repaired or
corrected by the city or private citizen so harmed are the liability of
the person in violation of this section.
(A) Construction, cleaning and removal of cesspools.
(1) No person shall construct any cesspool or other receptacle for
filthy water, or convert any well into a cesspool, or erect any privy
within the limits of the city without having first obtained a written
permit from the building inspector. No person shall be permitted to
remove or clean out the contents of any cesspool or privy within the
city, in the daytime, between June 1 and November 1 in any year,
and only in the nighttime after having thoroughly applied to the
matter to be so removed some disinfecting and deodorizing
§ 8-1-6 MONROE CODE § 8-1-8
1-1:646
§ 8-1-9. Sewer and water main connections. [6-16-2015; 2016 Code]
substance; nor shall any person be permitted to place or deposit
within the city limits any such substance as will create a stench,
or will in any manner endanger the public health, unless such
substance shall be immediately buried so as to entirely prevent
any stench arising therefrom, so that it will not injure any well or
cistern.
(2) No person shall erect, build, construct, keep or maintain any
surface privy or dry closet on any lot or parcel of land within the
city abutting on the public street, alley or place having a public
sewer and water main ready for use and accessible from such lot or
land.
(B) Privies, privy vaults and cesspools.
(1) All privies, privy vaults and cesspools situated on any lot or parcel
of land fronting or abutting on any public street, alley or place in
the city in and along which sewer and water mains have been laid,
shall be removed and abated and the use thereof discontinued
within 10 days after service of notice upon the owner or his or her
agents or the occupant of such lot or parcel of land.
(2) When a public sewer and water main shall be laid and completed
for use in any public streets, alleys or places within the city, all
privies, privy vaults and cesspools on lots or parcels of land
abutting or fronting on such streets, alleys or places opposite such
lot or parcel of land, and accessible therefrom, shall be removed
and abated and the use thereof discontinued within 10 days after
notice in writing of the completion for use of such sewer and water
main, served by authority of the city on the owner, his or her agent
or the occupant of such premises.
(3) It shall be unlawful and it is hereby declared to be unlawful for any
person to build, erect, construct, keep or maintain, or cause to be
built, erected, constructed, kept or maintained any privy, privy
vault, cesspool or surface closet on any lot or parcel of land
abutting on any public street, alley or place in the city, along and
within which street, alley or place the city maintains a public sewer
and water main ready for use at a distance accessible from such
privy, privy vault, cesspool or surface closet, after service of notice.
(A) When public sewers and water mains are laid along and within any
public street, alley or place in the city and ready for use, it shall be the
duty of the director of public works or of any person for that purpose
appointed on behalf of the city, to notify, in writing, all owners or their
agents and occupants of all houses, tenements or other buildings
situated on lots or parcels of lands abutting upon such street, alley or
place and accessible to such sewer and water main, to connect all
bathtubs, cesspools, closets, lavatories, sinks and urinals, upon their
§ 8-1-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-1-9
1-1:647
§ 8-1-10. Wisconsin department of health services rules and
regulations. [6-16-2015; 2016 Code]
All rules and regulations of the Wisconsin department of health services,
and including future amendments, are hereby adopted and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 8-1-11. Penalty. [12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
Except as otherwise specifically stated in this chapter, a person who fails
to comply with any provision of this chapter, including those adopted by
reference, shall upon conviction be subject to a Class 3 forfeiture.
Chapter 8-2
ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
§ 8-2-1. Applicability, interpretation and administration.
[12-2-2008; 2016 Code]
respective lots or parcels of land to such public sewer and water main
in a sanitary manner under this code and the state plumbing code
within 10 days after service of such notice, provided such notice shall
be given between March 1 and October 1 next succeeding.
(B) If any such owner shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with or conform
to the provisions of this section within 10 days after notice given by the
board of public works, the council shall cause the building or buildings
situated on such lots or parcels of land to be connected with the sewers
and water mains and the cost thereof to be assessed as a special tax
against the lots or parcels of land and the amount thereof to be levied
and collected in the same manner as other taxes.
(C) All owners of lots or parcels of land abutting on any public street, alley
or place within which public sewers and water mains have been
completed shall within 10 days from the date of service of the notice
provided in subsection (A) of this section, and under the provisions of
this code and any applicable statute or administrative rule of the state,
shall connect to such sewer all water closets, bathtubs, lavatories,
sinks, urinals and outside frostproof closets on such lot or parcel of land
and accessible to such sewer so that their contents will empty into such
sewer.
(A) This chapter applies to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed or undeveloped lands, unless otherwise authorized by this
chapter or the Wisconsin department of natural resources.
(B) Interpretation. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be
minimum requirements and shall not be considered a limitation or
repeal of any other power granted by the state. Where any terms or
requirements of this chapter may be inconsistent or conflicting, the
§ 8-1-9 MONROE CODE § 8-2-1
1-1:648
§ 8-2-2. Severability. [12-2-2008; 2016 Code]
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is judged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the chapter shall remain in force and not be affected by such
judgment.
§ 8-2-3. Definitions. [12-2-2008; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE — Means a discharge prohibited by this chapter
which occurs by chance and without planning or thought before the
occurrence.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — Means structural or non-structural
measures, practices, techniques or devices used to avoid or minimize
sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Means any land alterations or disturbances
that may result in soil erosion, sedimentation or change in runoff including
but not limited to removal of ground cover, grading, excavating and filling
of land.
DIRECTOR — Means the director of public works.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Means any material, including any substance,
waste or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration
or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL CONNECTION — Means either of the following: a) Any pipe,
open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illicit discharge to enter the MS4 including, but not limited
to, any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge including
sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the MS4, regardless
of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been
previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency; or b) Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the
MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records
and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
more restrictive requirement or interpretation shall control. This
chapter does not intentionally repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued
pursuant to law.
(C) Administration. The director shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 8-2-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-2-3
1-1:649
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Means any direct or indirect non-storm water
discharge to the MS4.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Means activities designated in 40 CFR section
122.26(b)(14) and subject to a national pollution discharge elimination
system industrial permit.
MS4 — Means municipal separate storm sewer system, a conveyance or
system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm
drains, which meet all the following criteria: a) Owned or operated by a
city; b) Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water; c) Not a
combined sewer conveying both sanitary and storm water; and d) Not part
of a publicly owned wastewater treatment works that provides secondary or
more stringent treatment.
NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE — Means any discharge to the MS4 that
is not composed entirely of storm water.
POLLUTANT — Means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive substances, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rocks, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into water.
POLLUTION — Means contaminating or rendering unclean or impure the
waters of the state or making the same injurious to public health, harmful
for commercial or recreational use or deleterious to fish, bird, animal or
plant life.
PREMISES — Means any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.
STORM WATER — Means any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — Means a document
which describes the best management practices and activities to be
implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or
contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant
discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance systems and receiving
waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER — Means any water or other liquid, other than storm water,
discharged from a facility.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Means those portions of Lake Michigan and
Lake Superior within the boundaries of this state, and all lakes, bays,
rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes,
watercourses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater,
natural or artificial, public or private, within this state or its jurisdiction.
§ 8-2-3 MONROE CODE § 8-2-3
1-1:650
WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM STORM
WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — Means a permit issued by the Wisconsin
department of natural resources that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the state, whether the permit applies on an individual, group or
general area-wide basis.
§ 8-2-4. Illicit discharges. [12-2-2008; 2016 Code]
§ 8-2-5. Illegal connections. [12-2-2008; 2016 Code]
(A) Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, discharge,
cause to be discharged or allow others under their control to discharge
into the MS4 or waters of the state any materials other than storm
water.
(B) Exemptions. The following non-storm water discharges are excluded
from subsection (A) of this section:
(1) Waterline flushing or other potable water sources;
(2) Landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
(3) Diverted, natural riparian habitat and wetland flows;
(4) Rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains and
uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(5) Foundation or footing drains, not including active ground water
dewatering systems and crawl space pumps;
(6) Air conditioning condensation;
(7) Springs;
(8) Non-commercial washing of vehicles;
(9) Dechlorinated swimming pool water with less than one part per
million chlorine;
(10) Fire-fighting and fire training activities;
(11) Other discharges specified in writing by the director as being
necessary to protect public health and safety; and
(12) Other water sources determined by the director in writing as not
containing pollutants that cause or contribute to waterway
degradation including, but not limited to, a violation of applicable
water quality standards and degradation of the biotic integrity of
surface water bodies and their floodplains.
(A) Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, use, maintenance
or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
§ 8-2-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-2-5
1-1:651
§ 8-2-6. Suspension of MS4 access. [12-2-2008; 2016 Code]
§ 8-2-7. Industrial or construction activity discharges. [12-2-2008;
2016 Code]
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity Wisconsin
pollutant discharge elimination system storm water discharge permit shall
comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with such
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law that was in effect at the time of connection.
(B) Location. Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in
plans, maps or the equivalent, and which may be connected to the MS4,
shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt
of written notice of violation from the director requiring that such
locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time
period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be
completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer,
sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of
connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other
discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be
documented and provided to the director.
(C) Violations. A person is in violation of this section if the person
constructs, uses or maintains an illicit connection or allows such a
connection to continue.
(A) Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations.
(1) The director may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, to the health
or welfare of persons, to the MS4 or to waters of the state.
(2) If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the director may take such steps as considered
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4, waters of the
state or the public.
(B) Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
(1) Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may
have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The director shall notify a violator of
the proposed termination of its MS4 access.
(2) A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person reinstates
MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section,
without the prior approval of the director.
§ 8-2-5 MONROE CODE § 8-2-7
1-1:652
permit may be required in a form acceptable to the director before allowing
discharges to the MS4.
§ 8-2-8. Best management practices. [12-2-2008; 2016 Code]
§ 8-2-9. Watercourse protection. [12-2-2008; 2016 Code]
Every person owning or leasing property through which waters of the state
pass shall keep and maintain that part of the waters of the state within the
property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that
would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through
the waters of the state. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
privately owned structures, within or adjacent to waters of the state, so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical
integrity of the waters of the state.
§ 8-2-10. Access and inspection of properties and facilities.
[12-2-2008; 2016 Code]
The director or his or her designees shall be permitted to enter and inspect
properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary
to determine compliance with this chapter.
(A) The director shall adopt requirements identifying best management
practices for any activity, operation or facility, which may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of the MS4 or waters of the
state.
(B) A commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at its own
expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the MS4 or waters of the state through
the use of structural and nonstructural best management practices
identified by the director under subsection (A) of this section.
(C) Any person responsible for the premises, which is or may be the source
of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at such person's
expense, structural and non-structural best management practices, in
addition to those required by subsection (B) of this section, to prevent
the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4.
(D) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid Wisconsin pollutant
discharge elimination system storm water discharge permit authorizing
the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the
extent practicable, shall be considered compliance with the provisions
of this section. These best management practices shall be part of a
storm water pollution prevention plan as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the Wisconsin pollutant discharge elimination system
storm water discharge permit.
(A) If a facility has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or
§ 8-2-7 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-2-10
1-1:653
§ 8-2-11. Notification of accidental discharges and spills.
[12-2-2008; 2016 Code]
operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the
director or his or her designees.
(B) The operator shall allow the director or his or her designees ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any
records that are required under the conditions of a Wisconsin pollutant
discharge elimination system storm water discharge permit.
(C) The director or his or her designees shall have the right to set up, on
any facility, such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the director
or his or her designees to conduct monitoring or sampling or both of
flow discharges.
(D) The director or his or her designees may require the facility to install
monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, at its own
expense, and make the monitoring data available to the director or his
or her designees. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
facility, at its own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality
shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(E) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
property or facility to be inspected or sampled or both shall be promptly
removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the
director or his or her designees and shall not be replaced. The costs of
clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator.
(F) Unreasonable delays in allowing the director or his or her designees
access to a facility is a violation of this chapter.
(G) If the director or his or her designees have been refused access to any
part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and the
director or his or her designees are able to demonstrate probable cause
to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a
need to inspect or sample or both as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or
any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the director or
his or her designees may seek issuance of a search warrant from any
court of competent jurisdiction.
(A) Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility, activity, operation or emergency response has
information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstorm
water discharges from that facility or any operation which is
resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants being
discharged into the MS4 or waters of the state, such person shall take
§ 8-2-10 MONROE CODE § 8-2-11
1-1:654
§ 8-2-12. Notice of violation and appeal. [12-2-2008; 2016 Code]
all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of
such release to minimize the effects of the discharge.
(B) In the event of a discharge of non-hazardous materials, the director
shall be notified by telephone, electronic communication or in person
within 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the
discharge. Notifications by any chosen means shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the director within three
business days following the notification. If the discharge of prohibited
materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the
operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written
record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence.
Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Such person
shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the
discharge or spill.
(C) In the event of a discharge of hazardous materials, emergency response
agencies and other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified
by the owner, operator or person responsible for emergency response
for the facility.
(D) Failure to provide notification of a discharge, as provided in this
section, is a violation of this chapter.
(A) Notice of violation. When the director or his or her designees finds that
a violation of this chapter has occurred, the director or his or her
designees shall order compliance by a written notice of violation.
(1) The notice of violation shall contain:
A) The name and address of the alleged violator;
B) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring or has
occurred;
C) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
D) A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore
compliance with this chapter;
E) A time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
and
F) A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed
against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed.
(2) The notice of violation may require without limitation:
A) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
B) The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections;
§ 8-2-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-2-12
1-1:655
§ 8-2-13. Enforcement and penalties. [12-2-2008; 2016 Code]
C) That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease
and desist;
D) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
E) Payment to cover administrative and abatement costs; and
F) The implementation of pollution prevention practices.
(3) If abatement of a violation or restoration of affected property or
both is required, the notice shall contain the following:
A) A deadline for remediation and restoration completion; and
B) A statement that if the violator fails to remediate or restore or
both within the established deadline, the work shall be done by
the director or his or her designees at the expense of the
violator.
(B) Enforcement and abatement measures after appeal.
(1) If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the subsection (A) of this section, or in the
event of an appeal under section 8-2-14 of this chapter, within five
days of upholding the decision, then the director or his or her
designees shall enter upon the subject private property and to take
any measures necessary to abate the violation and restore the
property.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in
possession of any premises to refuse to allow the director, his or her
designees or designated contractor, to enter upon the premises for
the purposes of subsection (1) of this subsection (B).
(C) Costs of abatement of the violation.
(1) Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement including
administrative costs.
(2) The property owner may file a written objection to the amount of
the assessment with the city clerk within 15 days.
(3) If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the
notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on
such appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment
against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for
the amount of the assessment.
§ 8-2-12 MONROE CODE § 8-2-13
1-1:656
§ 8-2-14. Appeals. [12-2-2008; 2016 Code]
Chapter 8-3
SOLID WASTE RECYCLING AND DISPOSAL
(A) Penalty. If a person who has received notice of violation issued by the
director under section 8-2-12 of this chapter fails to take the remedial
measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure
the violations described in such notice within 10 days, or such greater
period as director shall consider appropriate, and after the director has
taken one or more of the actions described in section 8-2-12 of this
chapter, the violator shall upon conviction be subject to a Class 3
forfeiture for each separate offense. A separate offense exists each day
the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation.
For any subsequent violation the person shall upon conviction be
subject to a Class 1 forfeiture.
(B) Injunction. The director may refer any violation of this chapter to the
city attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings. It
shall not be necessary to prosecute for forfeiture before resorting to
injunction proceedings.
(C) Public nuisance. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation
of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and
environment and is considered a nuisance.
(D) Other remedies. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of
any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or
local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies.
(E) Costs. The city may recover in full attorney's fees, court costs and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.
(A) The board of public works shall hear and decide appeals made by any
aggrieved person or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
city affected by any decision of the director where it is alleged that
there is error in any order, decision or determination made by the
director in administering this chapter.
(B) Any person receiving a notice of violation under section 8-2-12 of this
chapter may appeal the determination of the director. The notice of
appeal must be received by the city clerk within five days from service
of the notice of violation. The notice of appeal shall include a copy of the
notice of violation and be signed by the person who received the notice
of violation.
(C) Hearing on the appeal before the board of public works shall take place
within 21 days from the receipt of the notice of appeal.
§ 8-2-13 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-3-1
1-1:657
§ 8-3-1. Declaration of purpose. [2-7-1995; 2016 Code]
The council finds that disposal of solid waste generated by individuals,
business and industry causes damage to the environment and poses serious
risks to public health and safety. The council further finds that recycling
extends the life of landfills and diminishes the potential for environmental
damage while conserving resources. The purpose of this chapter is to have
efficient and effective solid waste, recycling and disposal requirements that
are in compliance with state laws.
§ 8-3-2. Definitions. [5-15-1990; 2-7-1995; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
BOARD — Means the board of public works.
BULKY WASTE — Means solid waste which due to its composition, weight
or bulk cannot be effectively collected and transported, including without
limitation, tree limbs or branches exceeding three inches in diameter or
four feet in length, furniture, refrigerators, freezers, microwave ovens with
the capacitor removed, dishwashers, air conditioning units, dehumidifiers,
clothes washers, clothes dryers, stoves, ovens, furnaces, boilers, water
heaters, carpeting, toilets, tires, swing sets, poles, lumber, and
plasterboard.
COLLECTOR — Means a person employed by the city or a person authorized
by the city to collect solid waste within the city.
DIRECTOR — Means the director of public works for the city.
GARBAGE — Means solid waste resulting from the preparation of food,
decayed or spoiled food, decayed or spoiled food products from any source
whatever and all household wastes other than recyclable material, bulky
waste, rubble and yard waste.
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — Means a structure
containing three or more residences.
NONRESIDENTIAL ENTERPRISE — Means a structure or that part of a
structure which contains any activity other than a residence, including
without limitation commercial, retail, industrial, religious, governmental,
service or civic enterprises.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Means solid waste which has been designated
by resolution of the council as recyclable material under this chapter.
RESIDENCE — Means any structure or that part of a structure which is
used or intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one
person or by two or more persons maintaining a common household, to the
exclusion of all others.
RUBBLE — Means inorganic solid waste resulting from the construction,
repair, or demolition of buildings, roads or other structures, including,
without limitation, bricks, concrete, ceramic tile masonry and plaster.
§ 8-3-1 MONROE CODE § 8-3-2
1-1:658
SOLID WASTE — Means all materials intended for either disposal,
composting or recycling except materials lawfully discharged into the sewer
system for processing at the city wastewater treatment plant.
YARD WASTE — Means organic vegetative solid waste, except garbage and
except tree limbs or branches exceeding three inches in diameter or four
feet in length. Yard waste includes, without limitation, leaves, pine needles,
grass clippings, garden plants, vines and branches or limbs less than three
inches in diameter and less than four feet in length.
§ 8-3-3. Procedures to be developed by board of public works.
[5-15-1990; 2016 Code]
The board is hereby authorized and directed to prepare written procedures
for preparation, collection and disposal of solid waste generated within
the city, including such separation and cleaning as may be necessary to
maximize the opportunity to market recyclable materials. Upon passage by
the board such procedures shall be presented to the council in the form of
a resolution. The board shall from time to time recommend to the council
such changes to the procedures as may be necessary to carry out and make
effective the purpose of this chapter.
§ 8-3-4. Source separation and preparation required. [5-15-1990;
2-7-1995; 2016 Code]
The owners or occupants of each residence, multi-family residential
structure and nonresidential enterprise shall prepare solid waste for
collection under the procedures set forth in this section.
(A) Each procedure or modification thereof adopted by the council shall be
written in a concise manner and published as a Class 2 notice and
posted in a prominent location in city hall.
(B) Upon publication and posting, each procedure shall be considered a
part of this chapter.
(A) One- and two-family residences. The owners or occupants of each
residence within a structure housing one or two residences shall:
(1) Separate or cause to be separated and prepare or cause to be
prepared for collection recyclable material, bulky waste, garbage,
yard waste and rubble under procedures developed by the board
and adopted by resolution of the council.
(2) Place recyclable material, bulky waste, garbage and yard waste at
the curb for collection no earlier than 5:00 PM on the day before
the day scheduled for collection and no later than 7:00 AM on the
day scheduled for collection.
(B) Multi-family residential structures. The owner or owners or designated
agent of each multi-family residential structure shall:
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for recyclable material.
§ 8-3-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-3-4
1-1:659
(2) Notify tenants in writing when renting or leasing the dwelling and
at least semi-annually thereafter of the recycling program
established by this chapter.
(3) Provide for the collection of recyclable material separated from the
solid waste by the tenants and provide for the delivery of the
recyclable material, with the exception of yard waste and tires, to a
drop site within the city that has been designated by the director
for the deposit of recyclable material.
(4) Notify tenants of the reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste,
which materials are collected, how to prepare recyclable material
to meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites,
locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or company,
including a name, address and telephone number.
(C) Nonresidential enterprises. The owner or owners or designated agent
of each nonresidential enterprise shall:
(1) Provide users, tenants and occupants with adequate, separate
containers for recyclable material.
(2) Notify in writing, at least semiannually, all users, tenants and
occupants of the recycling program established by this chapter.
(3) Provide for the collection of recyclable material separated from the
solid waste by the users, tenants and occupants and provide for the
delivery of the recyclable material, with the exception of yard
waste and tires, to a drop site within the city designated by the
director for deposit of recyclable material.
(4) Notify users, tenants and occupants of the reasons to reduce and
recycle solid waste, which materials are collected, how to prepare
recyclable material to meet the processing requirements, collection
methods or sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact
person or company, including a name, address and telephone
number.
(D) Charges for city separation. The city may charge the cost of separating
recyclable material, garbage, rubble, yard waste and bulky waste to any
person who shall fail to separate such solid wastes as provided in this
section. Charges for separation shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the board.
(E) Prohibited disposal of recyclable material. No person shall:
(1) Mix or permit the mixing of recyclable material with other solid
waste.
(2) Deposit or cause to be deposited any recyclable material at any
collection site while the site is closed.
§ 8-3-4 MONROE CODE § 8-3-4
1-1:660
§ 8-3-5. Garbage collection and disposal. [5-15-1990; 2-7-1995;
2016 Code]
The collection, transportation and disposal of garbage shall be conducted
under the direction of the director pursuant to procedures established
pursuant to this chapter.
(3) Deposit or cause to be deposited any recyclable material in or upon
any public street, waterway, or grounds in the city.
(4) Deposit or cause to be deposited any solid waste which is not a
recyclable material in a container intended for the deposit of
recyclable material.
(5) Deposit or cause to be deposited recyclable material generated,
accumulated, originated or collected within the city in any landfill.
(6) Dispose of in a solid waste facility or burn in a solid waste
treatment facility any recyclable materials which have been
separated for recycling, except waste tires may be burned with
energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
(F) Separate containers required. Each person not receiving recyclable
material collection service from the city shall provide a separate
container, approved by the director, for the collection of recyclable
material.
(G) Unauthorized collection prohibited. Solid waste placed at the curb shall
become the property of the city. No person shall collect solid waste
without first obtaining written authorization from the city.
(A) Garbage containers required and placement of containers. The owner
of each residence shall provide or cause to be provided waterproof,
disposable containers for the disposal of garbage generated by
occupants of such residence. Such containers shall be 33 gallons in
size, shall contain garbage not exceeding 60 pounds in weight, and
shall be of sufficient strength to withstand stress resulting from
handling during collection. Containers shall be placed at the curb line
for collection on the days designated by the board. Containers shall be
placed no earlier than 5:00 PM on the day before the day scheduled for
collection and no later than 7:00 AM on the day scheduled for
collection.
(B) Prohibited disposal of garbage. No person shall cause or permit
garbage, other than garbage generated on the premises owned or
controlled by such person, to be placed in a garbage container required
by this section without a permit from the city, and then only under the
terms and conditions of such permit.
(C) Mandatory garbage collection for one-and two-family residences.
Garbage collection by collectors employed by the city shall be
§ 8-3-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-3-5
1-1:661
§ 8-3-6. Collection and transportation of solid waste. [5-15-1990;
10-20-2015; 2016 Code; 10-15-2018]
compulsory for all persons living in structures housing one or two
residences.
(D) Optional garbage collection for multi-family residential structures and
structures containing one or more residences and one or more
nonresidential enterprises. The owner or owners of each multi-family
residential structure and the owner or owners of each structure
housing one or more residences and one or more nonresidential
enterprises shall have the option to obtain garbage collection service
for each residence within such structure from the city or from a
commercial collection service at the owner's expense.
(1) Charges for city garbage collection service shall commence when
the property served obtains service from the city water
department.
(2) Each person who elects to use commercial garbage collection
services pursuant to this section shall provide or cause to be
provided waterproof, disposable containers for the disposal of
garbage by occupants of the structure generating such garbage. At
no time shall garbage be placed outside of this container.
(E) Nuisance declared. The accumulation of garbage in or upon a parcel of
land near an inhabited residence, nonresidential structure or public
place within the city which shall cause the air in or about such place to
become noxious or offensive, or in such a state as to breed rodents,
flies, mosquitoes or other insects, or otherwise become injurious to the
public health, is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(A) License required: No collector shall engage in the collection,
transportation or disposal of solid waste generated within the City
without having first obtained a license from the City unless:
(1) The person is employed by the City to collect and transport solid
waste.
(2) The person is collecting and transporting solid waste generated at
his or her own residence or nonresidential enterprise.
(3) The person is collecting and transporting solid waste generated at
the residence of a relative of that person, if:
A) No license is otherwise required by the state; and
B) The person makes no charge for the service.
(B) Application: Application for a license to collect, transport or dispose
solid waste, or an annual renewal thereof, shall be made in writing to
the City Clerk upon forms provided by said Clerk and shall be
accompanied by the appropriate fees as prescribed in this chapter.
§ 8-3-5 MONROE CODE § 8-3-6
1-1:662
(C) Minimum license requirements: Each applicant for a license to collect
or transport solid waste shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
(1) All containers and vehicles used for collection and transportation of
solid waste shall be durable, easily cleanable, and designed so as to
prevent escape of any solid waste during transportation. The
vehicles and containers shall be cleaned as may be necessary to
prevent nuisances and shall be maintained in good repair.
(2) Containers and vehicles used for the collection and transportation
of solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a way that the
contents will not fall, leak, or spill out. Covers shall be provided for
both the containers and the vehicles as necessary to prevent
escape of solid waste during transportation. If solid waste shall
escape from any container or vehicle, the operator shall
immediately return the solid waste to the container or vehicle, and
clean the area thoroughly.
(3) Each applicant requiring a license from the state for the collection
and transportation of solid waste shall provide evidence of issuance
of such license before a City license will be issued.
(D) Issuance of license: The City Clerk or its designee shall review each
complete application to determine whether the applicant has
adequately demonstrated that the applicant has complied with those
items set forth in this chapter and may conduct such investigation into
the content of the application as considered necessary. If the City Clerk
or its designee determines that the application should be approved,
then the license application shall be placed on the Council’s consent
agenda for final approval. If the City Clerk or its designee determines
that the application should not be approved, the City Clerk or designee
may administratively deny such application or refer the application to
the appropriate committee to consider such application. Failure by the
City Clerk or its designee to approve or deny an application within 30
days of submission shall be considered a denial, unless such action has
already been referred to the appropriate committee. Any denial by the
City Clerk or its designee may be appealed to the appropriate
committee for review as long as such appeal has been made in writing
to the City Clerk within 30 days of the notice of denial.
(E) Hours of collection. No collector shall collect solid waste from any
location in any R-1, R-2, R-3 or B-1 Zoning District within the cCity, or
from any location within 400 feet of the boundary of any such zoning
district, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. In the event of a
civil emergency, and during such emergency, the City Aadministrator
may authorize collection of solid waste at times that are otherwise
prohibited by this section.
(F) License year: The license year shall be from July 1 through June 30.
§ 8-3-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-3-6
1-1:663
§ 8-3-7. Solid waste control. [5-15-1990; 2016 Code]
§ 8-3-8. Billings. [7-6-2004; 6-17-2008; 2016 Code]
The services provided for by this chapter shall be billed each calendar
quarter and the water utility billing procedures shall apply to such bills.
§ 8-3-9. Enforcement. [2-7-1995; 2016 Code]
To determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be
the duty of the director to enforce the provisions of this chapter and
to see that all violations thereof are promptly abated and the violators
thereof prosecuted. The director or the director's authorized representative
may inspect recyclable material separated for recycling, garbage intended
for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles,
collection areas of multi-family residential structures and nonresidential
enterprises, and any records relating to recycling activities, which shall be
kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No
person may refuse the director or the director's authorized representative
who requests access for purposes of inspection and who presents
appropriate credentials. No person shall obstruct, hamper, or interfere with
such an inspection. It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the police
officers of the city to give attention throughout the city for violations of this
chapter and to report such violations to the director.
(G) License fee: The license fee shall be established by resolution of the
Council. The full license fee shall be required for one year or any part of
a year.
(A) No person shall transport solid waste from outside the city into the city
for collection and disposal by the city or its authorized agent. This
section shall not apply to persons who dispose of insignificant amounts
of solid waste in appropriate litter receptacles placed by the city on the
streets, sidewalks or in the parks.
(B) No person shall deposit solid waste in a container placed by a
commercial solid waste collection and disposal service unless the
person depositing such solid waste is authorized to do so by the person
or business paying for the commercial service.
(C) It shall be prima facie evidence that a person has violated this section if
solid waste containing that person's name or other reasonably
satisfactory identifying characteristics are found among other solid
wastes within the city awaiting collection and disposal, and the person
either is not a resident of the city, or in the case of deposit in a
commercial container, is not authorized to use the commercial
container.
§ 8-3-6 MONROE CODE § 8-3-10
1-1:664
§ 8-3-10. Penalty. [5-15-1990; 10-17-1995; 2016 Code]
Upon conviction for a violation of this chapter the following penalties shall
apply:
(A) Solid waste preparation. Any person who violates section 8-3-4 or 8-3-5
of this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to a Class 5 forfeiture.
(B) Solid waste control. Any person who violates section 8-3-7 of this
chapter shall upon conviction be subject to a Class 3 forfeiture. Any
person who violates section 8-3-7 of this chapter for a second or
subsequent offense shall upon conviction be subject to a Class 2
forfeiture.
(C) Solid waste collection and transportation. Any person who violates
section 8-3-6 of this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to a Class
1 forfeiture.
(D) Multiple violations. For the second or subsequent violation within a 12
month period of the same section for which a penalty is set forth in
subsections (A) or (C) of this section the penalty shall be double that
imposed for a first offense.
(E) License suspension or revocation. In addition to other penalties, a
person may have any solid waste hauling or junk dealer license issued
by the city suspended or revoked for a period not exceeding six months.
(1) The following shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of a
solid waste hauling or junk dealer license:
A) Any violation of this chapter;
B) Failure to hold a required license from the state;
C) Transporting solid waste in violation of any condition of a
license; and
D) Failure to maintain vehicles used for transportation of solid
waste in good repair or the leaving of solid waste standing in a
vehicle for more than 24 hours.
E) Failure to pay any invoice from the city for disposal of solid
waste within 30 days of the date of the invoice.
(2) No part of the license fee for a license which has been revoked or
suspended pursuant to this section shall be refunded.
(3) Notice of the hearing for revocation or suspension of any such
license shall be given by the city clerk in writing, setting forth
specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
person holding the applicable license at his or her last known
address at least five days before the date set for hearing, or shall be
§ 8-3-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-3-10
1-1:665
Chapter 8-4
MONROE WATER UTILITY
§ 8-4-1. Definitions. [2016 Code]
In this chapter:
CROSS-CONNECTION — Means any physical connection or arrangement
between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable
water from the city water system and the other water from a private source,
water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases or chemicals,
whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of
flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems.
CURB BOX — Means a covered durable box or standpipe supported
independently of the lateral main and service pipe, located within the public
right of way and containing a valve connected to a lateral main and a service
pipe.
DEDUCT METER — Means a water meter whose consumption reading is
subtracted from the account's primary consumption during a billing period
in order to allow a credit for sewer charges.
LATERAL MAIN — Means a pipe running from a water main to a curb box.
SERVICE PIPE — Means a pipe running from a curb box to a water meter.
WATER METER — Means a device connected to a service pipe and used by
the water utility to measure the volume of city water supplied to a premises.
§ 8-4-2. Access to premises. [8-20-1996; 2016 Code]
The director of public works and persons under his or her direction may
enter, at reasonable hours, any premises supplied with city water for the
purposes of inspecting and examining water service equipment.
§ 8-4-3. Connections and installations. [8-20-1996; 4-15-1997;
5-4-1999; 2016 Code; 6-5-2018]
delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a summons at
least three days before the date set for hearing.
(A) Installation and maintenance of service pipes. Each separate building
shall be served by a separate service pipe. Under this section each
residential unit in a building housing two residential units shall be
considered a separate building. The water utility shall have the power
to determine what constitutes a building. Service pipes may be installed
by the property owner or the water utility. Following installation,
service pipes shall be maintained by the property owner.
(B) Installation and maintenance of curb boxes and water meters. Each
service pipe shall connect a single curb box with a single water meter
§ 8-3-10 MONROE CODE § 8-4-3
1-1:666
unless the curb box contains multiple shutoff valves, in which case each
service pipe shall connect a single valve with a single water meter. Curb
boxes and water meters shall be installed and maintained by the water
utility.
(C) Cost. The cost of the construction and correction of service pipes with
the water main shall be set by the water utility.
(D) Service pipe specifications. All service pipes from the building to the
water main must be placed at least six feet below the surface after the
street is brought to grade.
(E) Property owner responsibility. The property owner shall keep the curb
boxes free and accessible at all times. The property owner shall be
responsible for the cost of removing obstructions from the service pipes
and curb boxes.
(F) Water utility authority. The water utility shall have the authority to
prescribe the kind of service connections or other attachments to any
water main and shall have the power to prescribe the kind of pipe to be
used for water service, and piping from the curb box to the water meter
must be of such kind and nature as approved by the water utility.
(G) Underground work. The laying of water mains, the construction of
service laterals for water service and any necessary underground work
may be done directly by the city without submitting the same for bids.
(H) Improvements. Whenever the council shall determine to pave or
improve any street in which water mains have not been laid, it shall be
the duty of the city clerk to notify the board of public works of such
determination, and the board of public works shall then determine
whether or not a water main shall be laid before the street
improvement.
(I) Payment before service. No water service shall be supplied until
charges assessed by the water utility to the property owner have been
paid.
(J) Outside connections restricted. No property shall be supplied with city
water unless such property is located within the corporate boundaries
of the city, or a contract for service is approved by the council and
executed with the city.
(K) Fire suppression system connections. For those properties that are
required to have a fire suppression system, such properties shall be
required to have two separate connections to the City's water main.
One connection shall be a direct connection from the City's water main
to the fire suppression system which shall be solely dedicated for use by
the fire suppression system and not for domestic use. The second
connection shall be from the City's water main to the property for
domestic use. Both connections shall contain separate shut-off valves to
§ 8-4-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-4-3
1-1:667
§ 8-4-4. Cross-connections. [8-20-1996; 2016 Code]
be located within the City's right-of-way. No water meter shall be
required for the fire suppression system line connection.
(A) Cross-connections prohibited. No person shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any crossconnection.
No interconnection shall be established whereby potable
water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than
the regular public water supply of the city may enter the supply or
distribution system of the city, unless such private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such
supply shall have been approved by the water utility and by the
Wisconsin department of natural resources under section NR 811.09(2)
of the Wisconsin administrative code.
(B) Inspections. It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be
made of all properties served by the public water system where crossconnections
with the public water system are considered possible. The
frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health
hazards involved shall be as established by the plumbing inspector and
as approved by the Wisconsin department of natural resources.
(C) Right of entry. Upon presentation of credentials, the plumbing inspector
shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine
any property served by a connection to the public water system of the
city for cross-connections. If entry is refused, such representative shall
obtain a special inspection warrant under section 66.0119 of the
Wisconsin statutes. The owner, lessee or occupant of any property so
served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information
regarding the piping system or systems on such property.
(D) Discontinuance of water service. The water utility may discontinue
water service to any property where any connection exists in violation
of this section, and may take such precautionary measures considered
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice
and opportunity to be heard under chapter 68 of the Wisconsin statutes,
except as otherwise provided in this section. Water service to such
property shall not be restored until the connection has been eliminated
in compliance with the provisions of this section.
(E) Immediate discontinuance of water service. If it is determined by the
water utility that a cross-connection or an emergency endangers public
health, safety or welfare and requires immediate action, and a written
finding to that effect is filed with the city clerk and delivered to the
customer's premises, service may be immediately discontinued. The
customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under chapter 68 of the
Wisconsin statutes, within 10 days of such emergency discontinuance.
§ 8-4-3 MONROE CODE § 8-4-5
1-1:668
§ 8-4-5. Remote readers required. [12-17-1996; 2016 Code]
All structures within the city served with city water shall be served by a
remote reader for any water meter or deduct meter located in the structure.
Installation of the remote reader required by this section shall be made by
an authorized city employee, a licensed plumber or a licensed electrician.
§ 8-4-6. Water rates. [8-20-1996; 2016 Code]
§ 8-4-7. Billings. [7-6-2004; 6-17-2008; 2016 Code]
§ 8-4-8. Protection of Monroe water utility. [8-20-1996; 2016 Code]
(A) The schedule of rates for water service shall be recommended by the
board of public works, after approval by the public service commission,
to the council. The council shall approve the rates for water service by
resolution.
(B) Surplus revenue from the water utility shall be applied in such manner
as the finance and taxation committee shall determine.
(A) Billing frequency. The services provided for by this chapter shall be
billed each calendar quarter and the water utility billing procedures
shall apply to such bills.
(B) Water utility billing procedures. Bills shall be prepared by the water
utility and shall be directed to the owner of each parcel of real property
from which the liability for payment arose. Bills shall include an
itemized list of the services billed, a total amount due and a date, 20
days following issuance of the bill, by which payment in full is due (the
"due date"). A late payment charge of 3.0% computed upon any balance
remaining unpaid following the due date for charges first appearing on
the bill to which such due date applies, shall be added to the bill. The
treasurer shall collect the bills and any late payment charges. The
procedures set forth in section 66.0809 of the Wisconsin statutes for
the collection of unpaid utility charges and penalties shall apply to
collection of unpaid charges appearing on the bill, including late
payment charges. The procedures set forth in this subparagraph apply
whenever reference is made in this code to "water utility billing
procedures."
(A) No person, unless authorized, shall open or tamper with any fire
hydrant, draw water from any fire hydrant or obstruct access to any fire
hydrant, gate, stopcock box or other connection with the city water
distribution system.
(B) No person shall injure, deface or impair the operation of the city water
distribution system.
(C) No person, unless authorized, shall make any attachments or
connections with the city water distribution system.
§ 8-4-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-4-8
1-1:669
§ 8-4-9. Notice of discontinuance. [8-20-1996; 2016 Code]
The occupant or owner of the premises must make a written request for the
discontinuance of water service with the water utility. Such request shall
include the reason for discontinuance of service.
§ 8-4-10. Fluoridation. [8-20-1996; 2016 Code]
The water utility shall add approximately one and not more than 1 1/2 parts
of fluoride to every million parts of water being distributed by the water
utility.
§ 8-4-11. Private well abandonment. [8-20-1996; 2016 Code;
6-5-2018]
To prevent unused or improper construction of wells from serving as a
passage for contaminated surface or near surface waters or other materials
to reach the usable ground water, these existing wells must be properly
filled and sealed. Except as stated in Subsection (E) below, there shall be no
new private wells allowed after the passage of this section.
(D) No person shall sell or give away water from his or her premises
without the permission of the director of public works. The board of
public works shall determine what constitutes the selling or giving
away of water.
(E) No person shall take away water from any public source without first
obtaining the permission of the director of public works.
(A) Applicability. Except as stated in Subsection (E) below, all private wells
located on any premises which is served by the public water system of
the city shall be properly filled. Only those wells for which a current
well operation permit has been granted by the director of public works
may be exempted from this requirement, subject to the conditions of
maintenance and operation. The City Clerk shall provide notice to the
owner for those current private wells that have a valid well operation
permit that their well operation permit is not transferable and that
future new owners will not be entitled to use such private wells. The
City Clerk shall also record such notice with the register of deeds for
each current well operation permit holder's property.
(B) Well operation permits. Upon payment of a fee set by resolution of the
council, a permit may be granted to a well owner to operate a well for a
period not to exceed one year, the term of each permit to begin on
November 1 and to expire on October 31 of the following year, if the
following requirements are met:
(1) The well and pump installation meet the requirements of chapter
NR 812.42 of the Wisconsin administrative code, and a well
constructor's report is on file with the department of natural
resources, or certification of the acceptability of the well has been
§ 8-4-8 MONROE CODE § 8-4-11
1-1:670
§ 8-4-12. Penalty. [8-20-1996; 2016 Code]
A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be
subject to a Class 1 forfeiture. A separate offense exists each calendar day
during which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 8-5
CITY SEWER SERVICE
§ 8-5-1. Definitions. [1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
granted by the private water supply section of the department of
natural resources.
(2) The well has a history of producing safe water and produces
bacteriologically safe water as evidenced by three samples two
weeks apart. Initial samplings will be done by and paid for by the
water utility. "Initial samplings" as used in this subsection means
those samples necessary to establish a history of producing safe
water. The permit holder shall do and pay for all samplings
necessary beyond the initial samplings.
(3) The proposed use of the well can be justified as being necessary in
addition to water provided by the public water system.
(4) No physical connection shall exist between the piping of the public
water system and the private well.
(C) Methods. Wells to be abandoned shall be filled according to the
procedures outlined in chapter NR 812 of the Wisconsin administrative
code. The pump and piping must be removed and the well checked for
obstructions before plugging. Any obstruction or liner must be
removed.
(D) Reports and inspection. A well abandonment report must be submitted
by the well owner to the department of natural resources on forms
provided by the agency (available at the office of the director of public
works). The report shall be submitted immediately upon completion of
the filling of the well. The filling must be observed by a representative
of the city.
(E) Private wells exceptions. The prohibition against private wells shall not
apply to private wells to be located at the Monroe Municipal Airport or
private wells for commercial properties. However, all such private wells
located at the Monroe Municipal Airport and commercial properties
shall be required to obtain well operation permits and be subject to the
conditions of maintenance and operation as stated in this chapter.
§ 8-4-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-1
1-1:671
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Means the board of public works or its
authorized representatives.
ASTM — Means the American society of testing materials.
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) — Means the quantity of
oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic material in five days at
20 degrees Celsius, expressed as milligrams per liter, (mg/l). Quantitative
determination of BOD shall be made under procedures set forth in the latest
edition of standard methods.
BUILDING DRAIN — Means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
draining system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building, and conveys it to the
building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER — Means a sanitary sewer which begins immediately
outside the foundation wall of any building or structure being served, and
ends at its connection to the public sewer.
CATEGORY A — Means those sanitary sewer users who discharge normal
domestic strength wastewater into the public sewers with concentrations of
BOD no greater than 200 mg/l, and suspended solids no greater than 250
mg/l.
CATEGORY B — Means those sanitary sewer users who discharge normal
domestic strength wastewater into the public sewers with concentrations of
BOD no greater than 200 mg/l and suspended solids no greater than 250
mg/l from residential locations with three or more dwelling units and from
nonresidential locations or operations.
CATEGORY C — Means those sanitary sewer users who discharge
wastewater into the public sewers and those licensed septage disposers
who discharge wastewaters into the public sewers or at the wastewater
treatment plant with concentrations exceeding 200 mg/l of BOD and 250
mg/l of suspended solids.
CHLORINE REQUIREMENT — Means the amount of chlorine, in mg/l which
must be added to sewage to produce a residual chlorine as specified in the
Wisconsin pollutant discharge elimination system (WPDES) permit.
COD (denoting chemical oxygen demand) — Means the measure of oxygen
equivalent of that portion of the organic material in a sample that is
susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant.
COMBINED SEWERS — Means are combined sanitary and storm sewers.
COMPATIBLE BOD — Means suspended solids, phosphorus, nitrogen, pH,
or fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the city's
WPDES permit for its wastewater treatment facility; if such facility is
designed to treat such additional pollutants, and, in fact, does remove such
pollutants, to a substantial degree.
DEDUCT METER — Means a water meter whose consumption reading is
subtracted from the account's primary consumption during a billing period
in order to allow a credit for sewer charges.
§ 8-5-1 MONROE CODE § 8-5-1
1-1:672
DIRECTOR — Means the city's director of public works or his or her
authorized representative.
EASEMENT — Means an acquired legal right for a specified use of land
owned by others.
FLOATABLE OIL — Means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state, such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater. A wastewater or septage shall be
considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and wastewater
does not interfere with the collection system.
GARBAGE — Means the residue from the preparation, cooking, dispensing,
handling, storage and sale of food products and produce.
GROUND GARBAGE — Means the residue from the preparation, cooking,
dispensing, handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce that
has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried
freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in dimension.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — Means wastewater or septage with
pollutants that will adversely affect the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities or disrupt the quality of wastewater treatment if discharged to the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
LICENSED DISPOSER — Means a person holding a license under section
281.48(3) of the Wisconsin statutes.
NATURAL OUTLET — Means any outlet, including storm sewer outlets, into
a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or ground
waters.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — Includes all costs associated
with the operation and maintenance of the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities, including administration and replacement costs, all as
determined from time to time by the city.
pH — Means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion activity in
moles per liter.
PPM (denoting parts per million) — Means a weight to weight ratio; the
parts per million value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to
pounds per million gallons of water.
PRETREATMENT — Means the reduction of the amount of pollutants,
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
property in wastewater to a less harmful state in addition to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a public owned
treatment works. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes, or process changes or other means except
as prohibited by 40 CFR, part 403.6(d), and acts supplementary and
amendatory thereto.
PUBLIC SEWER — Means any publicly owned sewer, storm drain, or
sanitary sewer whether within or outside the corporate boundaries of the
city that serves one or more persons and ultimately discharges into the
§ 8-5-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-1
1-1:673
city sanitary sewer system, even though the sewer may not have been
constructed with funding from the city.
RECEIVING STREAM — Means that body of water, stream, or watercourse
receiving the discharge waters from the wastewater treatment plant.
REPLACEMENT COSTS — Means expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the
useful life of the wastewater treatment facility to maintain the capacity
and performance for which such facilities were designed and constructed.
Operation and maintenance cost includes replacement costs.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Means a combination of liquid and water carried
wastes discharged from toilets or sanitary plumbing facilities and such
ground, surface, and storm water runoff as may be present.
SANITARY SEWER — Means a sewer that carries sewage or wastewater,
liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants, and institutions, and small quantities of ground, storm,
and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
SEPTAGE — Means scum, liquid, sludge or other waste from a septic tank,
soil absorption field, holding tank, vault toilet or privy. This does not include
the waste from a grease trap.
SEWAGE — Means the spent water of a person or community. The preferred
term is "wastewater."
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — Means a charge levied on users of the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities for payment of operation
and maintenance expenses, debt service costs, and other expenses or
obligations of said facilities.
SLUG — Means any discharge of water or wastewater which in
concentration of any given constituent, or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than three times
the average 24 hour concentration of flows during normal operation, or
adversely affects the wastewater collection system or performance of the
wastewater treatment facility.
STANDARD METHODS — Means the examination and analytical
procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "standard methods for the
examination of water and wastewater," published jointly by the American
public health association, the American water works association, and the
water environment federation.
STORM SEWERS OR DRAIN — Means a drain, ditch or sewer which is
used for the disposal and conveying of rain water, ground water, subsurface
water or unpolluted water from any source.
STORM WATER RUNOFF — Means that portion of the rainfall that is
normally intended to be drained into the storm sewers.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Means total suspended matter that either floats
on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, septage or
other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed
§ 8-5-1 MONROE CODE § 8-5-1
1-1:674
in "standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater," and
referred to as nonfilterable residue.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Means water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent of the wastewater treatment facilities or water that would not cause
violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
WASTEWATER — Means the spent water of a community or person. From
the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants,
and institutions, and any ground water, surface water, and storm water that
may be present.
WASTEWATER COLLECTION FACILITIES (or WASTEWATER COLLECTION
SYSTEM) — Means the structures and equipment required to collect and
carry wastewater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY (or WASTEWATER TREATMENT
PLANT) — Means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating
wastewater and sludge and disposing of the effluent.
WATERCOURSE — Means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water, either continuously or intermittently.
WDNR — Means the Wisconsin department of natural resources.
WEF — Means the water environment federation.
WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT
(WPDES) — Means a document issued by the WDNR which establishes
effluent limitations and monitoring requirements for the Municipal
wastewater treatment facility. WPDES permit no. WI-0020362 and any
amendments, modifications or subsequent changes thereof pertaining to
the city's wastewater treatment facility.
§ 8-5-2. Sewer classifications. [1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
The sewerage system of the city shall be divided into two classes of sewers,
namely:
(A) Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers are those sewers which are designed
and used for the disposal of all waste products discharged from
plumbing fixtures located in buildings and structures along the line of
such sewer; the term "plumbing fixtures," shall not include downspouts
or any other fixture discharging rain water or refrigerating plant
cooling water. All of the territory comprised within the corporate limits
of the city shall be held to constitute one sanitary sewerage district to
be known as sanitary district number one. The system of sanitary
sewers shall, for the purposes of this chapter be considered as
consisting of the following separate parts:
(1) Sewer main. A sewer main being the principal artery extending
along the public street, alley or other public way or city held
easement into which the laterals may feed.
§ 8-5-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-2
1-1:675
§ 8-5-3. Compliance with state laws. [10-16-1990; 1-5-1999; 2016
Code]
Regulations governing plans, specifications, construction and costs
regarding sanitary sewers, and provisions relating to special assessments
for the same shall be as set forth in the Wisconsin statutes, and said rules
and regulations are incorporated herein by reference.
§ 8-5-4. Records kept. [10-16-1990; 1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
The city clerk or director of public works shall keep a complete record of
the installation of all sewers, whether the same be sanitary sewers or storm
sewers and also of all connections between sewer mains and service laterals
and all provisions made for such connections and generally of all materials
pertaining to the sewerage system of the city.
§ 8-5-5. Sewer construction and connection requirements.
[10-16-1990; 4-15-1997; 1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
(2) Sewer service laterals. A sewer service lateral being that part of
the sewer lying between the street or curb line and the sewer main.
(3) House sewer (or drain). A house sewer (or drain) being that part of
the sewer laid from the property to be served to the sewer service
lateral.
(B) Storm sewers. Storm sewers, drains, or ditches are those sewers
designed and used for the disposal and conveying of rain water, ground
water, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
Combined sanitary and storm sewers are prohibited.
(A) Construction. All sanitary sewers and house laterals shall be
constructed under the latest edition of "standard specifications for
sewer and water construction in Wisconsin," and any other
specifications adopted by the approving authority, or as may be
required by any other local, state or federal agencies.
(B) Cost of connection. No person or any agent or employee thereof shall
connect or cause to be connected any building or buildings with any
sanitary sewer within the city without first securing a permit from the
board of public works. The fee for such permit shall be set by resolution
of the council. No fee shall be charged for issuance of a permit where
the property connected to said sewer has been assessed for the cost of
said sewer. No plumbing contractor shall cause such connection to be
made until such permit is issued.
(C) Laterals. The laying of all sewer service laterals from the sewer main to
the property line shall only be performed by a licensed plumber or by
the city. The entire expense thereof and any future expenses incurred to
maintain or repair a sewer service lateral shall be paid for by the owner
of the lot or parcel benefited thereby. No house sewer shall be laid or
§ 8-5-2 MONROE CODE § 8-5-5
1-1:676
sewer main tapped unless an application therefor has been made to
the city and filed with and approved by the plumbing inspector. Such
applications must in all cases be accompanied by a fee set by resolution
of the council, which shall be paid into the city treasurer.
(D) Connections with main sewer. All connections with a sewer main shall
be made at a "Y" or "T" joint when possible. In the event no "Y" or "T"
joint can be located, connection to the sewer main shall be made in such
manner as is satisfactory to the plumbing inspector. No connection to
the sewer shall be approved by the plumbing inspector where any part
of the lateral shall extend into the sewer main.
(E) Laying of laterals. At the time of the laying of sewer mains, sewer
service laterals shall be constructed and laid from the sewer main to the
curb line of all adjoining parcels and lots abutting on that part of the
street wherein said sewer main is laid and the cost of the construction
of said sewer service lateral shall be charged to the owners of the
abutting parcels and lots. Provided, that if the street in which said
sewer main is placed is not to be permanently improved, then such
laterals shall be constructed to those parcels and lots abutting on said
sewer which are improved. All sanitary sewer laterals shall have G-425
rubber gasket joints, except where deviation is permitted by written
authorization of the director of public works.
(F) Buildings to have individual connections. Unless by prior approval of
the city, every building shall have its separate connection with the
sewer main and no two or more buildings shall be connected with the
sewer main through one pipe.
(G) Work authorized. No person shall uncover, make any connections with
or openings into, use, alter, or disturb the public sewers or
appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
approving authority.
(H) Cost of sewer connection. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
person making the connection.
(I) Use of old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used with new
buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the
approving authority, to meet all requirements for this chapter.
(J) Materials and methods of construction. The size, slope, alignment,
materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling
the trench shall conform to the requirements of the city's building and
plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In
the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials
and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and
WEF manual of practice no. 9 shall apply.
§ 8-5-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-5
1-1:677
§ 8-5-6. Use of the public sewers. [10-16-1990; 12-17-1991;
1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
(K) Building and sewer grade. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall
be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In
all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain
shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building
sewer.
(L) Storm and ground water drains. No persons shall make connection of
roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other
sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or
building drain which is connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary
sewer. All downspouts or ground water drains, etc., connected directly
or indirectly to a sanitary sewer must be disconnected within 30 days of
the date of an official written notice from the approving authority.
(M) Conformance to plumbing codes. The connection of the building sewer
into the sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing codes, or other applicable rules and regulations
of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of
the American society of testing materials and water pollution control
federal manual of practice no. 9. All such connections shall be made
gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the approving authority before
installation.
(N) Inspection of connection. The person making a connection to a public
sewer shall notify the approving authority when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection
shall be inspected and approved by the approving authority.
(O) Barricades; restoration. All excavations for the building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so
as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the approving authority.
(P) Outside connections restricted. No property shall be served by the
public sewer unless such property is located within the corporate
boundaries of the city, or a contract for service is approved by the
council and executed with the city.
(A) Sanitary sewers. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any unpolluted waters such as storm water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, or noncontact cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
(B) Storm sewers. Storm water and all other unpolluted water shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the approving authority and
§ 8-5-5 MONROE CODE § 8-5-6
1-1:678
other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or
process waters may be discharged, on approval of the approving
authority or other regulatory agencies, to a storm sewer, or natural
outlet.
(C) Prohibitions and limitations. Except as provided in this chapter, no
person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
(2) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, that could injure or interfere with any waste
treatment or sludge disposal process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, or create a public nuisance in the receiving
waters of the wastewater treatment facility.
(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or exceeding 9.0,
or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater
collection and treatment facility.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in public sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater collection
and treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair or fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers,
etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(5) The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste
shall be limited in discharges to sanitary sewer systems to
concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sanitary
sewers, wastewater treatment process, or equipment; will not have
an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise
endanger lives, limbs, public property, or constitute a nuisance.
The approving authority may set limitations more stringent than
those established in this chapter as such more stringent limitations
are necessary to meet the objectives of this chapter. The approving
authority will consider the quantity of subject waste in relation to
flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the
sanitary sewers, the wastewater treatment facility and other
pertinent factors. No person shall discharge any of the following
waste materials into any city sewer:
A) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 140
degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius.
§ 8-5-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-6
1-1:679
B) Any wastewater containing more than 25 mg/l of petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral origin;
wastewater containing more than 100 mg/l of nonpetroleum
based oils such as animal or vegetable oil or fats. The method
for determining grease and oil content shall be as stated in the
current edition of standard methods.
C) Any unground garbage. Garbage grinders may be connected to
sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants,
hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where
garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for
consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.
D) Any waters or wastes containing the toxic and nonconventional
pollutants specified in the United States environmental
protection agency's list of priority pollutants to such degree
that the concentration exceeds levels specified by federal,
state, and local authorities.
E) Any water or wastes containing odor producing substances
exceeding limits which may be established by the approving
authority or limits established by any federal or state statute,
rule, or regulations.
F) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the
approving authority in compliance with applicable state or
federal regulations.
G) Any waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment by the wastewater treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree
that the wastewater treatment facility effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
H) Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the sanitary sewer system, release objectionable
gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the
collection system, or create a condition deleterious to
structures and treatment processes.
I) Materials which exert or cause:
1) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a
significant load on the wastewater treatment facility.
2) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting "slugs."
§ 8-5-6 MONROE CODE § 8-5-6
1-1:680
§ 8-5-7. Use of the public storm sewers. [1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
3) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as,
but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime
residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to,
sodium sulfate).
4) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye,
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
J) Incompatible pollutants exceeding the allowed limits as
determined by city, state, and federal laws and regulations in
reference to pretreatment standards developed by the
environmental protection agency, and as contained in 40 CFR
403, as amended from time to time.
(6) Septage disposal. No person or licensed disposer shall dispose of
septage into any public sewer or at the wastewater treatment plant
without written authorization of the approving authority.
(A) Prohibited uses. No person shall discharge, dump, spill or deposit into,
or cause to be discharged, dumped, spilled or deposited into or allow
any of the materials set forth in this section to enter any public storm
sewer.
(1) Any whole milk, cream, skim milk, buttermilk, whey, and all other
wastes or by-products from the handling or processing of milk or
any by-product thereof;
(2) Any oil, fats or waxes;
(3) Any petroleum products or dry cleaning fluids;
(4) Any garbage, grease, or rags;
(5) Any cement, liquid or solid concrete, gravel, sand, salt, ashes or
cinders, except that sand, salt, ashes or cinders may be used for the
abatement of ice and snow accumulations and for public safety;
(6) Any fertilizer, ammonias, herbicides, pesticides, agricultural limes,
or liquid or solid manure.
(7) Any materials having a stabilized pH lower than 6.0 or higher than
8.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or causing damage or hazards to structures, equipment or
persons;
(8) Any liquids or vapors having a temperature greater than the
maximum prescribed by section N.R. 102.02(3) of the Wisconsin
administrative code, and acts supplementary and amendatory
thereto;
§ 8-5-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-7
1-1:681
§ 8-5-8. WPDES permit. [1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
No person shall cause or permit a discharge into the public sanitary sewers
that would cause a violation of the city's WPDES permit and any
modifications thereof.
§ 8-5-9. Special arrangements. [1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting
any special arrangement between the approving authority, with the
concurrence of the council, and any person whereby a waste of unusual
strength or character may be admitted to the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities, either before or after pretreatment, if there is no
impairment of the functioning of the wastewater collection and treatment
(9) Any material having a biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
exceeding 10 mg/l, or suspended solids exceeding 10 mg/l, unless
specific prior approval is granted in writing by the approving
authority under subsection (B) of this section.
(10) Any other materials, not limited to those set forth in this section,
the presence of which will be detrimental, harmful or may cause
harm to the storm sewer or its receiving waters or streams, or
obstruct the operation of the storm sewer.
(B) Permits. Any person may discharge or deposit into the public storm
sewer system the materials prohibited in subsection (A) of this section,
if such person:
(1) Obtains prior written approval from the approving authority and
complies with all that body's requirements.
(2) Obtains prior written approval from the state when required by
that body and complies with all their requirements.
(3) In the event either subsection (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this subsection
requires a sampling manhole, weir, flow recorder or other device,
all related costs will be borne by the person desiring usage at the
storm sewer.
(C) Damages; repairs. Any damages which occur to the public storm sewer
system or to the receiving waters downstream of the public storm
sewer system which are caused by an accidental or intentional
discharge, dumping, spilling or deposit from any person and which
must be repaired or corrected by the city are the liability of that person.
The approving authority shall assess all costs for any repairs or
corrections, in time and materials, to the person violating the terms of
this section. The approving authority may, in lieu of assessing all costs
for any repairs or corrections, in time and materials, order the person
violating any of the terms of this section to make any repairs or
corrections under the supervision of the approving authority and in
compliance with all their requirements.
§ 8-5-7 MONROE CODE § 8-5-9
1-1:682
facilities by reason of the admission of such wastes, and no extra costs
are incurred by the city without recompense by the person; and, further
provided, that all rates and provisions set forth in this chapter are
recognized and adhered to.
§ 8-5-10. New connections. [1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
New connections to the city's sanitary sewer system will be allowed only if
there is available capacity in all of the downstream wastewater collection
and treatment facilities.
§ 8-5-11. Industrial wastewater discharge permits. [1-5-1999; 2016
Code]
(A) An industrial wastewater discharge permit is required under this
section if a person's discharge into the sanitary sewer has any of the
following characteristics:
(1) A BOD greater than 200 mg/l;
(2) A suspended solids concentration greater than 250 mg/l;
(3) A volume of 10,000 gallons per day or greater from one or more
points of discharge;
(4) Any of the characteristics of prohibited discharges under
subsection 8-5-6(C) of this chapter and the person is a category C
sewer user; and
(5) Is an incompatible pollutant under N.R. 211 of the Wisconsin
administrative code.
(B) Permit application. Persons seeking an industrial wastewater discharge
permit shall complete and file with the approving authority an
application on the form prescribed by the authority. In support of the
application, the applicant shall submit the following information:
(1) Name, address, and standard industrial classification number
according to the standard industrial classification manual, bureau
of the budget, 1972, as amended;
(2) Average daily volume of wastewater to be discharged;
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics to be analyzed using
U.S.E.P.A. recommended procedures;
(4) Time and duration of discharge;
(5) Average and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly,
and seasonal variations, if any;
(6) Site plans and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size
and location;
§ 8-5-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-11
1-1:683
(7) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises including all materials and types of materials which are or
could be discharged; and
(8) The director shall evaluate the data furnished by the applicant and
may require the applicant to furnish further information. After
evaluation and acceptance of the application, based upon the
wastewater treatment plant's ability to treat the proposed
discharge, the approving authority, with the concurrence of the
council, shall issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit
subject to the terms and conditions provided therein.
(C) Permit conditions. Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be
subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user
charges, fees, and conditions of discharge established by the approving
authority or the state and federal authorities responsible for the
overseeing of the wastewater treatment plant operations. Permit
conditions shall include the following:
(1) The daily average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
(2) Limits on the rate, time, and amount of discharge;
(3) Requirements for the installation of control manholes, flow
measurement devices, and composite sampling devices;
(4) Pretreatment of wastes discharged as may be required for
adequate treatment of wastewaters discharged to the wastewater
treatment plant; and
(5) Any other special conditions considered appropriate by the
approving authority. Such other special conditions shall be effective
only after due notice and hearing for the permit holder or permit
applicant.
(D) Emergency suspension of treatment service. When the director
determines that by reason of the gravity of the potential consequences
of a violation of this chapter an immediate order is necessary to protect
the wastewater collection system or treatment plant from possible
serious damages, he or she may issue a written order terminating
service to the permit holder or requiring the permit holder to cease
operations which could be contributing to the violation. The permit
holder shall be entitled to have the council review the director's actions
in proceedings meeting the requirements of chapter 68 of the
Wisconsin statutes.
(1) Suspension of service under this section shall not prevent the city
from seeking any other remedy that may be available to it for the
continuance of proper operation of the wastewater treatment plant,
nor shall it prevent the city from imposing penalties otherwise
applicable to the permit holder violating any section of this chapter.
§ 8-5-11 MONROE CODE § 8-5-11
1-1:684
(E) Revocation of industrial wastewater discharge permits and treatment
services. The city may seek to terminate the wastewater treatment
services provided to any permit holder and revoke the permit holder's
industrial wastewater discharge permit upon failure by the permit
holder to:
(1) Factually report any information required by the application for the
industrial wastewater discharge permit;
(2) Report significant changes in the wastewater constituents or
characteristics;
(3) Allow access to the permit holder's premises by the director or the
director's representatives for inspection of monitoring discharge
under this chapter;
(4) Comply with the industrial wastewater discharge permit issued by
the approving authority; and
(5) Allow the director or the director's representatives exclusive
control of any control manhole serving the permit holder's
premises whenever the director considers such control necessary.
Such exclusive control of the manhole shall not preclude parallel
monitoring.
(F) Notification of violation; administrative adjustment. Whenever the
director finds that any permit holder has engaged in conduct that is
grounds for revocation of the industrial wastewater discharge permit
and treatment services under subsection (E) of this section, the director
shall cause to be served upon the permit holder a written notice stating
the nature of the alleged violation. Service of the notice shall be
effective when made upon an agent or agents named by the permit
holder. The city may require the permit holder to provide the name or
names of such agents in such a number as to insure the reasonable
availability of such agents to receive notice. Within five days of the
service of the notice, the permit holder shall respond in writing to the
authority, advising of its position with respect to the allegations.
Thereafter, the parties shall meet to determine the veracity of the
allegations, and, where necessary, establish a plan for the satisfactory
correction of the problems.
(G) Show cause hearing. Where the violation giving rise to under
subsection (E) of this section, is not corrected by timely compliance
with the procedures of subsection (F) of this section the approving
authority may order any permit holder causing or allowing conduct
prohibited by subsection (E) of this section, to show cause why the
proposed revocation of the industrial wastewater discharge permit and
treatment service should not occur. A written notice shall be served on
the permit holder, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held
by the council regarding the violation, the reasons why the enforcement
action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing
the permit holder to show cause before the council why the proposed
§ 8-5-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-11
1-1:685
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall
be served no less than 10 days before the hearing. Service may be made
on any agent, officer or authorized representative of a permit holder, as
defined in subsection (F) of this section. The proceedings at the hearing
shall be considered by the council which shall then enter appropriate
orders with respect to the alleged improper activities of the discharger.
Appeals of such orders shall be to the circuit court of Green County.
(H) Revocation of industrial wastewater discharge permits and termination
of treatment services under subsection (E) of this section shall not
prevent the city from seeking any other remedy that may be available to
it for the continuance of proper operation of the wastewater treatment
plant, nor shall it prevent the city from imposing penalties otherwise
applicable to the permit holder violating any section of this chapter.
(I) Judicial proceedings. Following the entry of any order by the council
with respect to the conduct of a permit holder contrary to the provisions
of subsection (E) of this section, the city attorney may commence an
action for enforcement of the order and any other appropriate legal or
equitable relief.
(J) Transfer of industrial wastewater discharge permit. An industrial
wastewater discharge permit will be issued to a specific user for a
specific operation. Such permit will not be transferred to a new owner,
user, location, or operation without the prior written approval of the
approving authority.
(K) Duration of industrial wastewater discharge permits. Each industrial
wastewater discharge permit shall expire on December 31 of each year.
Renewal of the permit shall be automatic unless the director notifies the
permit holder of nonrenewal in writing before October 2 of that year.
(1) If the director believes nonrenewal of a permit is justified or
required for the proper operation of the wastewater treatment
system, the director shall so inform the approving authority by
October 1. The director shall not send a notice of nonrenewal of a
permit unless the approving authority is satisfied that nonrenewal
of the permit is justified or required for the proper operation of the
wastewater treatment system. If the approving authority is so
satisfied, it shall direct the director to notify the permit holder of
nonrenewal and state the reasons therefor.
(2) A permit holder desiring a change in a permit may petition the
approving authority at any time. The terms and conditions of the
permit shall be subject to modification during the life of the permit.
If any code, statute, rule or regulation of the approving authority or
the state or federal authorities is amended and that amendment
requires modification of a permit, the director may modify the
permit at any time, with the concurrence of the council. The permit
holder shall be notified in writing of any proposed changes in the
industrial wastewater discharge permit at least 60 days before the
§ 8-5-11 MONROE CODE § 8-5-11
1-1:686
§ 8-5-12. Septage disposal permits. [1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
effective date of the change. Any modification in the permit shall
include a time schedule for compliance.
(A) Septage shall only be discharged to the city's sewerage system by city
approved and state of Wisconsin licensed disposers and at locations,
times and conditions as specified by the approving authority or the
director.
(B) Permit application. Between August 1 and September 1 of each year
every licensed disposer wishing to discharge septage into the city's
wastewater treatment plant shall file an application in writing to the
approving authority on forms to be provided for such purpose. During
the months of July and August forms for such application will be
furnished at the office of the director. The application must state fully
and truly the type, frequency, quantity, quality and location of
generated septage to be disposed of at the city's wastewater treatment
works. As part of the permit application, each licensed disposer shall
provide to the approving authority proper proof of minimum liability
insurance coverage for the licensed disposer's operation of a septage
disposal business. The minimum liability insurance coverage shall be
established before August 1st of every year by resolution of the
approving authority.
(1) During the month of September, the approving authority will
evaluate the applications and make a determination as to the
amount and conditions of septage disposal at the city's wastewater
treatment facility. The approving authority shall approve or reject
all applications by October 1 of each year. If the approving
authority cannot accept all the proposed septage for disposal, then
consideration shall be given first to those generators of septage
that are within the sewer service area. For purposes of this code,
the sewer service area of the city shall be any location in the state
of Wisconsin within a 20 mile radius of the city.
(2) All city approvals for septage disposal shall have the conditions
that any time the wastewater treatment plant has operational
problems, maintenance problems or threat of WPDES permit
violations that are indirectly or directly related to septage disposal,
the approving authority or director may immediately restrict
septage disposal until such time as corrective action or mitigative
measures have been taken.
(C) Permit conditions. Septage disposal permits shall be subject to all the
provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user charges, fees
and conditions of discharge established by the approving authority or
the state and federal authorities responsible for the overseeing of the
wastewater treatment operations. Permit conditions shall include the
following:
§ 8-5-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-12
1-1:687
(1) The disposal or discharge of septage shall be at the wastewater
treatment plant unless the approving authority or director gives
express, written permission to discharge at a city specified
manhole.
(2) Septage discharges to city specified manholes may, under special
circumstances, be allowed, provided discharge rates are restricted
as necessary to facilitate mixing, prevent backup in the receiving
sewer and prevent a slug to the wastewater treatment facility.
(3) Disposal and discharge of septage shall be limited to the hours
specified on the septage disposal permit and by other terms and
conditions of discharge as considered necessary and appropriate
by the approving authority or the director. Such terms and
conditions shall be incorporated into the yearly application form
provided by the approving authority for licensed disposers wishing
to discharge septage into the city's wastewater treatment facility.
By making application for a permit to discharge septage to the
city's wastewater treatment plant, the licensed disposer agrees to
abide by the terms and conditions of disposal as set forth in the
application and by any other emergency or special conditions
imposed thereafter by the approving authority or the director.
(4) Any other special or emergency conditions as considered
appropriate by the approving authority. Notice of such conditions
shall be provided to all licensed disposers granted a septage
disposal permit by the approving authority. Such conditions shall
be effective immediately upon actual notice to the permit holder or
on the third working day after mailing by first class mail to the
permit holder's address as listed on the application.
(5) Written documentation of all discharges shall be submitted by the
permit holder to the director at the time of discharge to the public
sewers or wastewater treatment facility. Blanks for documentation
of each discharge will be furnished at the city's wastewater
treatment plant and will include the following:
A) Name, address, telephone number and license number of the
hauler;
B) Type of septage;
C) Quantity of septage;
D) Estimated quality of septage;
E) Location, date, time and feed rate of discharge to the sewerage
system;
F) Source of septage;
G) Name and address of septage generator; and
§ 8-5-12 MONROE CODE § 8-5-12
1-1:688
H) Other information.
(6) The director may require a sample of each septage discharge to be
submitted for testing to determine the applicable service charge
assessment for that particular discharge. Failure to submit a
sample for discharge will result in the imposition of the default
formula as specified in subsection 8-5-15(E)(2) of this chapter. The
director may require testing and sampling of any septage before its
introduction and discharge into the public sewers or wastewater
treatment plant.
(7) The permit holder shall submit to the director verification of the
weight or volume by weight of the septage discharged into the
public sewers or wastewater treatment plant at the time of
discharge.
(D) Revocation of septage disposal permits. The city may seek to terminate
the wastewater treatment services provided to any permit holder and
revoke the septage discharge permit of any permit holder who fails to:
(1) Factually report any information required by the application for the
septage disposal permit;
(2) Allow sampling or access to the permit holder's trucks, vehicles or
holding facilities by the director or the director's representatives
for inspection or monitoring of discharge under this chapter;
(3) Comply with the septage disposal permit issued by the approving
authority;
(4) Submit a true and accurate report of the weight or volume of
septage discharge or who intentionally submits a falsified report of
the weight or volume of septage discharged for purposes of
avoiding the sewer service charge imposed under subsection
8-5-15(E)(1) of this chapter, in whole or in part; and
(5) Submit a true and accurate documentation of the discharge or who
intentionally submits a falsified documentation of the discharge for
purposes of avoiding the sewer service charge imposed under
subsection 8-5-15(E)(1) of this chapter, in whole or in part.
(E) Notification of violation; administrative adjustment. Whenever the
director finds that any permit holder has engaged in conduct that is
grounds for revocation of the septage disposal permit and treatment
services under subsection (D) of this section, the director shall cause to
be served upon the permit holder a written notice stating the nature of
the alleged violation. Service of the notice shall be effective when made
upon the permit holder or any agent or agents named by the permit
holder in the yearly application submitted to the approving authority for
septage disposal. Within five days of the service of such notice, the
permit holder shall respond in writing to the authority, advising of its
position with respect to the allegations. The permit holder may request
§ 8-5-12 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-12
1-1:689
§ 8-5-13. General regulations. [1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
a meeting with the director and the approving authority to determine
the veracity of the allegations, and, where necessary, establish a plan
for the satisfactory correction of the problems.
(F) Show of cause hearing. Where the violation giving rise to under
subsection (D) of this section, is not corrected by timely compliance
with the procedures of subsection (E) of this section, administrative
adjustment, the approving authority may order any permit holder
causing or allowing conduct prohibited by subsection (D) of this
section, to show cause why the proposed revocation of the septage
discharge permit and treatment services should not occur. A written
notice shall be served on the permit holder, specifying the time and
place of a hearing to be held by the council regarding the violation, the
reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed
enforcement action, and directing the permit holder to show cause
before the council why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served no less than 10 days
before the hearing. Service may be made on the permit holder, or on
any agent, officer or authorized representative of a permit holder, as
defined in subsection (E) of this section. The proceedings at the hearing
shall be considered by the council which shall then enter appropriate
orders with respect to the alleged improper activities of the permit
holder. Appeals of such order shall be to the circuit court of Green
County.
(G) Revocation of septage disposal permits and termination of treatment
services under subsection (D) of this section shall not prevent the city
from seeking any other remedy that may be available to it for the
continuance of proper operation of the wastewater treatment plant, nor
shall it prevent the city from imposing penalties otherwise applicable to
the permit holder violating any section of this chapter.
(H) Judicial proceedings. Following the entry of any order by the council
with respect to the conduct of a permit holder contrary to the provisions
of subsection (D) of this section, the city attorney may commence an
action for enforcement of the order and any other appropriate legal or
equitable relief.
(A) Submission of basic data. The approving authority may require each
person who discharges or seeks to discharge industrial wastes or
septage into a public sewer or at the wastewater treatment plant to
prepare and file with the approving authority, at such times as it
determines, a report that shall include pertinent data relating to the
quantity and characteristics of the wastes discharged to the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities. In the case of a new connection, the
approving authority shall require that this report be prepared before
making the connection to the public sewer.
§ 8-5-12 MONROE CODE § 8-5-13
1-1:690
(B) Industrial discharges and septage. If any water or wastes are
discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers or at
the wastewater treatment plant, which waters or wastes contain
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection
8-5-6(C) of this chapter, and which in the judgment of the approving
authority have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater collection and
treatment facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life, health, or constitute a public
nuisance, the approving authority may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge into
the public sewers or at the wastewater treatment plant;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by sewer use charges under this chapter.
(C) Control manholes. Each person discharging industrial wastes into the
public sewer shall, at the discretion of the approving authority
construct and maintain one or more control manholes or access points
to facilitate observation, measurement, and sampling of wastes,
including sanitary sewage. Control manholes or access facilities shall
be located on property owned or controlled by the city and built in a
manner acceptable to the approving authority. If measuring or sampling
devices are to be permanently installed, they shall be of a type
acceptable to the approving authority. Control manholes, access
facilities, and related equipment shall be installed by the person
discharging the waste, at the person's expense, and shall be maintained
by the person in safe condition, accessible, and in proper operating
condition at all times. Plans for installation of the control manholes or
access facilities and related equipment shall be approved by the
approving authority before the beginning of construction.
(D) Measurement of flow. The volume of flow used for computing sewer
service charges shall be the metered water consumption of the person
as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the water
utility.
(E) Metering of waste. Devices for measuring the volume of waste
discharged by any category user may be required by the approving
authority if this volume cannot otherwise be determined from the
metered water consumption records. Metering devices for determining
the volume of waste shall be installed, owned, and maintained by the
person discharging the wastewater. Following approval and installation
such meters may not be removed without the consent of the approving
authority.
(F) Waste samples. Industrial wastes and septage discharged into the
public sewers or at the wastewater treatment plant shall be subject to
§ 8-5-13 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-13
1-1:691
inspection and determination on character and concentration of such
wastes. The determination shall be made by the approving authority.
(1) Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative
of the composition of the wastes. The sampling may be
accomplished either manually or by the use of mechanical
equipment.
(2) Industrial wastes and septage shall be tested periodically for BOD
and suspended solids by the city's wastewater treatment plant
laboratory. All costs associated with such tests shall be billed
directly to the permit holder. Special tests such as, but not limited
to, heavy metals PCB's, phenols, etc., which the city waste water
treatment plant is not equipped to perform, shall be sent to an
outside lab and all costs associated with the tests shall be billed to
the permit holder.
(3) Installation, operation, and maintenance of the sampling facilities
shall be the responsibility of the person discharging the waste and
shall be subject to the approval of the approving authority. Access
to, and exclusive control of sampling locations shall be granted to
the approving authority or its authorized representative at all
times. Every care shall be exercised in the collection of samples to
ensure their preservation in a state comparable to that existing
when the sample was taken. All sampling and testing shall be
determined under the latest edition of standard methods for the
examination of water and wastewater.
(G) Pretreatment. Persons discharging industrial wastes or septage into
any public sewer may be required to pretreat such wastes, if the
approving authority determines pretreatment is necessary to protect
the wastewater collection land treatment facilities or prevent the
discharge of incompatible pollutants. In that event, such person shall
provide at his or her expense such pretreatment or processing facilities
as may be determined necessary to render wastes acceptable for
admission to the wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
(H) Grease, oil and sand traps (interceptors). Grease, oil, and sand
interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the approving
authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing floatable grease in amounts exceeding those specified in this
chapter, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All the interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity as required by SPS 382.32(3) of the Wisconsin administrative
code, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. In maintaining these interceptors, the permit
holder shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by
appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records
of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the
approving authority. Disposal of the collected materials performed by
§ 8-5-13 MONROE CODE § 8-5-13
1-1:692
§ 8-5-14. Basis for sewer service charges. [10-16-1990; 1-5-1999;
7-6-2004; 6-17-2008; 2016 Code]
permit holder's personnel or licensed waste disposal firms must be
under WDNR rules and regulations.
(I) Analyses. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined under the latest edition of "standard methods" and with the
federal regulations 40 CFR 136, "guidelines establishing test
procedures for analysis of pollutants," as amended from time to time.
Sampling methods, location, time, durations, and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis by the director. Determination of the
character and concentration of the industrial wastes or septage shall be
made by the approving authority, and these determinations shall be
binding as a basis for sewer service charges. The permit holder may
have a portion of any sample collected by the approving authority,
provided, the permit holder makes a written request to the director in
advance of the collection of the sample.
(J) Submission of information. Plans, specifications, and any other
pertinent information relating to proposed flow equalization,
pretreatment, or grease or sand interceptor facilities shall be submitted
for review and approval of the approving authority before the start of
their construction if the effluent from such facilities is to be discharged
into the public sewers. No construction of such facilities shall
commence until approval has been granted.
(A) Sewer users served by water utility water meters. There is hereby
levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building, or premises
having a connection with the wastewater collection system and being
served with water solely by the water utility, a sewer service charge
based, in part, on the quantity of water used, as measured by the water
utility water meter used upon the premises.
(B) Sewer users served by private wells. If any person discharging
wastewater into the sanitary sewers procures any part or all of his or
her water from sources other than the water utility, all or part of which
is discharged into the sanitary sewers, the person shall have a deduct
meter installed by the water utility at the person's expense for
measuring the volume of water obtained from these sources. Where
sewer meters are already installed, deduct meters may not be required.
The deduct meters shall be furnished by the water utility and installed
under its supervision, all costs being at the expense of the person
requiring the deduct meter. The water utility will charge for each
deduct meter a rental charge set by the water utility to compensate for
the cost of furnishing and serving the deduct meter. The rental charge
shall be billed when the sewer service charge is billed.
(C) Premises not connected to water system or metered rates. If a lot,
parcel of land, building or premises, being connected onto the
§ 8-5-13 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-14
1-1:693
§ 8-5-15. Amount of sewer service charges. [10-16-1990; 9-15-1992;
1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
municipal sewerage system and discharging sewage, wastewater or
other liquids into the sanitary sewer or into the industrial sewer directly
or indirectly, which is not a user of the city water supplied by the city
water utility, and the water used is not measured by a water meter or is
measured by a water meter not approved by the city water utility, then
the amount of water used shall be otherwise measured or determined
by the approving authority to determine the sewer service charge or
rental provided in this chapter, or the owner or interested parties, at
their own expense, may install and maintain a meter acceptable to the
approving authority for such purpose in which case the foregoing rates
shall apply. In the case of a lot, parcel of land, building or premises
discharging sewage or industrial waste into a sanitary or industrial
sewer, either directly or indirectly when the water is not metered,
and the approving authority finds that it is not practical to attempt to
measure such by meter, the board of public works shall measure such
waste in such manner and by such methods as they find it practical in
light of the conditions and attendant circumstances of the case taking
into consideration the volume and character of the waste and use made
of the sewer system to determine the sewer service charge or rental
according to the corresponding rates per 1,000 gallons provided in this
chapter.
(D) Deduct meters. If a person feels that a significant amount of metered
water does not reach the sanitary sewer, he or she can at his or her own
expense, with approval of the approving authority, install such deduct
meters as are necessary to calculate the volume of water not
discharged to the sanitary sewer. Metered water not discharged to the
sanitary sewers shall not be subject to sewer service charges. Requests
to install deduct meters must be made in writing to the approving
authority.
(E) Billings. The services provided for by this chapter shall be billed each
calendar quarter and the water utility billing procedures shall apply to
such bills.
(F) Delinquent payment; disconnection. If a person discharging wastes into
the city's sanitary sewer system does not procure his or her sewer
service supply from the city and becomes delinquent in payment of
sewer service charges, his or her connection with the city sewer system
will be severed and will only be reconnected at his or her expense.
(G) Adjustments. The approving authority may recommend to the council
uniform rates for users where metered water is discharged in part into
the storm sewer and in part into the sanitary system; to interpret and
apply this chapter and to adjust charges and surcharges where a literal
application of the rules, rates and regulations of this chapter would be
inequitable, and to make and publicize such rules as may be necessary
and advisable to the more efficient operation of this chapter.
§ 8-5-14 MONROE CODE § 8-5-15
1-1:694
(A) Sewer service charges are computed on the basis of sewer service rates
as may be set by resolution of the council from time to time.
(B) Measurement of flow; category A and B users.
(1) Category A users. The volume of flow used for computing sewer
service charges for this category of users shall be the metered
water consumption of the user as shown in the records of meter
readings maintained by the water utility, within a 1,000 cubic foot
annual credit for non-consumptive uses including summer lawn
watering computed against the fixed customer charge.
(2) Category B users. The volume of flow used for computing sewer
service charges for this category of users shall be the metered
water consumption of the user as shown in the records of meter
readings maintained by the water utility.
(C) Quarterly billing; category A and B users. All persons discharging
wastewater into the city sanitary sewer system under these categories
will be billed quarterly based on volume of flow used each quarter, plus
a fixed quarterly charge.
(D) Category C industrial wastewater discharge permit holders. All permit
holders discharging wastewater into the city sanitary sewer system
under this category will be billed quarterly based on volume of flow
discharged each quarter, in addition to a surcharge for treatment of
BOD exceeding 200 mg/l and suspended solids exceeding 250 mg/l, plus
a fixed quarterly charge.
(1) The Category C industrial sewer service charge shall be computed
under the following formula:
T = (V x CV) + .00834 V (B x CB + S x CS) + FQC + ALC
Where:
T = Total sewer service charge
B = Concentration of BOD in mg/l in the wastewater
minus 200 mg/l but not less than zero
S = Concentration of suspended solids in mg/l in the
wastewater minus 250 mg/l, but not less than
zero
V = Wastewater volume in 1,000 gallons
CV = Volume charge per 1,000 gallons
CB = Surcharge per pound of BOD
FQC = Fixed quarterly charge
CS = Surcharge per pound of suspended solids
ALC = Additional laboratory charges, where applicable
0.00834 = Conversion factor
§ 8-5-15 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-15
1-1:695
(E) Category C septage discharge permit holders. All permit holders
discharging septage into the city sanitary sewer system under this
category will be billed monthly based on volume of flow discharged in
each disposal, in addition to a surcharge for treatment of BOD
exceeding 200 mg/l and suspended solids exceeding 250 mg/l plus a
fixed charge or fee for each discharge into the public sewers or at the
wastewater treatment plant.
(1) The category C septage sewer service charge shall be computed
under the following formula:
T = (V x CV) + .00834 V (B x CB + S x CS) + FC + ALC
Where:
T = Total sewer service charge
B = Concentration of BOD in mg/l in the wastewater
minus 200 mg/l but not less than zero
S = Concentration of suspended solids in mg/l in the
wastewater minus 250 mg/l, but not less than
zero
V = Wastewater volume in 1,000 gallons
CV = Volume charge per 1,000 gallons
CB = Surcharge per pound of BOD
FC = Fixed charge per 1,000 gallons of septage
discharged Surcharge per pound of suspended
solids
CS = Surcharge per pound of suspended solids
ALC = Additional laboratory charges, where applicable
0.00834 = Conversion factor
(2) The default category C septage sewer service charge shall be
computed under the same formula set forth in subsection (E)(1) of
this section, however, the value of category B shall be presumed to
be 7,000, if there is no other applicable data available or submitted
by the permit holder and the value of "S" shall be presumed to be
40,000, if there is no other applicable data available or submitted
by the permit holder.
(F) Reassignment of sewer users. The approving authority will reassign
category A, B and C sewer users into appropriate sewer service charge
categories if wastewater flow monitoring and sampling programs or
other related information indicate a change of categories is necessary.
(G) Operation, maintenance, and replacement fund accounts.
(1) All sewer service charge revenues collected for replacement costs
shall be deposited in a separate and distinct fund to be used solely
for replacement costs as defined in section 8-5-1 of this chapter.
§ 8-5-15 MONROE CODE § 8-5-15
1-1:696
(2) All sewer charge revenues collected for other operation and
maintenance expenses shall also be deposited in a separate and
distinct fund.
(3) All revenues for the replacement fund and for operation and
maintenance of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities
must be used solely for the replacement fund and operation and
maintenance of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
(4) Sufficient revenues to cover all capital costs, including clean water
fund loan principal and interest, will be generated through user
charges.
(H) Disposal of septic tank sludge and holding tank sewage. Except as
otherwise authorized by section 8-5-12 of this chapter, no person in the
business of gathering and disposing of septic tank sludge or holding
tank sewage shall transfer such material into the wastewater treatment
plant or any public sewer without first making application and
obtaining a permit for disposal of septage from the approving authority.
Permits shall be nontransferable and expire on April 15 following their
approval by the approving authority. The person disposing of and
discharging septage into the city's wastewater treatment plant or
public sewers shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from liability
and claims for damages arising out of or resulting from work and labor
performed.
(1) No person may dispose of septage, transfer or introduce such
material into any disposal area or public sewer in the city without
first having been issued a license from the WDNR under chapter
NR 113 of the Wisconsin administrative code.
(2) Exception for owner operated motor home and motor bus. The
owner, lessee or licensed operator of a motor home, motor bus or
similar vehicle having a toilet or holding tank for septage may
discharge such septage from the vehicle into the city's wastewater
treatment plant during normal working hours and under the
supervision and direction of the director upon payment, in advance,
of a fixed charge for each vehicle to be discharged. No owner,
lessee or licensed operator of a motor home, motor bus or similar
vehicle may discharge any prohibited waste materials enumerated
in section 8-5-6 of this chapter. The penalty for discharge of any
prohibited substances by a lessee, owner or licensed operator of a
motor home, motor bus or similar vehicle shall be as set forth in
section 8-5-21 of this chapter. The fixed charge for disposal of
septage from a motor home, motor bus or similar vehicle as allowed
by this subsection shall be established by resolution of the council.
(I) Charge for excessive or toxic pollutants. Any person discharging
excessive or toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of
managing the effluent or sludge from the city's wastewater treatment
§ 8-5-15 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-15
1-1:697
§ 8-5-16. Billing practice. [1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
§ 8-5-17. Right of entry; safety and identification. [1-5-1999; 2016
Code]
facility shall pay for such increased costs, as may be determined by the
approving authority.
(J) Cesspools, privies prohibited. Where there is access to a municipal
sewer within reasonable distance, as determined by the board of public
works, no privies, cesspools or septic tanks shall be permitted or built.
(K) Outside connections. Any person owning or controlling premises
located beyond the corporate limits of the city and desiring to install a
plumbing system for discharging domestic sewage or industrial waste
into the sanitary sewers of the city must obtain permission from the
council. If permission is granted, the user must comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter and will be required to pay a permit fee in
an amount set by resolution of the council. Each service connected
must include a meter, approved by the approving authority, for flow
measurement. Any construction costs for sewer main, laterals,
manholes or other related sanitary sewer facilities required for the
proper sanitary sewer service to a person outside the corporate limits
of the city shall be borne by the person desiring sanitary sewer service.
(A) Calculation of sewer service charges. Sewer service charges shall be
computed according to the rates established by resolution of the
council and the formulas presented in this chapter.
(B) Sewer service charge billing period. Sewer service charges shall be
billed by the city to sewer users on a quarterly basis and to septage
disposers on a monthly basis.
(C) Payment of sewer service charges. Except as requested by subsection
(E) of this section, those persons billed by the city for sewer service
charges shall pay such charges at the city hall within 20 days after the
billing date.
(D) Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall
not be cause for reducing or eliminating those penalties of subsection
8-5-14(F) of this chapter.
(E) The director may, in his or her discretion, require a person discharging
septage into the wastewater treatment plant or the public sewers to
make an advance payment of the estimated cost of sewer service
charge before discharge of septage into the city's public sewers or
wastewater treatment plant. The approving authority may provide
written guidelines to the director for requiring advance payment of
sewer service fees.
(A) Right of entry. The approving authority or other authorized employees
of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
§ 8-5-15 MONROE CODE § 8-5-17
1-1:698
§ 8-5-18. Validity. [1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
§ 8-5-19. Audit, notification, and records. [1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
permitted to enter all properties for inspection, observation, or testing
that may be necessary under this chapter, at any reasonable time and
with due regard for industrial health, safety, and security rules, and the
reasonable expectations of individual privacy.
(B) Safety. While performing the necessary work on private premises
referred to in subsection (A) of this section, the authorized city
employees shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises.
(C) Identification; right to enter easements. The approving authority or
other authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the city holds an easement for inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
sewage works lying within the easement.
(A) Superseding previous codes. This chapter governing sewer use,
industrial wastewater discharges, septage disposal, sewer service
charges, and sewer connections and construction shall supersede all
previous codes of the city.
(B) Invalidation/severability clause. Invalidity of any section, clause,
sentence or provision in this chapter shall not affect the validity of any
other section, clause, sentence or provision of this chapter which can
give effect without such invalid part or parts.
(C) Amendments. The city, through its authorized officers, reserves the
right to amend this chapter in part or in whole whenever it may
consider necessary.
(A) Annual audit. The city shall review annually the wastewater
contribution of its sewer users, the operation and maintenance
expenses of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities, and the
sewer service charge system. based on this review, the city shall revise
the sewer service charge system, if necessary, to accomplish the
following:
(1) Maintain a proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance expenses among sewer users based on the waste
water volume and pollutant loadings discharged by the users;
(2) Generate sufficient revenues to pay the operation and maintenance
expenses of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities;
(3) Apply excess revenues collected from class of users to the
operation and maintenance expenses attributable to that class of
users for the next year and adjust the sewer service charge rates
accordingly.
§ 8-5-17 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-5-19
1-1:699
§ 8-5-20. Damages to equipment. [10-16-1990; 1-5-1999; 2016
Code]
No person may damage, tamper with, or uncover any equipment or
materials belonging to the city used for making tests or examination of the
sewers or wastewaters discharged into the sewers.
§ 8-5-21. Discharges causing damage. [1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
§ 8-5-22. Penalty. [12-17-1991; 1-5-1999; 2016 Code]
(B) Annual notification. The city shall notify its sewer users annually about
the sewer service charge rates. The notification shall show what portion
of the rates are attributable to the operation and maintenance expenses
and debt service costs of the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities.
(C) Records. The city shall maintain records regarding wastewater flow and
loadings, costs of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities,
sampling programs, and other information which is necessary to
document compliance with 40 CFR 35, Subpart E of the clean water
act.
(A) Any damages which occur to the wastewater collection or treatment
facilities, or to the receiving waters downstream of the wastewater
treatment facilities, which are caused by a discharge from a person and
which must be repaired or corrected by the city are the liability of the
person causing the discharge. The approving authority will assess all
costs for such repair and correction to the person responsible for the
discharge.
(B) A person who violates any provision of this section shall upon conviction
be subject to a Class 1 forfeiture. A separate offense exists each
calendar day during which a discharge causing damage occurs or
continues.
(A) A person who violates any provision of sections 8-5-6, 8-5-7 or 8-5-8 of
this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to a Class 1 forfeiture.
(1) In addition to that penalty set forth in subsection (A) of this section,
a person who violates any provision of sections 8-5-6, 8-5-7 or 8-5-8
of this chapter shall be liable for all costs of repairs and corrections
to remedy the circumstances caused by such violation. Such costs
may be imposed by the court as part of the penalty for violation, or
may be recovered through a separate civil suit by the city.
(2) Such costs may be imposed by the court as part of the penalty for
violation, or may be recovered through a separate civil suit by the
city.
(3) A separate offense exists each calendar day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 8-5-19 MONROE CODE § 8-5-22
1-1:700
§ 8-5-23. Liability to the city for losses. [10-16-1990; 1-5-1999;
2016 Code]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be liable to the city
for any expense, loss, or damage suffered by the city that results from such
violation.
Chapter 8-6
OBJECTIONABLE MATERIALS
§ 8-6-1. Definitions. [11-2-1999; 2016 Code]
In this chapter.
CLEANUP COSTS — Means the actual costs incurred by any department,
agency or utility of the city in the response, control or abatement of any
objectionable material, including, but not limited to, expenses for
equipment, including assumed depreciation, personnel, including benefits,
costs of materials used, meals for all personnel involved, costs of specialists,
medical expenses for exposures, injuries or illnesses resulting from an
incident, experts or other contract labor not in the full-time employment
of the city, costs incurred by area police and fire departments requested
through mutual aid agreements with the city, and any other incidental costs
incurred by the city as a result of such incident.
EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION — Means all areas outside of the
boundaries of the city where the city, by virtue of contracts with towns, fire
departments, other municipalities or federal, state, or local agencies, allows
any department, agency or utility of the city to enter to provide assistance
required by such contract.
FACILITY — Means any area, place, or property where an objectionable
material has been released, deposited, stored, disposed of, or otherwise
comes to be located.
OBJECTIONABLE MATERIAL — Means material, waste, or a combination of
waste and material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material which, because of its quantity, quality, concentration or other
physical, chemical or general characteristic, if improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed, poses a substantial present
or potential hazard to human health or the environment or which represents
a public nuisance by virtue of its consistency, appearance, odor or other
characteristic.
(B) A person who violates section 8-5-20 of this chapter shall upon
conviction be subject to a Class 2 forfeiture.
(C) A person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is provided shall upon conviction be subject to a Class 1
forfeiture.
§ 8-5-22 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-6-1
1-1:701
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Means the following persons who, by their actions,
cause a release or threatened release of an objectionable material: a) The
owner or operator of a facility; b) The owner or operator of the facility
since the time of disposal of any objectionable material; c) The owner
or operator of the facility since the time of disposal of an objectionable
material not included in subsections a) and b) of this definition; d) A
person that by contract, agreement, or otherwise arranged for disposal
or treatment, or arranged with a transporter for transport for disposal or
treatment of an objectionable material owned or possessed by the person,
by any other person, at the facility owned or operated by another person
and containing the objectionable material; e) A person that accepts or
accepted any objectionable material for transport to the facility selected
by that person; f) The owner or operator of any vehicle, trailer or other
transportation device from which an objectionable material escapes.
§ 8-6-2. Duty to conduct cleanup. [11-2-1999; 2016 Code]
It shall be the duty of a responsible party who accidentally, negligently,
or intentionally causes or is responsible for a release, spill or other
dissemination of any objectionable material affecting property within the
city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction to immediately undertake and
complete the total cleanup of such objectionable material. The cleanup shall
be conducted in such a manner as to ensure that all such objectionable
material is fully removed and properly disposed of and the area is fully
restored to its condition before the release, spill or other dissemination of
such objectionable material.
§ 8-6-3. Failure to clean up. [11-2-1999; 2016 Code]
If after having been notified by the city, a responsible party fails to conduct a
cleanup of any objectionable material within the time specified in the notice,
the city may enter into such property and to conduct a cleanup and proper
disposal of all such objectionable material either by city employees or by
contractors or other agents of the city, the responsible party shall be liable
to the city for all cleanup costs incurred by the city for removal, disposal
and the restoration of the property to its former condition.
§ 8-6-4. Schedule of charges. [11-2-1999; 2016 Code]
The amounts that may be charged by any department, agency or utility
of the city and assessed to a responsible party as cleanup costs shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the council.
§ 8-6-5. Nonexclusive remedies. [11-2-1999; 2016 Code]
The remedies provided by this chapter shall be in addition to any other
remedies provided by law.
Chapter 8-7
§ 8-6-1 MONROE CODE § 8-6-5
1-1:702
STORM WATER UTILITY
§ 8-7-1. Findings and declarations of policy. [5-15-2007; 2016 Code]
The council finds that the management of storm water and other surface
water discharges within and beyond the city is a matter that affects the
health, safety and welfare of the city, its citizens and businesses, and others
in the surrounding area. Failure to effectively manage storm water affects
the sanitary sewer utility operations of the city by, among other things,
increasing infiltration to the sanitary sewer. In addition, surface water
runoff causes erosion of lands, damages to businesses and residences,
sedimentation, and other environmental damage in the city and surrounding
area. To protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the city is
exercising its authority to establish a storm water utility for storm water
management services.
§ 8-7-2. Establishment. [5-15-2007; 2016 Code]
There is hereby established a storm water utility in the city. The operation
of the storm water utility shall be under the supervision of the storm water
utility manager.
§ 8-7-3. Authority. [5-15-2007; 2016 Code]
The city, acting through the storm water utility, may acquire, construct,
lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge,
repair, conduct, manage and finance such facilities, operations and
activities, as are considered by the city to be proper and reasonably
necessary for a system of storm and surface water management. These
facilities may include, without limitation due to enumeration, surface and
underground drainage facilities, sewers, watercourses, retaining walls,
ponds, streets, roads, ditches and such other facilities as will support a
storm water management system.
§ 8-7-4. Definitions. [5-15-2007; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
DEVELOPED PROPERTY — Means a property for which a) A certificate of
occupancy has been issued for a building or structure on the property or,
if no certificate of occupancy has been issued, upon substantial completion
of construction or final inspection; or b) Construction of an improvement
on the property is at least 50 percent completed and such construction has
ceased for at least three months, whether consecutive or not.
ERU — Means equivalent runoff unit, the basic unit by which the storm
water utility charge is calculated under this chapter. It is the statistical
average impervious area of residential units within the city.
IMPERVIOUS AREA — Means a surface which has been compacted or
covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration
by rain water. The term includes, without limitation due to enumeration,
§ 8-6-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-7-4
1-1:703
all areas covered by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways,
sidewalks, parking lots, pavement, gravel, compacted clay, and loading
docks, all as measured on a horizontal plane.
LIVING UNIT — Means a room or group of rooms including cooking
accommodations, which is used or intended to be used as a home, residence
or sleeping place by one person or by two or more persons maintaining a
common household, to the exclusion of all others.
MULTI-FAMILY UNIT — Means any residential property comprised of two
or more living units, including without limitation duplexes, apartments and
condominiums.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Means a lot or parcel of land, with
improvements such as a building, structure, other impervious area, grading
or substantial landscaping, which is not a residential property, including,
but not limited to, commercial, industrial, institutional, mixed-use, and
governmental property, and excluding publicly-owned right-of-way and
publicly-owned or privately-owned rail beds.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Means a lot or parcel of land, regardless of
zoning classification, developed exclusively for living units, including singlefamily
units and multi-family units.
SINGLE-FAMILY UNIT — Means any residential property, including
manufactured homes, trailers, and condominiums, consisting of one living
unit.
STORM WATER UTILITY — Means the utility established under this chapter
to manage storm water and imposing charges for the recovery of costs
connected with such storm water management.
STORM WATER UTILITY CHARGE — Means the fee imposed under this
chapter for storm water utility services provided by the city.
STORM WATER UTILITY MANAGER — Means the city's director of public
works or such other person appointed by resolution of the council to
manage the storm water utility.
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY — Means property that is not developed by the
addition of an improvement such as a building, structure, other impervious
area, grading or substantial landscaping which increases storm water
runoff.
§ 8-7-5. Basis of storm water utility charges. [5-15-2007; 2016
Code]
Storm water utility charges shall be based on the actual and necessary cost
of operating the storm water utility apportioned among tax parcels in the
city based on the number of ERUs assigned to each parcel pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 8-7-6. Equivalent runoff unit. [5-15-2007; 2016 Code]
§ 8-7-4 MONROE CODE § 8-7-6
1-1:704
§ 8-7-7. Classifications. [5-15-2007; 2016 Code]
§ 8-7-8. Storm water utility charge formulas. [5-15-2007; 2016
Code]
Storm water utility charges assessed to a parcel in the city shall be
determined as follows.
(A) Statistical average square feet. The ERU is hereby established as 2,738
square feet.
(B) ERU fee. The council shall by resolution set or adjust the ERU fee to
reflect the costs of the storm water management program.
(A) Rate classification. For the purposes of imposing the storm water utility
charge, all lots and parcels within the city shall be classified into the
following rate classes.
(1) Residential -single family unit.
(2) Residential -multi-family unit.
(3) Nonresidential property.
(4) Undeveloped property.
(5) Right-of-way.
(B) Parcel classification. The storm water utility manager shall assign a
rate classification to each lot and parcel within the city.
(A) Residential -single family unit. The storm water utility charge imposed
for single family unit on a residential property shall be the fee
established for one ERU.
(B) Residential -multi-family unit. The storm water utility charge imposed
for a multi-family unit on a residential property shall be the fee
established for one ERU multiplied by the number of living units on the
property multiplied by 0.5.
(C) Non-residential property. The storm water utility charge imposed for a
non-residential property shall be the fee established for one ERU,
multiplied by a numerical factor obtained by dividing the total square
footage of impervious area of the property by the square footage of one
ERU rounded down to the nearest 1/10 of an ERU.
(D) Undeveloped property. The storm water utility charge imposed for an
undeveloped property shall be the fee established for one ERU
multiplied by 0.5.
(E) Right-of-way. A publicly owned or controlled street, alley, highway, road,
recreational trail and rail right-of-way shall be exempt from the storm
water utility charge.
§ 8-7-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-7-8
1-1:705
§ 8-7-9. Credits and adjustments. [5-15-2007; 2016 Code]
The council shall adopt, by separate resolution, criteria for establishing
adjustments to the storm water utility charge imposed for any parcel. The
storm water utility manager shall develop a manual explaining the criteria
for calculating such adjustments and an adjustment application.
(F) Minimum charge. The minimum storm water utility charge for any
property that is not exempt shall be the fee established for one ERU
multiplied by 0.5.
(G) Impervious area measurement. The storm water utility manager shall
be responsible for determining the impervious area of nonresidential
property based on the best available information, including, but not
limited to, data from aerial photography or data supplied by the city
assessor, property owner, tenant, or developer. The storm water utility
manager may require additional information as necessary to make the
determination. The number of ERUs shall be updated by the storm
water utility manager based on any changes to the impervious area.
(A) Credits.
(1) Eligibility. A property owner may be eligible for a credit, in the form
of a reduced ERU multiplier for a property where all of the
following conditions apply:
A) The city's cost of providing service or making service available
to the property has been lessened.
B) The property conforms to all applicable codes and standards of
the city in effect when the parcel was developed.
C) The property has been assigned a nonresidential or multifamily
residential user classification by the storm water utility
manager.
(2) Maximum credit. The maximum aggregate credit for any individual
property is 50 percent of its ERU charge, regardless of how many
types of credits the property may otherwise be qualified to receive.
(3) Credit types. The following credits may be available for a property
that meets all eligibility requirements.
A) Zero discharge credit. Credits shall be considered for
properties that discharge storm water directly into a water
body not maintained in any way by the city, or directly into a
water body downstream of where it is maintained by the city, or
is otherwise contained entirely upon the property.
B) Peak discharge control credit. Credits shall be considered for
owners who maintain private storm water management
facilities such as retention or detention basins that exceed
§ 8-7-8 MONROE CODE § 8-7-9
1-1:706
state and local peak discharge rate requirements applicable to
the site.
C) Water quality credit. Credits shall be considered for owners
who maintain private storm water management facilities that
improve the quality of runoff from the property to a degree that
exceeds state and local water quality requirements applicable
to the site.
(B) Adjustments. An owner may be eligible to have the number of ERUs
assigned to the owner's property adjusted under the following
conditions:
(1) Undeveloped property. Properties which have been assigned an
undeveloped user classification may be eligible to reduce the
number of ERUs assigned to the property if either of the following
conditions exist:
A) The property owner can show that the cumulative impervious
area on the parcel is less than half of the impervious area of
one ERU, in which case the number of ERUs assigned to the
property shall be reduced to zero.
B) The property owner can show that the parcel assigned an
undeveloped user classification is adjacent to another owned
residential parcel with an assessed ERU.
(2) Nonresidential property. The owner of a nonresidential property
who believes the number of ERUs allocated to such property to be
incorrect may submit an adjustment request to the storm water
utility manager. The allocated ERUs may be adjusted if the owner
can provide information showing that the impervious area
measurement is incorrect.
(C) Review procedure.
(1) Storm water utility manager administrative decision. Within 30
days following submission of a request to the storm water utility
manager for an adjustment to the number of ERUs allocated to a
property, the storm water utility manager shall issue a written
administrative decision as to whether the request for adjustment
should be granted, denied or granted in part. The written
administrative decision shall also set forth the reason or reasons
for such decision. The administrative decision shall be delivered to
the property owner by certified mail or personal delivery, and a
copy thereof shall be provided to the board of public works.
(2) Board of public works appeal. Within 30 days following delivery of
the administrative decision of the storm water utility manager, the
affected property owner may file with the city clerk a written
appeal of such decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the board of
public works within 30 days following the filing thereof. Notice of
§ 8-7-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 8-7-9
1-1:707
§ 8-7-10. Billings. [5-15-2007; 6-17-2008; 2016 Code]
The services provided for by this chapter shall be billed each calendar
quarter and the water utility billing procedures shall apply to such bills.
§ 8-7-11. Budget and excess revenues. [5-15-2007; 2016 Code]
The city shall separately account for the storm water utility finances. The
storm water utility manager shall prepare an annual budget, which is
to include all operation and maintenance costs, costs of borrowing and
other costs related to the operation of the storm water utility. The budget
is subject to approval by the council. Any excess of revenues over
expenditures in a year shall be deposited in a storm water maintenance
fund, which will be used to defer the costs of capital improvements or to
retire debt.
the meeting at which the appeal will be considered shall be
delivered to the property owner by certified mail or personal
delivery not less than five days before such meeting.
(3) Board of public works review. The board of public works may at any
time on its own initiative review a decision of the storm water
utility manager, provided however, that notice of the meeting
where such decision will be reviewed shall be delivered to the
affected property owner in the same manner as is required for an
appeal.
(4) Board of public works decision. Upon appeal or independent
review, the board of public works shall decide whether the
administrative decision should be approved, rejected, or modified.
The affected property owner shall be given an opportunity to be
heard before the board's final decision. The final decision shall be
in writing and shall set forth the reason or reasons for its decision.
Minutes of the board of public works meeting where such decision
was made shall be a sufficient record of the board's decision. A
copy of such decision shall be delivered to the affected property
owner by certified mail or personal delivery.
(5) Review considerations. In reviewing an administrative decision by
the storm water utility manager or the board of public works, the
considerations set forth in section 66.0821(4)(c) of the Wisconsin
statutes shall be applied.
(D) Effective date. Any ERU adjustment or reduced multiplier granted shall
thereafter be used to calculate the storm water utility charge for the
affected property. The reduction shall only apply for the period after the
filing of the request for adjustment. There shall be no retroactive
adjustment for user charges imposed before the filing of the request.
§ 8-7-9 MONROE CODE § 8-7-12
1-1:708
§ 8-7-12. Interpretation. [5-15-2007; 2016 Code]
The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted liberally to secure the
ends sought hereby and shall not be considered a limitation or repeal of any
other power granted by law.
§ 8-7-13. Severability. [9-5-2006; 5-15-2007; 2016 Code]
If any section, provisions or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of this chapter shall
not be affected thereby.
Title 9, Police Regulations
Chapter 9-1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 9-1-1. Creation; appointment of members. [3-5-2002; 2016 Code]
The police department of the city shall consist of a chief and subordinates.
The number of subordinates shall be determined by resolution of the
council. Appointments to the department shall be made as follows:
§ 9-1-2. Compensation. [3-5-2002; 2016 Code]
The salaries of the chief and subordinates shall be fixed by resolution of the
council. Such salaries, when so fixed, may be increased but not decreased
by the council without a previous recommendation of the board.
§ 9-1-3. Restrictions on department members. [3-5-2002; 2016
Code]
(A) Chief. The board of police and fire commissioners shall appoint the
chief who shall hold office during good behavior subject to suspension
or removal by the board for cause.
(B) Subordinates. The chief shall appoint all subordinates subject to
approval by the board. Such appointments shall be made by promotion
when this can be done to advantage, otherwise from an eligible list
furnished by the board and kept on file with the city clerk. The chief
may appoint such persons for temporary duty as he or she shall
consider necessary and advisable.
(A) Other employment. No regular member of the police force shall engage
in any other business, except upon written permission from the chief.
(B) Fees. No member of the police force shall receive any fees for the
performance of services while on duty as an employee of the city that
exceed the compensation payable by the city for such services, and any
fees paid that exceed the compensation payable by the city for such
§ 8-7-12 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-1-3
1-1:709
§ 9-1-4. Powers and duties of chief. [3-5-2002; 12-20-2005; 2016
Code]
§ 9-1-5. Conservators of the peace; powers. [3-5-2002; 2016 Code]
services shall be paid to the city treasurer for the use of the city. Any
fees so collected shall be appropriated to the general fund of the city.
(A) Duties.
(1) Supervision. The chief shall be administratively responsible to the
city administrator and shall obey all lawful orders of the mayor or
council. He or she shall exercise general supervision of the police
department. He or she shall cause the public peace to be preserved
by enforcement of codes and resolutions enacted by the council and
by suppression of all riots and disturbances that may occur.
(2) Arrest. The chief shall cause to be arrested and prosecuted all
persons who shall be found violating any codes or regulations of the
city. He or she shall likewise arrest all persons chargeable with
offenses punishable by the laws of the state or county or applicable
federal laws, and bring such persons before the proper tribunal for
prosecution.
(3) Investigations. The chief and members of the police department
shall cause to be conducted, investigations into reports of crimes or
violations of this code, and shall conduct investigations into the
backgrounds of all persons applying for employment with the city,
or applying to the city for licensing purposes, reporting the results
of such investigations to the proper authority.
(B) Powers. The chief shall possess the powers, enjoy the privileges and be
subject to the liabilities conferred and imposed by law upon constables
and be taken as included in all writs and papers addressed to
constables; shall arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without
process, and with reasonable diligence take before the proper court,
every person found in the city violating any law of the state, this code or
county or applicable federal law.
(A) Arrest powers. The chief and members of the police department of the
city are also hereby authorized, empowered and directed, with or
without process or complaint, to arrest, retain and confine in such place
as may be provided by the council, until a trial can be had in a proper
court, all persons violating this code, and any person who shall be
detected in the act of offending against any of the laws of the county,
state or federal government.
(B) Bail. The chief or other police officers shall be incompetent to provide
bail for any person arrested and shall in no case provide bail for any
person under arrest.
§ 9-1-3 MONROE CODE § 9-1-5
1-1:710
Chapter 9-2
ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
§ 9-2-1. Definitions. [12-18-2007; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
ANIMAL — Means any a) living warm-blooded creature, except a human
being; b) reptile; c) fish; or d) amphibian.
ANIMAL SHELTER — Means a facility operated by a humane society, or
municipal agency or its authorized agents, for impounding or caring for
animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law or both.
AT LARGE — Means an animal that is off the premises of the owner and not
under the restraint of the owner or another person.
ATTACK — Means to confront in an aggressive and hostile manner such that
a reasonable person would believe that there is an imminent threat of bite
or injury to the person or animal so confronted.
CHICKEN — Means a domestic chicken of the subspecies Gallus gallus
domesticus.
CHICKEN RUN — Means a fenced enclosure attached to a coop.
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT — Means an establishment that:
a) bathes, clips, plucks, or otherwise grooms animals, not their own; b)
breeds, boards, buys, sells or donates animals; c) trains, or sports animals;
or d) displays or exhibits animals.
COOP — Means a new or existing enclosed accessory structure designed or
modified for the keeping of chickens and meeting the requirements of this
section.
DEFENSE OF PERSONS OR PROPERTY — Means incidents in which the
person attacked, bitten, or injured was, at the time of the incident,
committing or attempting to commit a crime or violating or attempting to
violate a code which protects persons or property; and incidents in which
the licensable animal is protecting or defending a person from attack or
assault by another person or animal; excluding an attack on a mail carrier
or delivery person in performance of their duties.
FARM ANIMAL — Means an animal normally raised on farms in the United
States for use or profit including but not limited to chickens, turkeys,
geese, ducks, fowl, cattle, bovines, bison, sheep, goats, swine, potbelly pigs,
horses, donkeys, mules, and llamas.
GOVERNMENT ZOOLOGICAL PARK — Means a facility that displays or
exhibits one or more species of untamed animals, not considered a pet or
work animal, operated by a state, county, local, or other government agency.
HUMANE OFFICER — Means a person appointed by the council who is
qualified to perform duties of animal control as provided by the laws of the
state of Wisconsin or the city or both.
§ 9-1-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-2-1
1-1:711
HUMANE SOCIETY — Means a society organized primarily for the care and
shelter of homeless, stray or abused animals, on a nonprofit basis, no part
of the net income of which inures to the benefit of any member, officer or
shareholder, if the property is used exclusively for the primary purposes of
the humane society.
OWNER — Means a person or entity that owns, keeps or harbors one or
more animals. An animal is considered harbored if it is fed or sheltered for
seven consecutive days or more.
PET — Means an animal that is kept for pleasure rather than utility.
PROVOKED — Means an animal that is: a) teased, tormented, abused, or
assaulted by a person or another animal; b) acting in defense of persons or
property; or c) under the control of a law enforcement officer, and acting in
performance of its duties.
ROOSTER — Means a male chicken of any age, including a capon or
otherwise neutered male chicken.
VICIOUS ANIMAL — Means an animal that: a) other than when provoked,
bites or injures a person or another animal twice within a period of 12
consecutive months; b) other than when provoked, attacks a person or
another animal three times within a period of 12 consecutive months; c)
other than when provoked, bites a person or animal once and attacks a
person or animal twice within a period of 12 consecutive months; or d) has
been trained or used for fighting against other animals.
WILD ANIMAL — Means any live nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, fox,
leopard, panther, tiger, lynx, coyote, wolf, alligator, crocodile, or other
animal or hybrid which can normally be found in the wild.
§ 9-2-2. Licenses and permits. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code; 10-15-2018]
(A) Except as expressly provided otherwise in this chapter, all licenses and
permits shall be issued by the City Clerk. The City Clerk or its designee
shall review each complete application to determine whether the
applicant has adequately demonstrated that the applicant has complied
with those items set forth in this chapter and may conduct such
investigation into the content of the application as considered
necessary. If the City Clerk or its designee determines that the
application should be approved, then the license application shall be
placed on the Council’s consent agenda for final approval. If the City
Clerk or its designee determines that the application should not be
approved, the City Clerk or designee may administratively deny such
application or refer the application to the appropriate committee to
consider such application. Failure by the City Clerk or its designee to
approve or deny an application within 30 days of submission shall be
considered a denial, unless such action has already been referred to the
appropriate committee. Any denial by the City Clerk or its designee may
be appealed to the appropriate committee for review as long as such
appeal has been made in writing to the City Clerk within 30 days of the
notice of denial.
§ 9-2-1 MONROE CODE § 9-2-2
1-1:712
§ 9-2-3. Dog license required. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of a dog over five
months of age within this city must obtain a license.
§ 9-2-4. Dog license application. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
§ 9-2-5. Exceptions and exemptions to dog licensing. [12-18-2007;
2016 Code]
§ 9-2-6. Cat license. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
(B) All license, permit and related fees in this chapter shall be set by
resolution of the Council.
(A) An application for a dog license shall be made to the city treasurer. A
valid rabies certificate shall accompany the application stating the
owner's name and address, the name, sex, spayed or unspayed,
neutered or unneutered, breed and color of the dog, the date of the
vaccination, the type of rabies vaccine administered and the
manufacturer's serial number, the date that the immunization expires
as specified for that type of vaccine by the center for disease control of
the U.S. department of health, education and welfare and the city,
village or town where the dog is required to be licensed.
(B) Written proof of neutering or spaying shall accompany the application
to qualify for reduced license fees.
(C) The license shall be issued for one year, commencing on January 1, and
is not transferable.
(D) Upon acceptance of the license application, rabies certificate and fee, a
license and durable tag with an identifying number and the year of
issuance shall be issued by the city treasurer. Upon issuance of the
license and tag, the owner shall attach the tag to the collar of the
licensed dog. The dog must wear the tag at all times when off the
premises of the owner unless during competition or training, securely
confined indoors, or herding or controlling farm animals under the
control of its owner. An untagged dog shall be considered a stray.
(E) A renewal license and tag will be issued upon acceptance of the renewal
license application, payment of the renewal fee, and proof of rabies
vaccination by the city treasurer.
(A) No license shall be required of any animal kept at an animal shelter.
(B) Every dog specifically trained to lead blind or deaf persons, provide
support for mobility-impaired persons or aid law enforcement officers
shall receive annually a free dog license and tag from the city treasurer
upon application.
§ 9-2-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-2-6
1-1:713
§ 9-2-7. Rabies vaccination. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
The owner of a dog or cat shall have the animal vaccinated by a licensed
veterinarian on or before the date the animal reaches five months of age.
Upon the issuance of a rabies certificate, the veterinarian shall provide a
rabies vaccination tag of durable material bearing the same serial number
as the certificate, the year the vaccination was given, and the name, address
and telephone number of the veterinarian. The dog or cat must wear the tag
at all times when off the premises of the owner unless during competition or
training, securely confined indoors, or herding or controlling farm animals
under the control of its owner.
§ 9-2-8. At large. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code; 7-5-2017]
Except as provided otherwise in § 11-3-3 of the Monroe Code regarding dog
park regulations, no person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody
of an animal shall allow it to run at large within the city. The owner or
person in control of an animal shall keep such animal on a leash no more
than six feet in length or appropriately restrained for the species other than
the physical body of the person while off the premises of the owner.
§ 9-2-9. Number of animals limited. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
Not more than a combined total of six dogs and cats over five months old
may be maintained on any lot or residence, and there may not be more than
three dogs or three cats as a part of such combination. A litter of pups or
kittens may be kept for a period not exceeding five months from birth.
§ 9-2-10. Care and treatment. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
(A) The owner of a cat more than five months of age may pay a onetime fee
and obtain a cat license for the purposes of identification and safety.
Upon acceptance of the license application, a valid rabies certificate
and a fee, a durable tag with an identifying number shall be issued by
the city treasurer.
(B) The license shall remain effective for the life of the cat and is not
transferable.
(C) An untagged cat at large in the city shall be considered a stray.
(A) No animal shall be inhumanely confined in a manner which causes or is
likely to cause pain, suffering, injury or death.
(B) No person shall cause unnecessary pain or suffering or unjustifiable
injury or death to an animal.
(C) Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of an animal
shall provide good and wholesome food, potable water, proper shelter
and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed, and
other humane care and treatment as needed.
§ 9-2-6 MONROE CODE § 9-2-10
1-1:714
§ 9-2-11. Noise. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
No person shall own, keep, harbor or have custody of an animal that barks,
whines, howls or makes sounds common to its species in an excessive,
continuous or untimely fashion.
§ 9-2-12. Animal defecation. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
The owner or person in control of an animal shall promptly remove and
dispose of any feces in a sanitary manner deposited by such animal upon
any public or private property without permission of the owner, except if the
owner or person in control of the animal is blind.
§ 9-2-13. Animals in public places. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code;
2-22-2017]
No animals shall be permitted in any city park, except Forest Prairie Park
and any other park so designated by Council, or cemetery unless exempted
from licensing under section 9-2-5(B) of this chapter.
§ 9-2-14. Access to the public. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
No animal shall be tied, staked, or fastened in such a manner to allow
the animal access to any portion of a street, alley, sidewalk, or other
public place. No animal shall be tied, staked, or fastened in such a manner
that may interfere with delivery persons or mail carriers during their
employment.
§ 9-2-15. Injury to property by animals. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping, harboring or having
custody of an animal to permit such animal to go upon any public or private
premises without the permission of the owner of such premises and break,
bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, flower bed, plant, shrub, tree or
garden in any manner, or to defecate or urinate thereon.
§ 9-2-16. Disturbing birds and squirrels. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
The owner or person in control of an animal shall not cause the animal to
injure or kill any wild birds or squirrels in the city, except under a program
directed by the humane officer, police department, health department, or
other government agency.
(D) No animal shall be abandoned or turned loose by its owner.
(E) No person shall cause or permit any animal fighting.
(F) If an operator of a motor vehicle is involved in an accident resulting in
the injury or death of a dog, cat or other animal that appears to be a pet,
the operator shall immediately notify the police department.
§ 9-2-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-2-17
1-1:715
§ 9-2-17. Animals prohibited. [12-18-2007; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code;
9-6-2016]
§ 9-2-18. Wild animals. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code; 9-6-2016]
§ 9-2-19. Animals as prizes. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
No person or entity shall offer as a prize or give away any animal in a
contest, raffle or lottery, as an enticement to enter any place of business, or
to exploit any animal for fundraising.
§ 9-2-20. Commercial animal establishment permit required.
[12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
(A) Unless expressly authorized elsewhere in this code, it shall be unlawful
for any person to own, keep, harbor or have custody of any of the
following on any property or in any residence, household or dwelling
unit within the city:
(1) Any farm animals, except rabbits;
(2) Any poisonous animal; and
(3) Any vicious animal.
(B) This section shall not apply to animals that are in the care, custody or
control of a veterinary clinic, agricultural fair, 4-H Club show, display
for judging purposes, performing animal exhibit, circus, commercial
carnival, theatrical exhibit, public or private institution, government
zoological park, or any City of Monroe employee operating in his or her
official capacity.
(A) No person or entity shall own, keep, harbor or have custody of any wild
animal.
(B) Ferrets, rabbits, birds, fish, nonpoisonous snakes less than six feet in
length, lizards, frogs, spiders, turtles, chinchillas, hamsters, guinea
pigs, gerbils, mice and rats are excluded from this section.
(C) This section shall not apply to animals that are in the care, custody or
control of a veterinary clinic, agricultural fair, 4-H Club show, display
for judging purposes, performing animal exhibit, circus, commercial
carnival, theatrical exhibit, public or private institution, government
zoological park, or any City of Monroe employee operating in his or her
official capacity.
(A) No person or entity shall operate a commercial animal establishment
without first obtaining a permit.
(B) An application for a commercial animal establishment permit shall be
made to the city clerk, and the applicant shall pay a fee before the city
clerk issues a commercial animal establishment permit. No permit shall
§ 9-2-17 MONROE CODE § 9-2-20
1-1:716
§ 9-2-21. Operation of commercial animal establishments.
[12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
§ 9-2-22. Possessing chickens. [2-17-2016; 2016 Code; 6-5-2018]
No person shall, without first obtaining a permit under this section, possess
any live chicken, nor construct any coop or chicken run.
be granted without an inspection of the premises to determine
compliance with this code and state law.
(C) The permit shall be issued for one year, commencing on January 1.
Renewal applications for permits shall be made 30 days before and up
to 30 days after the start of the calendar year.
(D) If there is a change in ownership of a commercial animal establishment,
the new owner shall have the current permit transferred to his or her
name upon payment of a fee.
(E) No permit is required of any animal shelter or government zoological
park or person who sells or donates less than 10 animals per year.
(A) Every commercial animal establishment is subject to all applicable
provisions of this chapter and state law.
(B) Every commercial animal establishment shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition and not to allow any refuse or waste material to
accumulate.
(C) Every commercial animal establishment shall have impervious, smooth
and cleanable floors.
(D) Every commercial animal establishment shall keep and maintain
records for all animals except fish for one year that fully detail the
health, status and disposition of each animal that was trained, groomed,
bought, sold, kenneled, or was otherwise in the custody of the
establishment.
(E) Every commercial animal establishment permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place open to the public.
(F) Any animal having any disease, injury, or abnormality shall be properly
isolated and treated and shall not be sold without full disclosure to the
buyer of the condition of the animal.
(G) Upon the sale of any animal except fish, the seller shall furnish the
buyer with a written statement of sale showing the date of sale,
approximate age of the animal, immunization and medication type and
date administered, and the names of both the seller and buyer.
(H) A violation of this chapter shall be cause for revocation of the
commercial animal establishment permit.
§ 9-2-20 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-2-22
1-1:717
(A) Definitions. Terms used in this section for which a definition is
contained in section 5-2-1 of this code shall have the meaning set forth
in section 5-2-1 of this code.
(B) Chickens allowed. Pursuant to a permit issued under this section a
person may possess up to 6 female chickens in a coop or in a coop and
connected chicken run on any lot in the city that contains only a onefamily
dwelling. No roosters shall be allowed to be kept under this
section.
(1) Rear yard only. Coops and chicken runs shall be located in the rear
yard. No part of the coop or chicken run shall be located in the
front yard or side yard of any lot.
(2) Setback requirements. No part of the coop or chicken run shall be
located within 10 feet of any lot line, unless the rear or side lot is
contiguous to an alley in which case the coop or chicken run shall
not be located within 3 feet of the lot line abutting such alley. No
portion of the coop or chicken run shall be located within 25 feet of
any principal structure located on any adjacent lot.
(3) Cleanliness. Coops and chicken runs shall be kept clean, dry, odor
free and in a sanitary condition at all times in such a manner as to
not disturb the use or enjoyment of adjoining property due to noise,
odor or any other adverse impact.
(4) Construction and maintenance of coop. A coop shall have an
interior enclosed area of not less than 4 square feet per chicken
and a total enclosed area of not more than 24 square feet and shall
be constructed from conventional building materials in a
workmanlike fashion or be a pre-manufactured enclosed structure
designed specifically for the keeping of urban chickens. Such coop
shall be constructed and maintained in a manner that is resistant to
rodents, wild birds and predators, including dogs and cats, and
shall be constructed or modified in a fashion to provide a humane
environment for the chickens, including adequate ventilation,
adequate sun, adequate shade and adequate protection from
adverse weather.
(5) Construction and maintenance of chicken run. A chicken run shall
not exceed in size the greater of 40 square feet or one percent of
the rear yard area, but in no case more than 100 square feet, and
shall be constructed in a workmanlike fashion of wire normally
used for the containment of chickens.
(6) Confinement. Between sunrise and sunset, chickens may be
allowed outside of the coop in the chicken run. Chickens shall be
secured within the coop between sunset and sunrise.
(C) Application for permit. An application for a chicken permit shall be
made using forms provided by the city clerk and shall contain an
accurately scaled drawing showing the location of the proposed coop
§ 9-2-22 MONROE CODE § 9-2-22
1-1:718
and any chicken run, distances to lot lines and distances to the nearest
adjoining principal structure, together with dimensions of the coop and
chicken run.
(1) If the applicant is not the owner of the parcel, the property owner
shall sign the application before a notary public certifying approval
for the use of the premises for this purpose and such notary shall
affix his or her seal upon the application.
(2) The application shall be accompanied with satisfactory evidence
that the applicant has registered the proposed location with the
Wisconsin department of agricultural trade and consumer
protection pursuant to section 95.51 of the Wisconsin statutes and
section ATCP 17 of the Wisconsin administrative code.
(3) A permit fee shall be paid by the applicant when the application is
submitted.
(D) Review of application: The city clerk shall review each application to
determine whether the application is complete. The city clerk may
conduct such investigation into the content of the application as he or
she considers necessary and shall within 10 days following the filing
thereof refer such application to the building inspector for review and
comment.
(E) Permit year. The permit year shall be August 1 through July 31 of the
succeeding year.
(F) Assignment of permit. No permit shall be issued, assigned, or otherwise
transferred to any person other than the person to whom such permit is
originally issued.
(G) Miscellaneous.
(1) All food supplies maintained for the chickens kept under this
section shall be stored in a secure and rodent-proof container.
(2) Food meant for human consumption or scraps of such food shall
only be fed to chickens within the coop and such food shall be
prohibited within a chicken run.
(3) All waste generated by the operation of the coop or chicken run, or
both, including, chicken carcasses, manure, droppings and spoiled
feed, shall be properly disposed of in a sanitary manner.
(4) The zoning administrator or any law enforcement officer may enter
a lot at any reasonable time to determine if a property is in
compliance with this section.
(H) Penalty. A person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 4 forfeiture for the first offense in a 12
month period, a class 3 forfeiture for the second offense in a 12 month
period and a class 2 forfeiture for the third or subsequent offense in a
§ 9-2-22 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-2-22
1-1:719
§ 9-2-23. Impoundment of animals. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
12 month period. A person who is convicted of more than two violations
of this section in a 12 month period shall be ineligible to receive a
renewal permit under this section for a period of one year after the date
of the last conviction.
(A) Any law enforcement officer or humane officer may impound an animal
the officer has reasonable grounds to believe is:
(1) Unlicensed or untagged;
(2) At large;
(3) Abandoned or a stray;
(4) Rabid or has been exposed to a rabid animal;
(5) A vicious animal; or
(6) Receiving inadequate care and treatment in violation of section
9-2-10 of this chapter.
(B) If the humane officer or law enforcement officer impounds an animal
under subsection (A) of this section with the consent of the owner, the
officer shall explain how the owner may recover the animal and the
procedure to be followed if the animal is not returned to its owner.
(C) If the humane officer or law enforcement officer impounds an animal
under subsection (A) of this section without the consent of the owner,
the officer shall promptly notify the owner in writing if the owner can be
identified and located with reasonable effort. The notice shall explain
the procedure by which the owner may recover the animal and the
procedure to be followed if the animal is not returned to its owner.
(D) Whenever an animal bites a person, the humane officer or law
enforcement officer shall inform the owner that the animal shall be
quarantined for at least 10 days, during which time the animal shall be
examined by a veterinarian.
(1) If the animal has a current rabies immunization, the animal may
remain on the owner's premises. If the animal has no current rabies
immunization, the animal will be quarantined at an isolation facility
and will be released from quarantine at the end of the 10 day
observation period if there are no signs of rabies.
(2) If an animal exhibits symptoms of rabies during quarantine, the
owner shall be notified and the animal shall be killed by a law
enforcement officer or veterinarian in a humane manner. All
actions shall be under state law.
(3) The owner is responsible for all expenses of quarantine and if the
owner is unknown, the city is responsible for those expenses.
§ 9-2-22 MONROE CODE § 9-2-23
1-1:720
§ 9-2-24. Release from impound. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
§ 9-2-25. Rabies quarantine. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code; 2-7-2017]
(E) A person must report to the humane society, humane officer or the city
police or health department the existence of an animal which is known
or suspected to be infected with rabies.
(A) The humane society may release a dog or cat to its owner or a
representative under the following conditions:
(1) The owner of the dog or cat or representative provides his or her
name and address;
(2) The owner or representative shows proof of dog licensing or shows
prepayment of dog licensing, and that the dog or cat is vaccinated
against rabies or prepayment of rabies vaccination from a licensed
veterinarian;
(3) The owner or representative pays the humane society an
impoundment fee plus a boarding fee for each day or fraction of a
day that a dog or cat is impounded. The boarding fee may not
exceed the actual average daily cost for boarding and caring for the
dog or cat; and
(4) If a law enforcement officer or Humane Officer ordered the
impoundment and withholding of the animal, the law enforcement
officer or Humane Officer agrees to the release.
(B) The Humane Society may release a dog or cat to a person other than the
owner under the following conditions:
(1) The owner is unknown or does not claim the dog or cat within seven
days after the dog or cat has been impounded;
(2) The person to whom the dog or cat is released provides his or her
name and address, and pays the boarding and impoundment fee, if
required;
(3) The person to whom a dog is released shows proof of licensing or
shows prepayment of licensing, and shows proof of rabies
vaccination or prepayment of rabies vaccination from a licensed
veterinarian; and
(4) The person to whom a cat is released shows proof of rabies
vaccination or prepayment of rabies vaccination from a licensed
veterinarian.
(A) If a ward or other area is quarantined for rabies, all dogs and cats
within the city shall be kept securely confined, tied, leashed or muzzled.
Any dog or cat not confined, tied, leashed or muzzled is declared a
public nuisance and may be impounded. All officers shall cooperate in
§ 9-2-23 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-2-25
1-1:721
§ 9-2-26. Revocation and inspection. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
§ 9-2-27. Enforcement. [12-18-2007; 2016 Code]
Chapter 9-3
UNIFORM FORFEITURE CLASSIFICATIONS
§ 9-3-1. Use of forfeiture classes. [4-15-1997; 2016 Code]
When a forfeiture in this code is set out as a forfeiture of a certain class, the
forfeiture shall be as set forth in this chapter.
§ 9-3-2. Definitions. [4-15-1997; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
ADULT — Means any person who has attained 17 years of age as defined in
section 938.02(1) of the Wisconsin statutes.
JUVENILE — Means any person who has not attained 17 years of age as
defined in section 938.02(10m) of the Wisconsin statutes.
§ 9-3-3. Class 1 forfeiture. [4-15-1997; 2016 Code]
Any adult or juvenile who violates a code punishable by a class 1 forfeiture
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $200.00 nor more than
the enforcement of the quarantine. The city clerk shall promptly post in
at least three public places in the city notices of quarantine.
(B) A dog or cat which is immunized against rabies, as evidenced by a
rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag attached to the collar of the dog
or cat is exempt from the city quarantine provisions of subsection (A) of
this section.
(A) Any person whose permit or license is revoked shall, within 10 days
following such revocation, humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept
or harbored.
(B) Inspection of the premises of a permit or license holder may be made by
a city official designated by resolution of the council or the humane
officer to determine compliance with this chapter.
(A) An owner of a licensed cat found to be at large in the city shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 5 forfeiture upon proof of license.
(B) Except as expressly provided, a person who violates any provision of
this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to a class 4 forfeiture. A
separate offense exists for each calendar day during which a violation
occurs or continues.
§ 9-2-25 MONROE CODE § 9-3-3
1-1:722
$500.00. Any adult or juvenile who has attained 14 years of age shall also
be subject to applicable costs.
§ 9-3-4. Class 2 forfeiture. [4-15-1997; 2016 Code]
Any adult or juvenile who violates a code punishable by a class 2 forfeiture
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than
$300.00. Any adult or juvenile who has attained 14 years of age shall also
be subject to applicable costs.
§ 9-3-5. Class 3 forfeiture. [4-15-1997; 2016 Code]
Any adult or juvenile who violates a code punishable by a class 3 forfeiture
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50.00 nor more than
$200.00. Any adult or juvenile who has attained 14 years of age shall also
be subject to applicable costs.
§ 9-3-6. Class 4 forfeiture. [4-15-1997; 2016 Code]
Any adult or juvenile who violates a code punishable by a class 4 forfeiture
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 nor more than
$100.00. Any adult or juvenile who has attained 14 years of age shall also
be subject to applicable costs.
§ 9-3-7. Class 5 forfeiture. [4-15-1997; 2016 Code]
Any adult or juvenile who violates a code punishable by a class 5 forfeiture
shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10.00 nor more than $50.00.
Any adult or juvenile who has attained 14 years of age shall also be subject
to applicable costs.
§ 9-3-8. Deposit schedule. [4-15-1997; 1-3-2006; 2016 Code]
(A) Any person arrested for a violation of this code may make a deposit of
money as directed by the officer making the arrest at the police station
or the office of the clerk of court or by mailing the deposit to such
places. The arresting officer or the person receiving the deposit shall
notify the arrested person, orally or in writing, that:
(1) If the person makes a deposit as authorized by this section, the
person need not appear in court at the time fixed in the citation and
the person shall be considered to have tendered a plea of no
contest and submitted to a forfeiture and any penalty assessment,
jail assessment or other fee or assessment required by law, not to
exceed the amount of the deposit.
(2) If the person fails to make a deposit as authorized by this section or
appear in court at the time fixed in the citation, the court may enter
a default judgment finding the person guilty of the offense or issue
a warrant for his or her arrest.
(B) The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
§ 9-3-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-3-8
1-1:723
§ 9-3-9. Alternative sentences. [4-15-1997; 2016 Code]
Chapter 9-4
GENERAL OFFENSES
§ 9-4-1. Aircraft regulations. [12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
(1) The deposit for offenses listed in a deposit schedule established by
the Wisconsin judicial conference shall be the amount set forth in
the most recent schedule established by the Wisconsin judicial
conference.
(2) The deposit for offenses not listed in a deposit schedule established
by the Wisconsin judicial conference shall be an amount
established from time to time by resolution of the council.
(3) If a deposit amount has not been established by either the
Wisconsin judicial conference or the judiciary and ordinance
review committee, the arresting officer shall require the alleged
offender to deposit not less than the maximum forfeiture permitted
under this code plus any penalty assessment, jail assessment or
other fee or assessment required by law.
(A) Any adult who fails to pay a class 1, class 2, class 3, class 4, or class 5
forfeiture imposed by this chapter shall be subject to the alternative
sentencing provisions set forth in sections 800.09 and 800.095 of the
Wisconsin statutes.
(B) Any juvenile who fails to pay a class 1, class 2, class 3, class 4, or class 5
forfeiture imposed by this chapter shall be subject to the provisions set
forth in section 938.343(2) of the Wisconsin statutes.
(C) Any juvenile who violates a code punishable by a class 1, class 2, class
3, class 4, or class 5 forfeiture may be ordered to perform community
service as provided in section 938.343(3) and defined in section
938.34(5g) of the Wisconsin statutes, or any other disposition available
under section 938.343 or 938.344 of the Wisconsin statutes, in addition
to or in lieu of a forfeiture.
(D) Any adult who violates a code punishable by a class 1, class 2, class 3,
class 4, or class 5 forfeiture may be ordered to perform community
service in addition to or in lieu of a forfeiture.
(A) No person shall engage in acrobatic or trick flying over the city.
(B) No person shall operate an aircraft over the city at an altitude of less
than 1,000 feet above the highest obstacle within a horizontal radius of
2,000 feet from the aircraft, except for purposes of taking off from and
landing at the Monroe municipal airport.
§ 9-3-8 MONROE CODE § 9-4-1
1-1:724
§ 9-4-2. Disorderly house; disorderly conduct. [10-18-1983;
9-5-1995; 2016 Code]
(C) No person, while flying over the city, shall drop any object except the
emergency dropping of loose water or loose sand ballast.
(D) A person who violates any provision of this section shall upon conviction
be subject to a class 3 forfeiture.
(A) Disorderly house. No person, as owner, agent of the owner, lessee,
tenant, occupant, visitor, guest or as a trespasser of any building,
enclosure, structure, tent, garden, yard, room or other place within the
city shall permit or engage in "disorderly conduct" as defined in
subsection (B) of this section, or allow any excessive noise which causes
a disturbance to others.
(B) Disorderly conduct. No person shall, in a public or private place,
engage in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably
loud or otherwise disorderly conduct under circumstances in which the
conduct tends to cause or provoke a disturbance.
(C) Annoying phone calls. No person shall telephone another with the
intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, annoy, or offend, or
telephone another and use any obscene, lewd, or profane language or
suggest any lewd or lascivious act, or threaten to inflict injury or
physical harm to the person or property of any person. No person shall
attempt to extort money or other thing of value from any person, or to
otherwise disturb by anonymous telephone call, the peace, quiet or
right of privacy of any person at the place where the telephone call was
received whether or not conversation ensues.
(D) Harassment. No person shall, with intent to harass or intimidate
another person, do any of the following:
(1) Strike, shove, kick or otherwise subject the person to physical
contact or attempt or threaten to do the same.
(2) Engage in a course of conduct or repeatedly commit acts which
harass or intimidate the person and which serve no legitimate
purpose.
(3) This subsection does not prohibit any person from participating in
lawful conduct in labor disputes under section 103.53 of the
Wisconsin statutes.
(E) Unlawful assemblies. No person shall fail or refuse to withdraw from an
unlawful assembly which has been ordered to disperse.
(1) An "unlawful assembly" is an assembly which consists of three or
more persons and which causes such a disturbance of public order
that it is reasonable to believe that the assembly will cause injury to
persons or damage to property unless it is immediately dispersed.
§ 9-4-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-2
1-1:725
§ 9-4-3. Lewd and lascivious behavior. [12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-4. Disturbing the peace. [10-18-1983; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-5. Possession of alcohol beverages in public or on a
commercial quadricycle. [11-5-2014; 2016 Code]
(2) An "unlawful assembly" includes an assembly of persons who
assemble to block or obstruct the lawful use by any other person, or
persons of any private or public thoroughfares, property or of any
positions of access or exit to or from any private or public building,
or dwelling place, or any portion thereof and which assembly does
in fact so block or obstruct the lawful use by any other person, or
persons of any such private or public thoroughfares, property or
any position of access or exit to or from any private or public
building, or dwelling place, or any portion thereof.
(F) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 3 forfeiture.
(A) No person shall commit an indecent act of sexual gratification with
another with knowledge that they are in the presence of others.
(B) No person shall publicly and indecently expose his or her genitals or
pubic area.
(C) Any person violating any provision of this section shall upon conviction
be subject to a Class 3 forfeiture.
(A) No person shall disturb the peace and good order of the city in any
manner as to be annoying to others, whether the disturbance occurs in
his or her own home or elsewhere.
(B) No person shall disturb or annoy any congregation, audience, public
meeting or lawful assembly or persons or join others in so doing, nor
shall any person annoy any person in any public place.
(C) Any person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 2 forfeiture.
(A) No person shall be in possession of any alcohol beverage in any open
container while in or upon any public park, street, alley, sidewalk or
public way, or area held out for public use, or while riding upon a
commercial quadricycle as defined in section 340.01(8m) of the
Wisconsin statutes, except pursuant to a permit issued by the city
authorizing such possession.
(B) No person shall be in possession of any alcohol beverage in an open
container while in a motor vehicle in or upon any public street, alley,
sidewalk or public way, or area held out for public use.
§ 9-4-2 MONROE CODE § 9-4-5
1-1:726
§ 9-4-6. Gambling. [7-2-1985; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-7. Loitering. [6-19-1984; 3-18-1986; 5-5-1993; 10-19-2010;
2016 Code]
(C) Any person who violates this section shall upon conviction be subject to
a class 4 forfeiture.
(A) Gambling houses. No person shall keep or maintain any house or other
place for a gambling purpose, and no person shall visit any gambling
house or other place for a gambling purpose.
(B) Seizure of gambling devices. The mayor, chief of police or any police
officer of the city may seize or direct to be seized, any instrument,
devices or thing used a gambling purpose and all such instruments,
devices or things so seized shall be disposed of under the order of the
court.
(C) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 1 forfeiture.
(A) Loitering or prowling prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to loiter
or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding
individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of
persons or property in the vicinity.
(1) Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight
upon the appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself
or herself or attempts to conceal himself or herself or any object.
(2) Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it
impracticable, a police officer shall, before any arrest for an offense
under this section, allow the person an opportunity to dispel any
alarm which would otherwise be warranted by requesting such
person to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence
and conduct.
(3) No person shall be convicted of an offense under this paragraph if
the police officer did not comply with subparagraph (2) of this
paragraph, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the
person, if believed by the police officer, would have dispelled the
alarm.
(B) Obstruction to others.
(1) Obstruction of highway. No person shall obstruct any street,
bridge, sidewalk or crossing by loitering in or upon the same after
being requested to move on by any police officer.
(2) Obstruction to traffic. No person shall loiter individually, in groups
or crowds upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street
§ 9-4-5 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-7
1-1:727
§ 9-4-8. Property offenses. [8-10-2012; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-9. Battery. [6-19-1984; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-10. Trespass to property. [7-9-1997; 2016 Code]
crossings or bridges or in any other public places within the city in
such manner as to prevent, interfere with or obstruct the ordinary
free use of such public streets, sidewalks, street crossings and
bridges or other public places by persons passing along or over the
same.
(C) Loitering in buildings or on property owned, leased or operated by the
city. No person shall loaf or loiter in any waiting room, lobby or other
portion of any building owned, leased or operated by the city, or to
remain in or on any such building for longer than reasonably necessary
to transact such business as such person may have to transact in such
building.
(D) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 4 forfeiture.
(A) Damage to property. Whoever intentionally causes damage to the
physical property of another without the person's consent shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 3 forfeiture.
(B) Corruption of well. Whoever injures or corrupts any public or private
well shall upon conviction be subject to a class 3 forfeiture.
(C) Graffiti. Whoever intentionally marks, draws or writes with paint, ink or
another substance on or intentionally etches into the physical property
of another without the other person's consent shall upon conviction be
subject to a class 3 forfeiture.
(A) No person shall cause bodily harm to another by an act done with intent
to cause bodily harm to that person or another without the consent of
the person so harmed.
(B) Any person who violates this section shall upon conviction be subject to
a class 2 forfeiture.
(A) Restricted use area. No person shall intentionally enter or remain upon
any real property in violation of one or more lawful restrictions placed
upon the use of such property by the owner or person in lawful
possession thereof, if:
(1) The person present has received oral or written notice of the
restrictions applicable to the property from the owner or person in
lawful possession of the property, or
§ 9-4-7 MONROE CODE § 9-4-10
1-1:728
§ 9-4-11. Handbills, advertising materials. [11-20-1990; 9-4-2001;
11-6-2002; 2016 Code]
(2) There is clearly visible from the location of the person one or more
signs stating the restrictions applicable to the property and the
sign or signs visible to such person meet the following criteria:
A) The statement of restrictions must be clear, concise and
reasonably inform persons of the nature of the restrictions.
B) Lettering stating the restrictions must be at least two inches in
height and clearly legible.
(B) Dwelling or structure. No person shall do the following in or about a
dwelling or structure of another:
(1) Intentionally enter or remain within such dwelling or structure
without the consent of the owner or person in lawful possession
thereof.
(2) Prowl about or peek in the windows of such dwelling or structure.
(3) Perform any act which is intended or naturally tends to:
A) Frighten or alarm persons within such dwelling or structure,
or
B) Provoke a breach of the peace in or about such dwelling or
structure.
(C) Motor vehicle. No person shall climb, lie or sit upon the motor vehicle of
another while such vehicle is parked or standing upon any public street,
parking lot, or other public place in the city, without the consent of the
owner or person in lawful possession thereof.
(D) Penalty.
(1) Any person who violates subsection (A) or (B) of this section shall
upon conviction be subject to a class 3 forfeiture.
(2) Any person who violates subsection (C) of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 4 forfeiture.
(A) Declaration of purpose. The council finds that unsolicited distribution of
printed materials within the city constitutes a serious problem for
residents of the city because such printed materials are frequently
distributed to private residences contrary to the wishes of the owner or
occupant causing disruption of privacy and inconvenience to residents
of the city; such materials, if permitted to be distributed without
regulation, will be blown about by the wind causing unsightly
accumulations of litter and substantial expenditures of public funds for
cleanup; such materials may accumulate at a residence during
vacations or other absences of the owner or occupant thereby
§ 9-4-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-11
1-1:729
indicating the residence is temporarily vacant and inviting burglary
or other criminal activity; and the distribution of such materials on
and along public streets and sidewalks can impede the orderly flow of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(B) Definitions. In this section:
DISTRIBUTION — Means the delivery of a handbill to one or more
locations within the city by means other than the United States mail.
Distribute shall be given the same meaning as "distribution."
DISTRIBUTOR — Means a person who causes, supervises, directs,
oversees or is otherwise responsible for distribution.
HANDBILL — Means any handbill, dodger, circular, booklet, card,
pamphlet, sheet or other written or printed notice, or any sample
product, any of which advertises any fact, opinion, idea, commodity,
article, merchandise, business, meeting, entertainment, person or
thing.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE — Means any structure or that part of a
structure which is used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one
person or by two or more persons maintaining a common household, to
the exclusion of all others.
(C) Distribution regulated.
(1) Prohibited practices. No person shall:
A) Knowingly distribute a handbill, in or upon any lands owned or
leased by the city, to a natural person unwilling to accept such
handbill.
B) Distribute a handbill in or upon an unattended vehicle within
the city which is either parked on a public street or in a parking
area open to the general public and when such unattended
vehicle has posted thereon, in a conspicuous place, a sign or
signs of at least eight square inches in area bearing the words
"no advertising."
C) Distribute a handbill in such a manner as to impede the free
flow of traffic upon any street or sidewalk.
D) Tack, nail, paste, paint or otherwise affix a handbill upon public
property, including any bridge, fence, sidewalk, building,
monument, pole or post. Handbills may be affixed upon private
property, buildings or billboards with consent of the owner or
other authorized person if the same is not otherwise prohibited
by this code. This subsection shall not prohibit otherwise
lawfully posted legal notices.
E) Distribute a handbill from an aircraft or any place above
ground level without first obtaining permission from the
council. The council shall grant such permission only if it
§ 9-4-11 MONROE CODE § 9-4-11
1-1:730
§ 9-4-12. Obstruction of aisles, exits. [12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
determines that such distribution is not detrimental to the
public health and safety. Said distribution shall also be subject
to the other requirements of this section.
F) Distribute a handbill to the address of a person who has
provided written notice to the distributor requesting that
future distribution be stopped to such address. Notice shall be
considered given on the fifth day after the day of mailing if the
mail is addressed to a point within the state and the eighth day
after the day of mailing in all other cases.
G) Distribute a handbill when a handbill left from a previous
distribution by the same distributor remains in the same
location. A handbill shall be considered to be in the same
location if it is located outside the structure or other premises
to which it was originally distributed and is clearly visible from
the location of the second handbill placed by the same
distributor.
(2) Special provisions relating to private residences. Except pursuant
to a written subscription or other written authorization by the
occupant of a private residence, no person shall distribute a
handbill to or upon any private residence in the city:
A) When such private residence has posted thereon, in a
conspicuous place, a sign or signs of at least eight square
inches in area bearing the words "No Advertising."
B) Between the hours of 9:00 PM of any day and 8:00 AM of the
following day.
(3) Disclosure of names. A distributor shall maintain at all times a
current written list containing the name and address of each
person authorized or directed by the distributor to engage in
distribution. A legible copy of such list shall be provided to an
authorized representative of the city upon request.
(D) Severability. The several subsections, paragraphs and subparagraphs of
this section are hereby declared to be severable. If any subsection,
paragraph or subparagraph of this section shall be declared by a
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the other provisions of the section or of
the subsection of which the invalid portion may be a part.
(E) Penalty. Whoever violates this section shall upon conviction be subject
to a class 3 forfeiture.
(A) No person shall permit the approaches, passageways or aisles leading
to or between the seats of any room used for public meetings to be
§ 9-4-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-12
1-1:731
§ 9-4-13. Scaffolds. [2016 Code]
§ 9-4-14. Barbed wire and electric fences. [12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-15. Noxious weeds. [9-1-1981; 2016 Code]
obstructed by any means that impairs free passage to, through or from
such seats.
(B) Any person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 5 forfeiture.
(A) All scaffolds erected in the city for use in the erection of buildings shall
be properly supported, secured, and of sufficient width to ensure the
safety of persons using such scaffolds, and to ensure proper support for
all materials upon such scaffolds.
(B) Any scaffold erected or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
section shall be considered a nuisance.
(C) Any person erecting or maintaining a scaffold contrary to the provisions
of this section shall upon conviction be subject to a class 4 forfeiture.
(A) No person shall build or maintain any barbed wire or electric fence
along any public street adjacent to any sidewalk.
(B) No person shall build or maintain any barbed wire or electric fence as a
division fence between any lots or parts of lots occupied for residence
purposes.
(C) A fence shall be considered to be a barbed wire or electric fence if it is
constructed, in any part, of barbed wire or electric fence.
(D) Any person violating any provision of this section shall upon conviction
be subject to a class 5 forfeiture. A separate offense exists each
calendar day during which a violation occurs or continues.
(A) The term "noxious weeds" as used in this chapter shall have the
meaning set forth in section 66.0407(1)(b) of the Wisconsin statutes.
(B) Every person shall destroy all noxious weeds on all lands which he or
she shall own, occupy or control. The person having immediate charge
of any public lands shall destroy all noxious weeds on such lands.
(C) The term "destroy" means the complete killing of weed plants above the
surface of the ground by the use of chemicals, cutting, tillage, cropping
system, pasturing livestock, or any or all of these in effective
combination, at such time and in such manner as will effectually
prevent such plants from maturing to the bloom or flower stage.
(D) The mayor shall annually before May 16 publish a class 2 notice, under
chapter 985 of the Wisconsin statutes, that every person is required by
§ 9-4-12 MONROE CODE § 9-4-15
1-1:732
§ 9-4-16. Fireworks. [6-21-1988; 3-1-2005; 2016 Code]
law to destroy all noxious weeds on lands in the city which the person
owns, occupies or controls.
(E) Duties; powers; collection of tax.
(1) The weed commissioner shall investigate reports of noxious weeds
in the city; if any person neglects to destroy any noxious weeds as
required by this section the weed commissioner shall cause all such
weeds to be destroyed in the manner he or she considers most
economical. For each day devoted to the destruction of weeds the
weed commissioner shall receive such compensation as is
determined by the council; the accounting, itemized by parcel of
land, shall be presented to the city clerk. The city clerk shall bill the
property owner to recover the cost of the destruction of the weeds.
Bills not timely paid shall be entered on the next tax roll in a
column headed "for destruction of weeds," as a tax upon the land
on which such weeds were destroyed, which tax shall be collected
as other taxes are, or as taxes are collected on personal property
under section 74.11 of the Wisconsin statutes, except lands which
are exempt from taxation in the usual way. For railroad or other
lands not taxed in the usual way, the amount chargeable against the
same shall be certified by the city clerk to the Wisconsin secretary
of administration who shall add the amount designated to the sum
due from the company owning, occupying or controlling the lands
specified, and the treasurer shall collect the same therefrom as
prescribed in sub-chapter I of chapter 76 of the Wisconsin statutes,
and return the amount collected to the city.
(2) The weed commissioner may enter upon any lands upon which any
noxious weeds are growing and destroy them without being liable,
either personally or as an agent or independent contractor or
servant of the city, to an action in trespass or any other action for
damages resulting from the performance of these duties, if
reasonable care is exercised in the performance of the duties
imposed by this section.
(F) References to a specific statute section wherever used in this section
shall mean the Wisconsin statutes of 2013-2014 and acts amendatory
and supplementary thereto.
(A) Wisconsin statutes adopted. Except as expressly provided in this
section, the provisions of section 167.10 of the Wisconsin statutes and
all acts amendatory and supplementary thereto, and in replacement
thereof, relating to the sale, possession or use of Fireworks are hereby
adopted by reference. Any act required to be performed or prohibited
by section 167.10 of the Wisconsin statutes is by reference required to
be performed or prohibited by this chapter.
(B) Definitions. In this chapter:
§ 9-4-15 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-16
1-1:733
EXCLUDED COMBUSTIBLE — Means any of the following: a) Fuel or
a lubricant. b) A firearm cartridge or shotgun shell. c) A flare used
or possessed or sold for use as a signal in an emergency or in the
operation of a railway, aircraft, watercraft or motor vehicle. d) A match,
cigarette lighter, stove, furnace, candle, lantern or space heater. e) A
cap containing not more than one-quarter grain of explosive mixture, if
the cap is used or possessed or sold for use in a device which prevents
direct bodily contact with a cap when it is in place for explosion. f)
A toy snake which contains no mercury. g) A model rocket engine.
h) Tobacco and a tobacco product. i) A sparkler on a wire or wood
stick not exceeding 36 inches in length that is designed to produce
audible or visible effects. j) A device containing less than one-quarter
grain of explosive mixture that is designed to spray out paper confetti
or streamers. k) A fuseless device containing less than one-quarter
grain of explosive mixture that is designed to produce audible or visual
effects. l) A device that is designed primarily to burn pyrotechnic
smoke-producing mixtures at a controlled rate while remaining on the
ground and that produces audible or visual effects and showers of
sparks, but not objects, and does not explode. m) A cylindrical fountain
that is classified by the federal department of transportation as a
division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50, that consists of one
or more tubes that remain on the ground while emitting showers of
sparks, but not objects, and does not explode. n) A cone fountain that
is classified as a Division 1.4 explosive, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50,
that remains on the ground while emitting showers of sparks, but not
objects, and does not explode.
FIREWORKS — Means anything manufactured, processed or packaged
for exploding, emitting sparks or combustion which does not have
another common use, but does not include an excluded combustible.
(C) Sale. No person may sell or possess with intent to sell fireworks except:
(1) To a person holding a permit granted under this chapter.
(2) To a city, town or village.
(3) Under sections 167.10(3)(b)2 to six of the Wisconsin statutes.
(4) Under sections 167.10(4) and (6) of the Wisconsin statutes.
(D) Possession and use. No person may possess or use fireworks except
pursuant to a permit granted by the council and issued under this
chapter.
(1) Permit. A permit authorizing the possession and use of fireworks
may be issued under this chapter only to a public authority, fair
association or civic organization and shall specify all of the
following:
A) The name and address of the permit holder.
B) The date by which fireworks shall be purchased.
§ 9-4-16 MONROE CODE § 9-4-16
1-1:734
§ 9-4-17. Discharge of firearms. [9-4-1984; 2016 Code]
C) The kind and quantity of fireworks that may be purchased.
D) The date, time and exact location of use.
(2) Inspection. A copy of the permit application shall be given to the
fire chief at least two weeks before the date of authorized use. The
fire chief shall make recommendation to the council as to whether
to approve or deny the permit.
(3) Permit fee. The fee for a permit issued under this chapter shall be
set by resolution of the council.
(4) Indemnity bond. The city shall require an indemnity bond under
section 167.10(3)(e) of the Wisconsin statutes, as recommended by
the fire chief, with good and sufficient sureties, or a policy of
liability insurance for payment of all claims that may arise by
reason of injuries to person or property from the handling, use or
discharge of Fireworks under the permit. The bond or policy shall
be taken in the name of the city, and a copy of the bond or policy
and a copy of the permit shall be filed with the city clerk.
(5) Storage. Fireworks used under a permit shall not be stored, kept,
sold or discharged within 300 feet of any structure, other than a
motor vehicle, which contains more than one gallon of a volatile
substance.
(E) Possession at public fireworks display. No person may possess or use
fireworks or an excluded combustible, other than a match, cigarette
lighter, tobacco or a tobacco product, while attending a fireworks
display for which a permit has been issued under this chapter if such
fireworks display is open to the general public.
(F) Penalty.
(1) Any person who violates section 9-4-16(C) of this chapter shall
upon conviction be subject to a class 1 forfeiture.
(2) Any person who fails to obtain a permit required by section
9-4-16(D) of this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to a class
1 forfeiture.
(3) Any person who possesses or uses fireworks in violation of section
9-4-16(D) of this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to a Class
4 forfeiture.
(4) Any person who possesses or uses fireworks or an excluded
combustible in violation of section 9-4-16(e) of this chapter shall
upon conviction be subject to a class 5 forfeiture.
(A) No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within
the city limits, except when necessary to protect his or her person and
§ 9-4-16 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-17
1-1:735
§ 9-4-18. Carrying concealed weapon. [12-29-2011; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-19. Radio interference. [1969 Code; 12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-20. Nuisance noise and sound levels regulation. [5-20-2014;
2016 Code]
except a police officer in the lawful discharge of his or her duty. This
section shall not apply to a shooting gallery, nor to military funerals.
(B) Any person who violates this section shall upon conviction be subject to
a class 2 forfeiture.
(A) Unless expressly authorized by section 11-6-10(H) of this code or by a
clearly preemptive state or federal law, no person shall go armed with a
concealed and dangerous weapon.
(B) Any person who violates this section shall upon conviction be subject to
a class 1 forfeiture.
(A) Interference prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly
to operate or cause to be operated, any machine, device, apparatus or
instrument in the city between the hours of 8:00 AM and 12:00
midnight, the operation of which shall cause reasonably preventable
electrical interference with radio or television reception, within the
city; provided, however, that x-ray pictures, examinations or treatments
may be made at any time if the machines or apparatus used therefor are
properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably preventable
interference with radio reception and not negligently operated.
(B) Exceptions. This section shall not be held or construed to regulate any
transmitting, broadcasting or receiving instrument, apparatus or device
used or useful in interstate commerce or the operation of which
instrument, apparatus or device is licensed or authorized by any act of
the Congress of the United States.
(C) Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 5 forfeiture. A separate offense exists
each calendar day during which a violation occurs or continues.
(A) Statement of purpose. The city recognizes that objectionable sounds
and nuisance noise is a serious threat to the public health and welfare,
public safety, quality of life and property values. Current science and
technology permit abatement of sound sources which was not available
in the past. Therefore, it is the policy of the city to prevent and abate
objectionable sounds and nuisance noise which may jeopardize the
public health, safety or welfare or which would cause harm to property
values or which would impair the quality of life within the city.
(B) Definitions. All terms used in this section that are not defined in this
code, shall have the meaning provided by applicable publications of the
§ 9-4-17 MONROE CODE § 9-4-20
1-1:736
american national standards institute (ANSI) or its successor body. In
this section:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — Means the sound pressure level in
decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting
network. The level so read is designated as db(A) or dBA.
AMBIENT SOUND — Means the all-encompassing sound associated
with a given environment being usually a composite of sounds from
near and far.
AMPLIFIED SOUND — Means voice or other sound, other than
background music, that is amplified by a mechanical or electronic
device, or multiple mechanical or electronic devices, whenever the
sound amplified is intended to be audible outside a dwelling or business
enclosure by an audience located within a geographically defined area.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Shall have the meaning set
forth in section 340.01(3) of the Wisconsin statutes.
BACKGROUND MUSIC — Means amplified music that plays
continuously for extended periods of time and that is intended to serve
as a background for other activities that occur within a geographically
defined area such as shopping or dining.
CONSTRUCTION — Means a non-emergency related activity necessary
or incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering,
installing, repairing or equipping of buildings, roadways, or utilities,
including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling.
EMERGENCY WORK — Means work necessary to restore property to
a safe condition following a public calamity, work required to restore
public utilities, or work required to protect persons or property from
imminent exposure to danger.
IMPULSE SOUND — Means sound of short duration, usually less than
one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources
of impulse sound include explosions, drop forge impacts and the
discharge of firearms.
MUFFLER — Means a sound dissipative device or system for abating
sound of escaping gases on equipment where such device is part of the
normal configuration of powered equipment.
NUISANCE NOISE — Means any sound which tends to disturb
reasonable persons in the vicinity thereof or tends to cause an adverse
psychological or physiological effect on humans, regardless of whether
such sound exceeds the stationary sound limits imposed by this section.
RECEIVING ZONE — Means the zoning district in which is located
the real property at which the sound being measured is received. The
zoning classification shall be that as set forth in section 5-1-3 of this
code.
SOUND LEVEL METER — Means an instrument which includes a
microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager,
§ 9-4-20 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-20
1-1:737
output meter, and weighing networks used to measure sound pressure
levels. The instrument shall comply with the standards for Type 1
or Type 2 sound level meters as specified in the american national
standards institute ANSI S1.4-1983 (revised 2001) with amendments
s1.4A-1995 or its successor.
STATIONARY SOUND — Means sound emanating from a source that is
either affixed to or operated upon a fixed point of land, building or other
real property.
TRAFFIC SOUNDS — Means sounds emanating from the normal
operation of motorized vehicles, including all-terrain vehicles, upon
public or private roads, streets and highways and trails. Nuisance noise
which emanates from the operation of one or more motorized vehicles
upon private property shall be considered as stationary sound for the
purposes of this section.
(C) Exemptions.
(1) General exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to the following:
A) The emission of sound for alerting persons to the existence of
an emergency, the emission of sound in the performance of
emergency work, or the emission of sound brought about by
emergency conditions where such sound is a by product of
activities necessary for the preservation of public safety or the
protection of the health, safety and welfare of any person or
property.
B) Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety,
the emission of any sound necessary for the protection of the
health, safety, or welfare of person or property or to the
emission of any sound which is required by law.
C) The operation of authorized emergency vehicles.
D) Outdoor sporting events sponsored by a public or private
school that is listed in the Wisconsin public school district
directory or the Wisconsin private school directory maintained
by the Wisconsin department of public instruction or by an
organization the membership of which consists of schools
listed in either of such directories.
E) Public works projects as authorized by the United States
government, the state of Wisconsin or other political
subdivisions.
F) Sounds emanating from the operation of construction
machinery when engaged in bona fide, temporary construction
work between 7:00 AM and 8:00 PM of the same day.
§ 9-4-20 MONROE CODE § 9-4-20
1-1:738
G) Sounds emanating from the operation of lawn or garden
equipment, chainsaws or power tools between 7:00 AM and
8:00 PM of the same day when used in bona fide short term
property maintenance or repair activities.
H) Any fireworks display authorized by a permit issued under to
section 9-4-16 of this chapter.
I) Any bells or chimes of any building clock, public or private
school building, church, synagogue, or other place of religious
worship.
J) Traffic Sounds emanating from a public street, highway or
recreational trail.
K) Events sponsored by the city or any of its departments.
L) Sounds emanating from vehicles, machinery or equipment
when operated by or at the direction of city employees or work
performed by or at the direction of city employees, when such
sounds are the product of bona fide city sponsored activities.
M) Train whistles activated from a moving train to warn of the
approaching train.
(2) Partial exemption. Subsection (F) of this section shall not apply to
sounds emitted pursuant to and in conformance with an amplified
sound permit issued under this section.
(D) Enforcement. The chief of police shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this section unless otherwise noted. The chief of police
shall:
(1) Investigate all complaints regarding alleged violations of this
section.
(2) Issue orders requiring violators to comply with this section and
issue citations for violations of this section.
(3) Maintain permanent and current records of all matters arising out
of the enforcement of this section.
(E) Determining sound levels. Sound levels shall be measured using the
following procedures:
(1) Instruments used to measure sound levels must, as a minimum
standard, conform to the specifications of the american national
standard institute ANSI S1.4-1983 (revised 2001) with
amendments S1.4A-1995 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters.
Sound level meters shall be capable of both fast and slow meter
response.
(2) The following steps must be followed when preparing to take sound
level measurements:
§ 9-4-20 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-20
1-1:739
A) The instrument manufacturer's specific instructions for
preparation and use of the instrument shall be followed.
B) The sound level meter shall be calibrated periodically, under
the manufacturer's instructions.
C) When outdoor measurements are taken, a windscreen shall be
placed over the microphone of the sound level meter under the
manufacturer's instructions.
D) The sound level meter shall be placed at an angle to the sound
source, as specified by the manufacturer's instructions, and
placed at least 4 feet above the ground. The meter shall be
placed so as not to be interfered with during the taking of
sound measurements.
E) Measurements shall be taken at any point within a receiving
zone which point is outside of the property line of the source of
the stationary sound.
F) Impulse sound shall be measured with the sound level meter
set for fast meter response. All other sound shall be measured
with the sound level meter set for slow meter response.
G) Under this section, sounds capable of being accurately
measured are those sounds which cause no more than (+ or -)
2 decibels fluctuation of the sound level meter or, in the case of
impulse sound, the mean average of four peak readings
measured over the period of an hour.
(F) Maximum permissible sound levels.
(1) General limitations. In the following zoning districts the AWeighted
Sound Level emitted from any source of stationary sound
shall not exceed the following limits at any point within a receiving
zone which point is outside of the property line of the source of the
stationary sound:
Receiving Zone Maximum dBA
R-1, R-2, R-3, A-1, A-2 60 dBA
B-1, B-2 & PUD 70 dBA
M-1, M-2 & M-3 75 dBA
(2) Additional restrictions on impulse sound. A reduction of 5 dBA shall
apply to each of the limitations set forth under subparagraph (F)(1)
of this paragraph for all impulse sounds.
(G) Special exception for ambient sound. When the ambient sound at the
source of a stationary sound equals or exceeds the decibel limits
provided in this section, the owner or operator of the property that is
the source of such stationary sound may seek a special exception from
the sound limitations of this section. Application for a special exception
§ 9-4-20 MONROE CODE § 9-4-20
1-1:740
from the sound limitation shall be made to the city clerk. The public
safety committee shall hear and act upon all applications for a special
exception under this subsection. The committee may grant the appeal
where the committee finds that the ambient sound equals or exceeds
the decibel limits for a property in a receiving zone and that the
combination of the ambient sound and the sound from the stationary
sound producing source does not exceed the limit for the receiving
affected property by more than 10 dBA.
(H) Nonconforming source. Any source of stationary sound that does not
conform to the requirements of this section, which existed lawfully
when this section was adopted and which remains nonconforming, or
which shall became nonconforming upon the adoption of this section, or
of any subsequent amendments thereto, may continue, as provided in
this subsection.
(1) Any such nonconforming source of stationary sound shall not be
modified, altered, added to, or enlarged in any manner unless such
modifications, alterations, additions, or enlargements thereto are
made to conform with all of the sound or noise control regulations
applicable to the source.
(2) Any such nonconforming source of stationary sound which is
discontinued for one year shall not be used unless the use is made
to conform with all of the sound or noise control regulations
applicable to the source.
(3) Any such nonconforming source of stationary sound shall not be
repaired or restored to the extent that the cost of repair or
restoration exceeds 50 percent of the full market value of the
source. In the event that damage or destruction requires repairs or
restoration which is less that 50 percent of such market value,
repairs or restoration may be made if work is commenced within
one year from the date of the partial destruction and is diligently
prosecuted to completion.
(I) Effect of zoning change of affected property. When the zoning
classification of a receiving property is changed in a manner which
would result in a then existing sound source being in noncompliance
with this section, the sound source shall be considered a nonconforming
and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (H) of this section.
(J) Prohibition of nuisance noises.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to make or assist in making any
nuisance noise unless the making and continuing of the same
cannot be prevented and is necessary for the protection or
preservation of property or of the health, safety, life or limb of some
person.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or other
entity occupying or having charge of any building or premises, or
§ 9-4-20 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-20
1-1:741
any part thereof, to cause or allow any nuisance noise in the
operation or use of any radio, stereo or other mechanical or
electrical device, instrument or machine.
(3) No person shall make nuisance noise with a motor vehicle by
squealing tires, excessive acceleration of engine or by emitting
unnecessary and loud muffler sounds.
(K) Amplified sound permit.
(1) Permit. No person shall produce or cause to be produced amplified
sound without a permit issued by the city authorizing such
amplified sound.
(2) Short term amplified sound.
A) Permits for amplified sound to be emitted within a period of not
more than 6 consecutive days may be approved by the city
clerk upon filing of proper application and the payment of a fee
in an amount established by resolution of the council.
B) No short term amplified sound permit shall be issued for any
time that does not fall within a given period of 6 consecutive
days. No more than 3 short term amplified sound permits shall
be issued to the same person in any consecutive 12 month
period.
(3) Long term amplified sound.
A) Permits for amplified sound that will be emitted during a
period exceeding 6 consecutive days may be approved by the
public safety committee upon filing of proper application and
the payment of a fee in an amount established by resolution of
the council.
B) All long term amplified sound permits shall expire on a date
certain which shall be no later than the next succeeding June
30 following issuance.
C) A long-term amplified sound permit may authorize multiple
amplified sound events if such events are part of a series of
coordinated events sponsored by a single person, company or
organization.
(4) Issuance by clerk. All amplified sound permits shall be issued by
the city clerk.
(5) No amplified sound permit shall be issued except upon showing by
the applicant that the peace and good order of the city will not be
disturbed, nor shall any permit be construed to authorize an act
which does disturb the peace and good order of the city.
(L) Regulation of background music.
§ 9-4-20 MONROE CODE § 9-4-20
1-1:742
(1) Permit required. No person, company or organization may play any
form of background music audible in a public area outside a
building or structure without having first obtained a permit.
(2) Requirements for permit. Application for a permit to play
background music for which a permit is required shall be made to
the city clerk, who shall be authorized to grant and issue a permit
in compliance with the regulations established in this section.
A) Term. All background music permits shall expire on a date
certain which shall be no later than the next succeeding June
30 following issuance.
B) Permit fee. The fee for a background music permit shall be
established by resolution of the council.
(M) Revocation of permit. A permit issued pursuant to this section may be
subject to revocation at any time the permitted music or sound exceeds
the maximum permissible sound levels contained in this section or
becomes a nuisance noise. The procedure for revocation shall be as
follows:
(1) Notice. The holder of a permit shall be notified, in writing, of the
city's intent to revoke a permit not less than 10 days before the
proposed revocation.
(2) Hearing. The permit holder shall be permitted a hearing before the
council, which will hear such evidence as may be presented.
Witnesses will be sworn, and the proceedings will be electronically
recorded or otherwise preserved. Witnesses will be subject to
examination by the city and by the permit holder. The permit holder
may be represented by an attorney, but shall otherwise be required
to present evidence pertaining to the revocation of the permit in
person. The permit holder shall in all cases be present at the
revocation hearing. Hearings will take place at regularly scheduled
or special meeting of the council and a majority vote of shall be
required to revoke a permit.
(N) Penalty.
(1) Any person who violates subsection (F) or (J) of this section shall
upon conviction be subject to a class 4 forfeiture for the first
offense in a 12 month period, a class 3 forfeiture for the second
offense in a 12 month period and a class 1 forfeiture for the third or
subsequent offense in a 12 month period.
(2) Any person who violates subsection (K) or (L) of this section shall
upon conviction be subject to a class 5 forfeiture for the first
offense in a 12 month period, a class 4 forfeiture for the second
offense in a 12 month period and a class 1 forfeiture for the third or
subsequent offense in a 12 month period.
§ 9-4-20 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-20
1-1:743
§ 9-4-21. Resisting or obstructing officer. [6-19-1984; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-22. Issue of worthless check. [1-7-2014; 2016 Code]
(3) A separate offense exists each calendar day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
(O) Severability. If any provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, or phrase of
this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is
held, for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of other
provisions or applications of the provisions of this section which can be
given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end,
the provisions of this section are declared to be severable.
(A) Lawful authority. No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct an officer
while such officer is doing any act in an official capacity and with lawful
authority.
(B) Definitions. In this section:
OBSTRUCT — Includes, without limitation, knowingly giving false
information to the officer with intent to mislead him or her in the
performance of his or her duty including the service of any summons or
civil process.
OFFICER — Means a peace officer or other public officer or public
employee having the authority by virtue of his or her office or
employment to take another into custody.
(C) Serving or executing summons. Whoever, by violating this section,
hinders, delays or prevents an officer from properly serving or
executing any summons or civil process, is civilly liable to the person
injured for any actual loss caused thereby and to the officer or his or her
superior for any damages adjudged against either of them by reason
thereof.
(D) Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall upon conviction be
subject to a class 2 forfeiture.
(A) Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to issue any check or
other order for the payment of any amount which, at the time of
issuance, he or she intends shall not be paid.
(B) Prima facie evidence. Any of the following is prima facie evidence that
the person at the time he or she issued the check or other order for the
payment of money, intended it should not be paid:
(1) Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have an
account with the drawee; or
(2) Proof that, at the time of issuance, the person did not have
sufficient funds or credit with the drawee and that the person failed
§ 9-4-20 MONROE CODE § 9-4-22
1-1:744
§ 9-4-23. Sale of poisons. [12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-24. Unauthorized person prohibited on school grounds.
[6-7-1983; 2016 Code]
within 5 days after receiving written notice of nonpayment or
dishonor to pay the check or other order, delivered by regular mail
to either the person's last-known address or the address provided
on the check or other order; or
(3) Proof that, when presentment was made within a reasonable time,
the person did not have sufficient funds or credit with the drawee
and the person failed within 5 days after receiving written notice of
nonpayment or dishonor to pay the check or other order, delivered
by regular mail to either the person's last-known address or the
address provided on the check or other order.
(C) Inapplicability. This section does not apply to a postdated check or to a
check given for a past consideration, except a payroll check.
(D) Restitution. Pursuant to section 800.093 of the Wisconsin statutes, in
addition to the other penalties provided for violation of this section a
judge may order a violator of this section to make restitution.
(E) Penalty. A person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 2 forfeiture for the first offense and a
class 3 forfeiture for the second or subsequent offense within a 12
month period.
(A) No person shall knowingly vend, give away or deliver within the city any
poison unless the same is conspicuously labeled "Poison."
(B) A person who violates any provision of this section shall upon conviction
be subject to a Class 4 forfeiture.
(A) No student under suspension, expulsion or other discipline excluding
him or her from attending school, no person not a student who is
enrolled at the school or a person not a parent or guardian of a student
who is enrolled at the school, and no person not otherwise authorized to
be present in the school or upon the school grounds shall be present
within the school or upon its grounds, unless in direct route to secure
authorization from the school principal or other person in charge of the
school.
(B) Any person present within the school or upon its grounds shall, upon
the request of the principal or any other person in charge of the school
or its grounds, or upon the request of any police officer, display any
written authorization which he or she may have to be present, or
otherwise explain his or her presence.
§ 9-4-22 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-24
1-1:745
§ 9-4-25. Littering. [9-20-1983; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-26. Theft. [1-16-1996; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-27. Retail theft. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
(C) All entrances to school buildings shall be posted with a notice stating
"Entry into school buildings or premises by unauthorized persons is
prohibited" or a notice that conveys substantially the same meaning.
(D) Authorization to be present at one school shall not be construed as
authorization to be present at any other school.
(E) This section applies to all schools within the city which are under the
jurisdiction of the board of the school district of Monroe.
(F) Any person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a Class 3 forfeiture.
(A) No person may litter any public place by depositing, dropping, or
throwing any form of trash or refuse any place other than a waste
receptacle, nor may any person deposit, drop or throw any form of trash
or refuse upon any private place without the consent of the owner.
(B) Any person violating this section shall upon conviction be subject to a
Class 5 forfeiture.
(A) Theft. No person may intentionally take and carry away, use, transfer,
conceal, or retain possession of the moveable property of another
without the other's consent and with intent to deprive the owner
permanently of possession of such property.
(B) Definitions. For this section, definitions may be found in subsection
943.20(2), Wisconsin statutes, and all acts supplementary and
amendatory thereto.
(C) Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall upon conviction be
subject to a class 3 forfeiture.
(A) Definitions. In this section:
MERCHANT — Means any "merchant" as defined in section 402.104(3)
of the Wisconsin statutes or any innkeeper, motelkeeper or hotelkeeper.
VALUE OF MERCHANDISE — Means: a) For property of the merchant,
the value of the property, not to exceed $1,000.00 for each item of
property; or b) For merchandise held for resale, the merchant's stated
price of the merchandise, not to exceed $1,000.00 for each item of
merchandise, or, in the event of altering, transferring or removing
a price marking or causing a cash register or other sales device to
reflect less than the merchant's stated price, the difference between the
merchant's stated price of the merchandise and the altered price, not
§ 9-4-24 MONROE CODE § 9-4-27
1-1:746
to exceed $1,000.00 difference for each price so altered, transferred or
removed.
(B) Penalty. Whoever intentionally alters indicia of price or value of
merchandise or who takes and carries away, transfers, conceals or
retains possession of merchandise held for resale by a merchant or
property of the merchant without his or her consent and with intent to
deprive the merchant permanently of possession, or the full purchase
price of the merchandise, shall upon conviction be subject to a Class 2
forfeiture.
(C) Evidence of intent. The intentional concealment of unpurchased
merchandise which continues from one floor to another or beyond the
last station for receiving payments in a merchant's store is evidence of
intent to deprive the merchant permanently of possession of such
merchandise without paying the purchase price thereof. The discovery
of unpurchased merchandise concealed upon the person or among the
belongings of another is evidence of intentional concealment by the
person so concealing such goods.
(D) Procedure to detain. A merchant or merchant's adult employee who has
probable cause for believing that a person has violated this section in
his or her presence may detain the person in a reasonable manner for a
reasonable length of time to deliver the person to a peace officer, or to
his or her parent or guardian in the case of a minor. The detained
person must be promptly informed of the purpose of the detention and
be permitted to make phone calls, but he or she shall not be
interrogated or searched against his or her will before the arrival of a
peace officer who may conduct a lawful interrogation of the accused
person. Any merchant or merchant's adult employee who acts in good
faith in any act authorized under this section is immune from civil or
criminal liability for those acts.
(E) Evidence; privilege.
(1) In any action or proceeding for violation of this section, identified
and authenticated photographs of merchandise which was the
subject of the violation may be used as evidence in lieu of
producing the merchandise.
(2) A merchant or merchant's adult employee is privileged to defend
property as prescribed in section 939.49 of the Wisconsin statutes.
(F) Additional penalties.
(1) In addition to the other penalties provided for violation of this
section, a judge may order a violator to pay restitution as provided
under section 973.20 of the Wisconsin statutes. A victim may not be
compensated under both this section and section 943.51 of the
Wisconsin statutes.
§ 9-4-27 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-27
1-1:747
§ 9-4-28. Failure to return library materials. [2-7-1984; 7-3-1984;
2016 Code]
§ 9-4-29. Fraud on residential landlords. [10-16-2012; 2016 Code]
(2) In actions concerning violations of this section, a judge may order a
violator to make restitution under section 800.093 of the Wisconsin
statutes. A victim may not be compensated under sections 800.093
and 943.51 of the Wisconsin statutes.
(3) If the court orders restitution under subsections (F)(1) and (F)(2) of
this section, any amount of the restitution paid to the victim under
one of those subsections reduces the amount the violator must pay
in restitution to the victim under the other subsection.
(A) In this section, "library materials" include any book, plate, pictures,
photograph, engraving, painting, drawing, map, newspaper, magazine,
pamphlet, broadside, manuscript, document, letter, public record,
microfilm, sound recording, audiovisual materials in any format,
magnetic or other tapes, electronic data processing records, artifacts or
other documentary, written or printed materials, equipment, regardless
of physical form or characteristics, belonging to, on loan to, or
otherwise in the custody of a municipal library situated or based within
the city.
(B) Any person who takes and carries away any library material with the
consent of a library official, agent or employee and fails, after the notice
required by this section, to timely return the library material, shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 4 forfeiture.
(C) No person shall be charged with a violation of this section unless such
person is provided written notice signed by a library official, agent or
employee setting forth at least the following: a reasonable description
of the library materials; the date that the library materials were due to
be returned; the final date by which either the library materials are to
be returned or a written explanation made to the library that the library
materials are incapable of being returned because they are lost or
destroyed; and the statement: "Your failure to comply with the demands
of this notice will subject you to being prosecuted for a violation of
section 9-4-28 of the this code (failure to return library materials)" or a
statement conveying substantially the same information. Such notice
shall be served either by regular, first class mail sent to the person's last
known address or by personal service upon such person.
(A) Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any tenant, with intent to
defraud, to do any of the following:
(1) Intentionally abscond without paying rent that has been
contractually agreed upon in an oral or written lease with a
landlord. Prima facie evidence of intentionally absconding will be
established if a tenant fails to pay rent due before vacating the
§ 9-4-27 MONROE CODE § 9-4-29
1-1:748
§ 9-4-30. Obtaining utility service by fraud. [10-16-2012; 2016
Code]
rental premise, and the non-payment of rent continues for five days
after vacation of the premise; or
(2) Issue any check, money order or any other form of bank or
monetary draft as a payment of rent, where such document lacks
sufficient funds, where the account is closed, or where such draft is
unredeemable in any other form or fashion.
(B) Applicability. This chapter shall apply to rental agreements between
residential landlords and tenants only. The words and terms used in this
section shall be defined and construed in conformity with the provisions
of chapter ATCP 134 of the Wisconsin administrative code, chapter 704
of the Wisconsin statutes, and section 990.001(2) of the Wisconsin
statutes.
(C) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 3 forfeiture for the first such offense.
For the second or subsequent offense, any person who violates any
provision of this section shall upon conviction be subject to a class 2
forfeiture.
(A) Telecommunications service and video service defined. In this section
"telecommunications service" shall have the meaning set forth in
section 182.017(1g)(cq) of the Wisconsin statutes and the term "video
service" shall have the meaning set forth in section 943.46(1)(c) of the
Wisconsin statutes.
(B) Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to
defraud, to obtain or attempt to obtain telecommunication service,
video service, gas service, sewer service or water service by any of the
following means:
(1) Rearranging, tampering with or making connections with any
facilities or equipment;
(2) Using any contrivance, device or means to avoid payment of the
lawful charges, in whole or in part, for such service;
(3) Charging such service to another subscriber without the consent of
such subscriber thereto, or the legitimate holder thereof.
(C) Applicability. This section shall apply when the services either originate
or terminate, or both, in this city, or when the charges for services
would have been billable, in normal course, by a person providing the
services in this city but for the fact services were obtained, or
attempted to be obtained, by one or more of the means set forth in this
section.
§ 9-4-29 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-30
1-1:749
§ 9-4-31. Fraud on hotel or restaurant keeper, recreational
attraction, taxicab operator, or gas station. [10-16-2012; 2016
Code]
(D) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 3 forfeiture for the first such offense.
For the second and subsequent offense, any person who violates any
provision of this section shall upon conviction be subject to a class 2
forfeiture.
(A) Recreational attraction defined. In this section, "recreational
attraction" means a public accommodation designed for amusement
and includes theaters, entertainment venues, racetracks, swimming
pools, trails, golf courses, carnivals, and amusement parks.
(B) Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to
defraud, to do any of the following:
(1) Having obtained any beverage, food, lodging, ticket or other means
of admission, or other service or accommodation at any
campground, hotel, motel, boarding or lodging house, restaurant,
or recreational attraction, intentionally absconds without paying
for it.
(2) While a guest at any campground, hotel, motel, boarding or lodging
house, or restaurant, intentionally defrauds the keeper thereof in
any transaction arising out of the relationship as guest.
(3) Having obtained any transportation service from a taxicab
operator, intentionally absconds without paying for the service.
(4) Having obtained gasoline or diesel fuel from a service station,
garage, or other place where gasoline or diesel fuel is sold at retail
or offered for sale at retail, intentionally absconds without paying
for the gasoline or diesel fuel.
(C) Under this section, prima facie evidence of an intent to defraud is
shown by:
(1) The refusal of payment upon presentation when due, and the return
unpaid of any bank check or order for the payment of money, given
by any guest to any campground, hotel, motel, boarding or lodging
house, or restaurant, in payment of any obligation arising out of the
relationship as guest. Those facts also constitute prima facie
evidence of an intent to abscond without payment.
(2) The failure or refusal of any guest at a campground, hotel, motel,
boarding or lodging house, or restaurant, to pay, upon written
demand, the established charge for any beverage, food, lodging or
other service or accommodation actually provided.
§ 9-4-30 MONROE CODE § 9-4-31
1-1:750
§ 9-4-32. Purchase or possession of tobacco products prohibited.
[3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
(3) The giving of false information on a lodging registration form or the
giving of false information or presenting of false or fictitious
credentials to obtain any beverage or food, lodging or credit.
(4) The drawing, endorsing, issuing or delivering to any campground,
hotel, motel, boarding or lodging house, or restaurant, of any
check, draft or order for payment of money upon any bank or other
depository, in payment of established charges for any beverage,
food, lodging or other service or accommodation, knowing that
there is not sufficient credit with the drawee bank or other
depository for payment in full of the instrument drawn.
(D) If a person has obtained a ticket, another means of admission, or an
accommodation or service provided by the recreational attraction, his
or her failure or refusal to pay a recreational attraction the established
charge for the ticket, other means of admission, or accommodation or
service provided by the recreational attraction constitutes prima facie
evidence of an intent to abscond without payment.
(E) The refusal to pay a taxicab operator the established charge for
transportation service provided by the operator constitutes prima facie
evidence of an intent to abscond without payment.
(F) The failure or refusal to pay a service station, garage, or other place
where gasoline or diesel fuel is sold at retail or offered for sale at retail
the established charge for gasoline or diesel fuel provided by the
service station, garage, or other place constitutes prima facie evidence
of an intent to abscond without payment.
(G) Penalty.
(1) Any person who is convicted of an offense under subsections (B)(1),
(B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section shall be subject to a class 2 forfeiture
for the first such offense. Any person who is convicted of an offense
under subsections (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section a second or
subsequent time within a 12 month period shall be subject to a
class 1 forfeiture.
(2) Any person who is convicted of an offense under subsection (B)(4)
of this section shall be subject to a class 3 forfeiture for the first
such offense. Any person who is convicted of an offense under
subsections (B)(4) of this section a second or subsequent time
within a 12 month period shall be subject to a class 2 forfeiture.
(A) State statute adopted. Section 254.92 of the Wisconsin statutes
regulating the purchase or possession of tobacco products by a person
under 18 years of age is hereby adopted by reference.
§ 9-4-31 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-32
1-1:751
§ 9-4-33. Restrictions on sale or gift of cigarettes or tobacco
products. [3-1-1994; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-34. Curfew. [6-2-1998; 2016 Code]
(B) Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 5 forfeiture.
(A) State statute adopted. Section 134.66 of the Wisconsin statutes
establishing restrictions on the sale or gift of cigarettes or tobacco
products is hereby adopted by reference.
(B) Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a Class 3 forfeiture.
(A) Definitions. In this section:
CURFEW HOURS — Means a) one minute after 11:00 PM on any day,
until 5:00 AM the following day, for any person under 16 years of age;
b) one minute after 1:00 AM on any day, until 5:00 AM the same day, for
any person 16 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age.
EMERGENCY — Means any unforeseen combination of circumstances
or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes
a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of
life.
ESTABLISHMENT — Means any privately owned place of business
operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not
limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN — Means a person who, under court order, is the guardian
of the person of a minor; or a public or private agency with whom the
minor has been placed by a court.
MINOR — Means any person under 18 years of age.
PARENT — Means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or
stepparent of another person; or a person at least 18 years of age and
specifically authorized by a parent or guardian to have care and control
of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Means any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes streets, highways,
sidewalks, public parking lots, and the common areas of schools,
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and
businesses.
REMAINS — Means to linger or stay; or fail to leave premises when
requested to do so by a police officer or the operator or person in
control of the premises.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY — Means bodily injury that creates
substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent
§ 9-4-32 MONROE CODE § 9-4-34
1-1:752
disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any
bodily member or organ.
(B) Offenses.
(1) A minor commits an offense if the minor remains in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the city
during curfew hours.
(2) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if the parent or
guardian knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the
minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(C) Defenses.
(1) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (B) of this section if
the minor was:
A) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
B) On an errand specifically authorized by the minor's parent or
guardian, without any detour or stop;
C) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel, without any
detour or stop;
D) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning
home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
E) Involved in an emergency;
F) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next - door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
G) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, school,
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home
from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious,
or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, school, civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor.
(D) Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section,
a police officer shall ask the suspected offender's age and reason for
being in the public place or on the premises. The officer shall not issue a
citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer
reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any
response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (C) of this
section is present.
§ 9-4-34 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-34
1-1:753
§ 9-4-35. Marijuana, synthetic cannabinoids and drug
paraphernalia. [6-16-2015; 2016 Code]
§ 9-4-36. Truancy, habitual truancy, dropout, and contributing to
truancy. [3-6-2001; 2016 Code]
(E) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 5 forfeiture for the first such offense.
For the second and subsequent offense, any person who violates any
provision of this section shall upon conviction be subject to a Class 4
forfeiture.
(A) Definitions. In this section:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — Shall have the meaning set forth in section
961.571 of the Wisconsin statutes.
MARIJUANA — Shall have the meaning set forth in section 961.01(14)
of the Wisconsin statutes.
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS — Shall mean the substances set forth in
section 961.14(4)(tb) of the Wisconsin statutes.
(B) Wisconsin statutes adopted. Sections 961.14(4)(tb), 961.573(1) and (2),
961.574(1) and (2), and 961.575(1) and (2) of the Wisconsin statutes
are hereby adopted by reference.
(C) Possession of marijuana prohibited. No person shall possess 25 grams
or less of marijuana within the city.
(D) Possession of synthetic cannabinoids prohibited. No person shall
possess synthetic cannabinoids within the city.
(E) Possession of drug paraphernalia. No person shall possess drug
paraphernalia within the city.
(F) Penalty.
(1) Any person who violates subsections (C) or (D) of this section shall
upon conviction be subject to a class 2 forfeiture. The forfeiture
provided in this subsection shall be doubled for any person who is
convicted of violating subsections (C) or (D) of this section on or
within a school bus, or within 500 feet of any private or public
school, church, park or playground.
(2) Any person who violates subsection (E) of this section shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 3 forfeiture. The forfeiture provided
in this subsection shall be doubled for any person who is convicted
of violating subsection (E) of this section on or within a school bus,
or within 500 feet of any private or public school, church, park or
playground.
(A) Definitions. In this section:
§ 9-4-34 MONROE CODE § 9-4-36
1-1:754
ACCEPTABLE EXCUSE — Means any of the following: a) The pupil
has graduated from high school; b) A pupil, age 16 or over and who
qualifies as a child at risk as defined in the general school operations
section of the Wisconsin statutes, and upon written approval by the
school board and the pupil's parent or guardian, in lieu of high school
or on a part-time basis, may attend a vocational or technical college
program leading to the pupil's high school graduation; c) The pupil, age
16 and over, may be excused by the school board if the pupil's parent or
guardian agrees in writing that the pupil will participate in a program
or curriculum leading to the pupil's high school graduation or high
school equivalency diploma, including, but not limited to modifications
within the pupil's current academic program, a school work training
or work study program, enrollment in any alternative public school
or program located in the school district in which the pupil resides,
enrollment in any nonsectarian private school or program, homebound
study, including nonsectarian correspondence courses or other courses
of study approved by the school board or nonsectarian tutoring
provided by the school in which the pupil is enrolled or enrollment in
any public educational program located outside the school district in
which the pupil resides; d) Any pupil who is excused by the school
board because the pupil is temporarily not in proper physical or mental
condition to attend a school program, but who can be expected to
return to a school program upon termination or abatement of the
illness or condition. The school attendance officer may request the
parent or guardian of the pupil to obtain a written statement from
a licensed physician, dentist, chiropractor, optometrist, psychologist,
or Christian science practitioner as sufficient proof of the physical or
mental condition of the pupil. An excuse under this subsection shall be
in writing and shall state the time period for which it is valid, not to
exceed 30 days; e) A pupil excused in writing by his or her parent or
guardian before the absence. A pupil may not be excused for more than
10 days in a school year under this subsection; f) Instruction in a homebased
private educational program, as approved by the school board;
g) Any other reason established by the school board specifying when
pupils may be permitted to be excused from a public school.
ACT OF COMMISSION OR OMISSION — Means anything that
contributes to the truancy of a pupil, whether or not the pupil is
adjudged to be in need of protection or services, if the natural and
probable consequences of that act would be to cause the pupil to be
truant.
DROPOUT — Means a pupil, who has ceased to attend school, continues
to reside in the school district, does not attend a public, private or
vocational, technical and adult education district school or home-based
private educational program on a full-time basis, and has not graduated
from high school and does not have an acceptable excuse.
HABITUAL TRUANT — Means a pupil who is absent from school
without an acceptable excuse for part or all of five or more days on
which school is held during a school semester.
§ 9-4-36 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-36
1-1:755
OPERATING PRIVILEGE — Means the authorization to operate a motor
vehicle, or to obtain any license, including the authorization to operate
vehicles of specific vehicle classes or types, instruction permit, and
temporary, restricted or occupational driver's licenses.
PUPIL — Means a child between the ages of six and 18, who is a
resident of the city, or who attends a school in the city, and who is
required under the compulsory school attendance laws of Wisconsin to
attend school regularly.
SCHOOL ATTENDANCE OFFICER — Means an employee, or
employees, designated by the school board to deal with matters relating
to school attendance and truancy.
TRUANT — Means a pupil who is absent from school without an
acceptable excuse for part or all of any day on which school is held
during a school semester.
(B) Offenses.
(1) No pupil shall be a truant.
(2) No pupil shall be a habitual truant.
(3) No pupil shall be a dropout.
(4) No person, 18 years of age or older, who has care, custody, or
control over a pupil shall fail to cause the pupil to attend school
regularly, and no person shall perform any act of commission or
omission, which act encourages or contributes to a pupil's truancy
or habitual truancy from school. It is a defense to this section if the
person can show that he or she cannot comply with this section due
to the disobedience of the pupil.
(C) Disposition. If a pupil is adjudged to be a truant, a habitual truant, or a
dropout, or a person adjudged to have contributed to truancy, then the
court shall enter a dispositional order including one or more of the
following:
(1) Truant.
A) An order for the person to attend school.
B) A class 5 forfeiture plus costs for a first violation, or a class 4
forfeiture plus costs for any second or subsequent violation
committed within 12 months, subject to the juvenile justice
code of the Wisconsin statutes and subject to a maximum
cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than the maximum
class 4 forfeiture multiplied by 5 for all violations committed
during a school semester. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs
may be assessed against the pupil, the parents or guardian of
the pupil, or both.
(2) Habitual truant.
§ 9-4-36 MONROE CODE § 9-4-36
1-1:756
A) An order for the person to attend school.
B) A class 1 forfeiture plus costs, subject to the juvenile justice
code of the Wisconsin statutes. All or part of the forfeiture plus
costs may be assessed against the pupil, the parents or
guardian of the pupil, or both.
C) Suspension of the pupil's operating privilege, for not less than
30 days, nor more than one year. The court shall immediately
take possession of any suspended licenses and forward it to the
department of transportation and a notice stating the reason
for and the duration of the suspension.
D) An order for the pupil to participate in counseling or a
supervised work program or other community service work as
described in the juvenile justice code of the Wisconsin statutes.
The costs of any such counseling, supervised work program or
other community service work may be assessed against the
pupil, the parents or guardians of the pupil, or both.
E) An order for the pupil to remain at home except during hours
in which the pupil is attending religious worship or a school
program, including the travel time required to and from the
school program or place of worship. The order may permit a
pupil to leave his or her home if a parent or guardian
accompanies the pupil.
F) An order for the pupil to attend an educational program as
described in the juvenile justice code of the Wisconsin statutes.
G) An order for the Wisconsin department of workforce
development to revoke, under section 103.72 of the Wisconsin
statutes, a permit under section 103.70 of the Wisconsin
statutes authorizing the employment of the pupil.
H) An order for the pupil to be placed in a teen court program as
described in the juvenile justice code of the Wisconsin statutes.
I) An order placing the pupil under formal or informal
supervision, as described in the juvenile justice code of the
Wisconsin statutes, for up to one year.
J) An order for the pupil's parent, guardian or legal custodian to
participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's or legal
custodian's own expense or to attend school with the pupil, or
both.
K) Any other reasonable conditions consistent with this
subsection, including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or
remaining on specified premises and restrictions on
associating with other children or adults.
(3) Dropout.
§ 9-4-36 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 9-4-36
1-1:757
Chapter 9-5
ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 9-5-1. Abandonment prohibited. [1-4-1972; 2016 Code]
No person shall leave unattended any motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or
mobile home on any public highway or private or public property, for such
time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably
appear to have been abandoned. Whenever any vehicle has been left
unattended without the permission of the property owner for more than
A) The court may suspend the operating privilege of a pupil, age
16 or older, until the pupil reaches the age of eighteen (18).
The court shall immediately take possession of any suspended
licenses and forward it to the Wisconsin department of
transportation and a notice stating the reason for and the
duration of the suspension.
(4) Contributing to truancy.
A) Any person found to be contributing to truancy or contributing
to habitual truancy shall upon conviction be subject to a class 5
forfeiture for the first offense, and subject to a class 4
forfeiture for the second or subsequent offense.
(D) Prerequisites for conviction of habitual truancy, dropout, and
contributing to truancy. No parent or guardian having control of a pupil
may be convicted of contributing to truancy, nor any pupil may be
convicted of habitual truancy or being a dropout, unless appropriate
school personnel or the school attendance officer has, within one year
before the commencement of prosecution, done all of the following:
(1) Met with the pupil's parent or guardian to discuss the pupil's
truancy or attempted to meet with the pupil's parent or guardian
and received no response or were refused.
(2) Provided an opportunity for educational counseling to the pupil and
considered curriculum modifications.
(3) Evaluated the pupil to determine whether learning problems are
the cause of the truancy and, if so, taken steps to overcome the
learning problems.
(4) Conducted an evaluation to determine whether social problems are
the cause of the pupil's truancy and, if so, taken appropriate action
or made appropriate referrals.
(E) Applicability. Subsections (D)(2), (D)(3), and (D)(4) of this section shall
not apply if the school attendance officer provides evidence that
appropriate school personnel were unable to carry out the activity due
to the pupil's absences from school.
§ 9-4-36 MONROE CODE § 9-5-1
1-1:758
48 hours, the vehicle is considered abandoned and constitutes a public
nuisance.
§ 9-5-2. Impoundment and disposition of abandoned vehicles.
[5-17-1983; 2016 Code]
§ 9-5-3. Penalty. [7-2-1985; 2016 Code]
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction
be subject to a class 4 forfeiture.
Title 10, Traffic Regulations
Chapter 10-1
DEFINITIONS
§ 10-1-1. Definitions. [2-2-2010; 5-25-2012; 2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
In this title:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Has the meaning specified under § 23.33(1)(b)
of the Wisconsin Statutes.[Amended 11-18-2019]
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE ROUTE — Means a highway or sidewalk
designated by the city for use by all-terrain vehicle operators.
BICYCLE — Means every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals
and having wheels, any two of which are not less than 14 inches in diameter.
BICYCLE IDENTIFICATION TAG — Means a sticker issued by the city
indicating that a bicycle is properly registered.
BICYCLE LANE — Means that portion of a roadway three feet in width
measured from the curb, or if there is no curb the edge of the paving,
designated by resolution of the council for the use of bicycles, electric
personal assistive mobility devices or other modes of travel.
BICYCLE ROUTE — Means any bicycle lane, street or alley which has been
designated as a bicycle route by resolution of the council and which is
identified by appropriate signs and markings.
(A) Any vehicle found in violation of section 9-5-1 of this chapter shall be
impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of according to section
342.40 of the Wisconsin statutes.
(B) The chief of police shall be the designated representative of the city
under this section.
(C) Storage fees shall be set by action of the council. Towing will be based
on actual costs incurred.
§ 9-5-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 10-1-1
1-1:759
BUSINESS DISTRICT — Means the territory abutting a street when 50
percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more
is occupied by buildings in use for business.
ENGINE BRAKE — Means a device that converts a power-producing diesel
engine into a power-absorbing air compressor, resulting in a net energy
loss.
GOLF CART — Means a vehicle whose speed attainable in one mile does
not exceed 20 miles per hour on a paved, level surface, and is designed and
intended to convey one or more persons and equipment to play the game of
golf in an area designated as a golf course.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING — Means the value specified by the
vehicle manufacturer, including secondary or final stage manufacturer, as
the loaded weight of a vehicle.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Means father, mother, brother, sister, son or
daughter.
IN-LINE SKATES — Means any skates with wheels arranged singly in a
tandem line rather than in pairs.
LOW-PRESSURE TIRE — Means a tire which has a minimum width of
six inches, which is designed to be mounted on a rim with a maximum
diameter of 12 inches and which is designed to be inflated with an operating
pressure not to exceed six pounds per square inch as recommended by the
manufacturer.
MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Means a vehicle which is built on
a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently
towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if
registration is required and is designed primarily as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured
homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain
capable of being towed or carried, including model homes, are not mobile
recreational vehicles.
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE — Means a four-wheeled motor
vehicle that is propelled by electric power, that is capable of traveling at
a speed on a paved level surface of more than 20 miles per hour and
not more than 25 miles per hour, and that conforms to the definition
and requirements for low-speed vehicles as adopted in the federal motor
vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles under 49 CFR 571.3(b) and
571.500. "Neighborhood electric vehicle" does not include a golf cart.
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE ROUTE — Means that portion of
state trunk highway 69 lying within the city and within and between its
intersections with 2nd Street and 30th street, and any street, alley or
highway within the city having a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour
or less, but not including any part of a state trunk highway other than that
portion of state trunk highway 69 expressly set forth herein.
§ 10-1-1 MONROE CODE § 10-1-1
1-1:760
OPERATE or OPERATION — Means to exercise physical control over the
speed or direction of a vehicle, an all-terrain vehicle or a snowmobile, or
to physically manipulate or activate any of the controls of a vehicle, an allterrain
vehicle, or a snowmobile necessary to put it in motion.
OPERATOR — Means, unless the context otherwise requires, a person
who operates a vehicle, an all-terrain vehicle or a snowmobile, or who is
responsible for or exercises control over the speed or direction of a vehicle,
an all-terrain vehicle or a snowmobile or a person who is supervising an allterrain
vehicle.
PARKING STALL — Means an area delineated by markings on the pavement
or other surface with a width and length sufficient to contain a single
vehicle.
PERSON — Means a natural person, whether minor or adult.
PLAY VEHICLE — Means a coaster, skateboard, roller skates, sled,
toboggan, unicycle or toy vehicle upon which a person may ride, but does
not include in-line skates.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT — Means the territory abutting or within 175 feet
of any street not comprising a business district where the frontage on such
street for a distance of 300 feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings or
by dwellings and buildings in use for business.
RIDE or RIDING — Means either wholly or partially sitting, standing or
lying upon a play vehicle, bicycle or in-line skates by a person whether such
play vehicle, bicycle or in-line skates is in motion or stationary.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Means the right of one operator or pedestrian to proceed
in a lawful manner in preference to another operator or pedestrian
approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as
to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROW OF PARKING STALLS — Means a series of parking stalls designed
and arranged to accommodate vehicles facing in a single direction where
each parking stall in the series shares at least one common boundary with
another parking stall in the series.
SEMITRAILER — Means a vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used
in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and
that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle, but does not
include a mobile home or a mobile recreational vehicle. A vehicle used with
a ready-mix motor truck to spread the load is considered a semitrailer.
SNOWMOBILE — Means an engine driven vehicle that is manufactured
solely for snowmobiling, that has an endless belt tread and sled type
runners, or skis, to be used in contact with snow but does not include such
a vehicle that has inflatable tires or a vehicle that is driven by a motor of
four horsepower or less and that is operated in sanctioned races, derbies,
competitions or exhibitions or only on private property.
§ 10-1-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 10-1-1
1-1:761
STREET — Means a way or thoroughfare within the city that is used for
vehicular travel by the public, including both streets and avenues, but not
including an alley.
TRAILER — Means a vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
property or passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by
a motor vehicle, but does not include a mobile home.
UNMUFFLED ENGINE BRAKE — Means an engine brake that is not
equipped with a muffler in good working order.
UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLE — Has the meaning specified under
§ 23.33(1)(ng) of the Wisconsin Statutes.[Added 11-18-2019]
VEHICLE — Means every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except railroad
trains. A snowmobile or neighborhood electric vehicle shall not be
considered a vehicle except for purposes made specifically applicable by
law.
VIN — Means a series of Arabic numbers and roman letters that is assigned
to a motor vehicle for identification purposes under the requirements of 49
CFR 565.
Chapter 10-2
TRAFFIC CODE
§ 10-2-1. State traffic laws adopted. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
(A) Wisconsin statute. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the provisions in chapters 340 to 348 of the Wisconsin statutes,
describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic,
exclusive of any provisions relating to penalties to be imposed and
exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory penalty is a fine or
term of imprisonment, are hereby adopted by reference made a part of
this chapter.
(B) Wisconsin administrative code. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter, the provisions in the following chapters of the
Wisconsin administrative code are hereby adopted by reference made a
part of this chapter
TRANS 146: Reciprocity - nonresident motor carriers.
TRANS 300: Transportation of school children
TRANS 302: Lettering on vehicles, display of evidence of registration
and dual permit.
TRANS 305: Standards for motor vehicle equipment.
TRANS 308: Requirements for trailer and semi-trailer brake, hitch and
coupling, safety chains, cables and leveling bars.
§ 10-1-1 MONROE CODE § 10-2-1
1-1:762
§ 10-2-2. Speed limits. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
The council hereby finds that the speed limits that would apply on the
following streets, or portions thereof, under the statutes adopted by
reference, are unreasonable, unsafe and imprudent and such speed limits
shall be as follows:
TRANS 326: Transportation of explosives by motor vehicles.
(C) Any act required to be performed, or prohibited, by any statute or
administrative code incorporated by reference is required or prohibited
by this chapter. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of
statute or administrative code sections incorporated by reference are
intended to be made part of this chapter.
(A) 15 miles per hour. The speed limit shall be 15 miles per hour on the
following streets:
10th street: from 15th avenue to 18th avenue.
11th street: from 15th avenue to 18th avenue.
16th avenue: from 9th street to 12th street.
17th avenue: from 9th street to 12th street.
(B) 25 miles per hour. The speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour on the
following streets:
West 2nd street: from 6th avenue west to 4th avenue west.
4th street: from 18th avenue to 22nd avenue.
6th street: from 1st avenue to 10th avenue.
West 7th street: entire length
8th street: from 1st avenue to 10th avenue west.
11th street: from STH 69 to 17th street.
17th street: from STH 69 west to the city limits.
21st street: from 4th avenue to the west city limits.
1st avenue: from 3rd street to 8th street.
3rd avenue: from 2nd street to 8th street.
4th avenue west: from west 21st street to north city limits.
6th avenue west: from west 8th street to west 2nd street.
8th avenue: from 2nd street to 8th street.
9th avenue west: entire length
§ 10-2-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 10-2-2
1-1:763
§ 10-2-3. General parking regulations. [2-2-2010; 5-25-2012;
2-17-2015; 2016 Code]
17th avenue: from 26th street south to the city limits.
18th avenue: from 6th street to the badger state recreational trail
crossing.
27th avenue: from 18th street south to the city limits.
(C) 35 miles per hour. The speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour on the
following streets:
STH 69: between the south city limits and its intersection with state
highways 11 and 81.
18th avenue: from the state highway 11 overpass to the badger state
recreational trail crossing.
county trunk k: from 13th street to 18th street.
(D) 45 miles per hour. The speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour on the
following streets:
STH 69: from the state highway 11 overpass of 18th avenue to the north
city limits.
Aebly road: from north city limits to state highway 69.
(E) 55 miles per hour. The speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour on those
segments of state highways 11, 69 and 81 lying within the city between
the highway 59 overpass and a point where the roadbed would intersect
with 10th avenue west if 10th avenue west were projected across such
roadbed.
(A) Parking restrictions.
(1) 48 hour vehicle parking. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
operator of a vehicle to cause or permit such vehicle to be parked
on any street, alley or public parking lot in the city for more than 48
consecutive hours. This subsection shall not preclude placement of
a vehicle that has been expressly authorized in a permit issued by
the city.
(2) City-wide large vehicle and semitrailer parking restrictions. It shall
be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle having a gross vehicle
weight rating of 16,000 pounds or more, or a semitrailer, to cause
or permit such vehicle or semitrailer to be parked on any street,
alley or public parking lot within the city during the period
commencing at 12:00 midnight and ending at 7:00 AM, Sunday
through Saturday, inclusive, except to comply with official traffic
signs or signals, directions of a traffic officer or for such limited
time as is reasonably necessary for the loading, unloading or
§ 10-2-2 MONROE CODE § 10-2-3
1-1:764
emergency repairs of such vehicle or semitrailer. This subsection
shall not preclude placement of a vehicle that has been expressly
authorized in a permit issued by the city.
(3) Residence district parking restrictions. It shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating of
16,000 pounds or more, or a trailer, to park or leave standing such
vehicle or trailer within a residence district with engines or
auxiliary motors operating, except to comply with official traffic
signs or signals, directions of a traffic officer, or for such limited
time as is reasonably necessary for the loading or unloading or
emergency repairs of such vehicle or trailer.
(4) Size and weight limitations. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
operator of a vehicle to cause or permit such vehicle to be parked
upon any city parking lot if such vehicle does not comply with size
and weight limits established for such location if appropriate
signage stating the applicable size and weight limits has been
posted. Size and weight limitations shall be established from time
to time by resolution of the council.
(5) Mailboxes. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a
vehicle to park or leave parked any vehicle on that portion of any
street in the city that lies within 15 feet of a mailbox used for rural
delivery of U.S. mail or otherwise park in the vicinity of such
mailbox in such a manner as to prevent a mail carrier from driving
up to and placing mail in such mailbox from his or her vehicle.
(6) Parking in terrace. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of
any vehicle or other object to cause or permit such vehicle or object
to be parked or placed within the terrace or area between curb line
and property line along any public street, except for purposes of
temporary loading or unloading not to exceed eight hours. This
subsection shall not be interpreted to preclude temporary placing
for pick up of proper containers for garbage or rubbish if such
placing is not contrary to any other provision of law, nor shall this
subsection preclude parking in such area where a permit has been
obtained under this chapter.
(7) Handicapped parking. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
operator of any vehicle to park, stop or leave standing such vehicle,
whether attended or unattended, upon any portion of a street or
public or private parking facility reserved by official signs or
markings for those vehicles used by physically disabled persons, or
to cause any vehicle to obstruct, block or otherwise limit the use of
those areas, unless the vehicle is displaying special registration
plates, a special registration card, emblem or other visible permit
of whatever type or nature, issued by the state of Wisconsin
department of transportation, or another jurisdiction with the
lawful authority to issue such permits, which allows the person to
use such restricted parking areas.
§ 10-2-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 10-2-3
1-1:765
(8) Parking on state highway. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
operator of any vehicle to park or to leave parked such vehicle on
any state highway within corporate limits of the city during the
period commencing at 2:00 AM and ending at 5:30 AM on any day
during the months December, January, February and March if
appropriate signs have been posted under section 349.13 of the
Wisconsin statutes.
(9) Restricted parking zones. The council, by resolution, may prohibit
or restrict vehicle parking in any location. Upon passage of such
resolution so designating a location where vehicle parking is
prohibited or restricted, the board of public works shall procure,
erect and maintain appropriate, standard, traffic signs, signals and
markings conforming to the rules of the Wisconsin Department of
Transportation giving notice of the particular restrictions
applicable to such location and said signs, signals or markings shall
be erected in such locations and areas in such a manner as to give
adequate warning to the users of said location and area of the
restriction placed thereon. Signs shall be placed designating such
areas under section 349.13 of the Wisconsin statutes.
(10) Vehicle to be entirely in parking stall. It shall be unlawful for the
owner or operator of any vehicle to park or to leave parked any
such vehicle in a city owned or managed parking stall unless such
vehicle is positioned entirely within a single parking stall.
(11) Timed parking. The council may by resolution establish timed
limits applicable to vehicles parked in parking stalls located in rows
of parking stalls designated in such resolution.
A) Expired time. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of
any vehicle leave such vehicle parked in the same parking stall
after the timed limit has expired.
B) Vehicle to be moved. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
operator of any vehicle to move such vehicle after the timed
limit has expired directly to another parking stall in the same
row of parking stalls containing the parking stall for which the
timed limit has expired, unless a period of time equal to the
maximum amount of time a vehicle is allowed to remain in the
original parking stall has elapsed between the time the vehicle
was removed from the original parking stall and the time the
vehicle was parked in another parking stall in the same row of
parking stalls.
C) Enforcement. The times during which timed parking limits are
enforced shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
council.
(12)Winter parking restrictions.
§ 10-2-3 MONROE CODE § 10-2-3
1-1:766
A) It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any street in
the city during the period commencing at 12:00 midnight and
ending at 7:00 AM on any day between November 15 of any
year and March 31 of the succeeding year, except as provided
in this chapter.
B) Between November 15 of any year and March 31 of the
succeeding year, parking on city streets shall be allowed on the
even-numbered side of the street on the even-numbered days
of the month and on the odd-numbered side of the street on the
odd-numbered days of the month.
C) Sides of streets are hereby defined as odd or even based upon
the last digit of the house or building number of the buildings
on that side of the street.
D) The following shall be exempted from the winter parking
regulations contained in this subsection:
1) The following streets, and any segments of alleys which
intersect with any two of the following streets:
9th street: from 15th avenue to 18th avenue.
10th street: from 14th avenue to 19th avenue.
11th street: from 14th avenue to 19th avenue.
12th street: from 13th avenue to 20th avenue.
17th street: from 13th avenue to 15th avenue.
14th avenue: from 12th street to 13th street.
15th avenue: from 9th street to 12th street.
16th avenue: from 8th street to 13th street.
17th avenue: from 8th street to 13th street.
18th avenue: from 9th street to 12th street.
2) The opposite side of a street where one side of that street
is designated "no parking this side of street."
3) Those areas where 30 minute parking is permitted, during
the hours in which such 30 minute parking is permitted.
E) Any vehicle that is parked in violation of the winter parking
regulations contained in this subsection may be towed away by
the city at the owner's risk and the cost of towing and storage
charged to the registered owner of the vehicle.
(B) Traffic officer may move vehicles. Whenever any traffic officer shall find
a vehicle standing upon a street or alley in violation of the provisions of
§ 10-2-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 10-2-3
1-1:767
§ 10-2-4. Parking permits. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, a permit may
be issued authorizing the parking of a vehicle, as follows:
this section, he or she may move such vehicle or require the operator in
charge thereof to move such vehicle to a position where parking is not
prohibited.
(A) Terrace parking. The board of public works may grant a permit
authorizing parking of a vehicle in the terrace of any street in an area
where such parking does not constitute a traffic hazard if the area is
surfaced with crushed rock, blacktop, or concrete, and outlined with
one or more parking stalls.
(B) Temporary parking permit. The chief of police, or his or her designee,
may grant and issue a temporary parking permit authorizing the owner
or operator of a vehicle to park such vehicle on a street for a specific
purpose, and for a limited time, subject to the following:
(1) Fee. The fee for issuance of a temporary parking permit under this
subsection shall be established from time to time by resolution of
the council.
(2) Conditions or limitations. The temporary parking permit may
contain reasonable restrictions on the time and manner of use if
such restrictions are designed to promote public safety or avoid
traffic congestion.
(3) Use for other than stated purpose prohibited. Use of a temporary
parking permit for a purpose other than the purpose stated in the
permit is prohibited.
(C) Exempt parking permit. The chief of police, or his or her designee, may
grant and issue an exempt parking permit authorizing the parking of a
vehicle in any parking stall that is located in a row of parking stalls for
which the council has by resolution authorized issuance of exempt
parking permits, except a parking stall for which a reserved parking
permit has been issued.
(1) Fee. The fee for issuance of an exempt parking permit under this
subsection shall be established from time to time by resolution of
the council.
(2) Conditions or limitations. The exempt parking permit may contain
reasonable restrictions on the time and manner of use if such
restrictions are designed to promote public safety or avoid traffic
congestion.
(3) Term. An exempt parking permit shall be issued for a term not
exceeding one year from the date of issuance.
§ 10-2-3 MONROE CODE § 10-2-4
1-1:768
§ 10-2-5. Parking during snow removal. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
(4) Exemption of holder of exempt parking permit from time-based
parking restrictions. The holder of an exempt parking permit shall
be exempt from time-based parking restrictions applicable to any
parking stall in any row of parking stalls for which the exempt
parking permit has been issued.
(5) Display of exempt parking permit. A vehicle parked in a row of
parking stalls for which time-based parking restrictions are in
effect shall not be exempt from such time-based parking
restrictions unless the exempt parking permit is displayed in a
manner that is clearly visible through the windshield from the
driver's side of the vehicle.
(D) Reserved parking permit. The chief of police, or his or her designee,
may grant and issue a reserved parking permit authorizing the parking
of a vehicle in any parking stall that is located in a row of parking stalls
for which the council has by resolution authorized issuance of reserved
parking permits, subject to the following:
(1) Fee. The fee for issuance of a reserved parking permit under this
subsection shall be established from time to time by resolution of
the Council.
(2) Conditions or limitations. The reserved parking permit may contain
reasonable restrictions on the time and manner of use if such
restrictions are designed to promote public safety or avoid traffic
congestion. A reserved parking permit authorizes the person to
whom such permit is issued to park a vehicle only in the parking
stall designated in the reserved parking permit.
(3) Term. A reserved parking permit shall be issued for a term not
exceeding one year from the date of issuance.
(4) Exemption of holder of reserved parking permit from time-based
parking restrictions. The holder of a reserved parking permit shall
be exempt from time-based parking restrictions applicable to the
Parking Stall for which the reserved parking permit is issued.
(5) Display of reserved parking permit. A vehicle parked in a parking
stall for which a reserved parking permit has been issued shall not
be lawfully parked in such parking stall unless the reserved parking
permit issued for such parking stall is displayed in a manner that is
clearly visible through the windshield from the driver's side of the
vehicle.
(A) Parking during snow removal operations. It shall be unlawful for the
owner or operator of a vehicle to park or leave parked such vehicle on
that portion of any street in the city where the street department is in
the process of removing snow, when the street is posted with signs to
that effect.
§ 10-2-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 10-2-5
1-1:769
(B) Impound of vehicles hampering snow removal. The street
superintendent or his or her employees, or officers of the police
department, are hereby authorized to remove any vehicle parked in
violation of this section to a public lot or an impound area, or have the
same removed thereto.
(C) Notice to move vehicle. It shall be unlawful to leave any vehicle on any
city street in a manner that would hamper snow removal for more than
one hour after being notified by an authorized representative of the city
that such vehicle is to be moved to another location.
(D) Liability for towing charges. The owner or operator of a vehicle
removed pursuant to the authority granted by this section shall be
liable for towing charges.
(E) Designation of snow removal routes. The following streets, and any
segments of alleys which intersect with any two of the following streets,
are designated snow routes, from which accumulated snowfalls of two
inches or more shall be both plowed and removed:
9th street: from 15th avenue to 18th avenue.
10th street: from 14th avenue to 19th avenue.
11th street: from 14th avenue to 19th avenue.
12th street: from 13th avenue to 20th avenue.
17th street: from 13th avenue to 15th avenue.
14th avenue: from 12th street to 13th street.
15th avenue: from 9th street to 12th street.
16th avenue: from 8th street to 13th street.
17th avenue: from 8th street to 13th street.
18th avenue: from 9th street to 12th street.
(F) Removal of vehicles parked on snow removal route. A motor vehicle
parked on or in the right-of-way of the street or alley designated as a
snow removal route by this section, may be removed at the owner's
expense on order of the street supervisor or his or her assistant, after
an accumulation of two inches or more of snowfall. The one hour notice
required by subsection (C) of this section shall not apply to any vehicle
parked in violation of this subsection.
(G) Warning signs. The superintendent of streets shall post signs along the
sections of the streets affected by this section. The signs shall be
conspicuous in size and color, and shall read: "Snow Route.-No parking
after two inch snowfall or more until removal is complete. Vehicles will
be towed."
§ 10-2-5 MONROE CODE § 10-2-6
1-1:770
§ 10-2-6. Pedestrian safety. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
§ 10-2-7. Unmuffled engine braking prohibited. [2-2-2010; 2016
Code]
No person shall use an unmuffled engine brake within the city.
§ 10-2-8. Penalties. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be as follows:
(A) School bus lights. A school bus operator shall use flashing red warning
lights when loading or unloading passengers at any location not
controlled by a traffic signal, where the passengers must cross the
street before being loaded or after being unloaded and a sidewalk and
curb is laid on both sides of the street.
(B) Pedestrian safety zones. The council, by resolution, may authorize the
establishment of and location of crosswalks, safety zones, loading
zones, bus stops and taxi stands. Upon passage of such resolution so
designating an area as one of the such classifications, the board of
public works shall procure, erect and maintain appropriate, standard,
traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to the rules of the
Wisconsin department of transportation giving notice of the particular
designation of such area and the signs shall be erected in such locations
and areas in such a manner as to give adequate warning to the users of
such location and area of the restriction placed thereon. Signs shall be
placed designating such areas under section 349.13 of the Wisconsin
statutes.
(A) Affirmative defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution
under this section that an unmuffled engine brake was applied in an
emergency and the use of such brake was necessary for the protection
of persons or property.
(B) Authorized emergency vehicles. The operator of an authorized
emergency vehicle shall be exempt from the prohibition in this section.
(A) Violation of statute or administrative code provisions adopted by
reference. The forfeiture for a violation of any provision of the
Wisconsin statutes or the Wisconsin administrative code adopted by
reference in this chapter shall be the same as the forfeiture for such
violation if it were charged under the corresponding section of the
Wisconsin statutes or Wisconsin administrative code, including any
permitted suspension or revocation of driving privilege, demerit points,
and any variations or increases for a second or subsequent offense.
(B) Other violations. The forfeiture for a violation of this chapter, other than
any provision of the Wisconsin statutes or the Wisconsin administrative
code adopted by reference in this chapter, shall be as follows:
§ 10-2-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 10-2-8
1-1:771
§ 10-2-9. Enforcement. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
This chapter shall be enforced under the provisions of sections 345.20
to 345.52 and section 66.0114 of the Wisconsin statutes, and any acts
supplementary or amendatory thereto.
(1) Violations of parking regulations. Forfeiture amounts for violations
of parking regulations shall be established by resolution of the
council.
A) Except as provided in subparagraph (b) hereof, each day that a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
B) A separate violation of the timed parking restrictions
established under section 10-2-3(A) 11 of this chapter shall
exist if following issuance of a citation for a violation of such
timed parking restrictions the vehicle originally cited has not
been moved to a location that is not in violation of such timed
parking restrictions within a period of time that is equal to the
amount of time parking is permitted at such location.
(2) Compounded penalty for parking violations. A forfeiture amount for
any violation of the parking regulations of this chapter shall double
if not paid within 14 days following the date the parking citation
was issued.
(3) Violations of unmuffled braking regulations. Upon conviction for a
violation of section 10-2-7 of this chapter the following penalties
shall apply:
A) A class 4 forfeiture upon conviction for the first offense within
a 12 month period.
B) A class 3 forfeiture upon conviction for the second offense
within a 12 month period.
C) A class 2 forfeiture upon conviction for the third or subsequent
offense within a 12 month period.
(4) Revocation or suspension. In addition to any forfeiture, any
permitted suspension or revocation of driving privilege or other
license or permit, may be imposed as provided in state statutes and
this chapter.
(C) Costs of prosecution. In addition to the forfeiture, a person violating
any provision of this Chapter shall pay the costs of prosecution.
(D) Failure to pay. Any person who fails to pay a penalty imposed by this
chapter shall be subject to the alternate sentencing provisions set forth
in sections 345.47 and 800.09 of the Wisconsin statutes.
(A) Stipulation of guilt or no contest. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may
be made by persons charged with violations of this chapter whenever
§ 10-2-8 MONROE CODE § 10-2-9
1-1:772
Chapter 10-3
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
§ 10-3-1. Purpose. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations that provide
for the safe and enjoyable use of bicycles, and to establish designated
bicycle routes within the city, consistent with public rights and interest.
§ 10-3-2. State statutes adopted. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions
in chapters 340 to 348 of the Wisconsin statutes describing and defining
regulations with respect to bicycles, exclusive of any provisions relating
to penalties to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the
statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment, are hereby adopted and
by reference made a part of this chapter.
§ 10-3-3. Bicycle regulations. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
the provisions of section 345.27 are inapplicable to such violations.
Stipulations shall conform to the form contained on the uniform traffic
citation and complaint under section 345.11 of the Wisconsin statutes.
(B) Deposit for parking violations. Any person stipulating guilt or no
contest to a parking violation may make a deposit in an amount
established from time to time by the chief of police and approved by the
council. Deposits may be brought or mailed to the police department. If
the deposit is received by the police department within seven days
following issuance of the parking citation, the deposit shall constitute
the entire penalty and the matter shall not be prosecuted in the circuit
court and court costs and assessments shall not be added to the penalty.
(C) Deposit for other than parking violations. Any person stipulating guilt
or no contest may make a deposit under section 345.26, Wisconsin
statutes, or, if the deposit is not established under such statute, shall
deposit a penalty as provided in the schedule established by the chief of
police and approved by the council. Deposits may be brought or mailed
to the police department or the office of the clerk of circuit court.
(D) Receipt. Every officer accepting a deposit under this chapter shall
prepare a receipt as provided in section 345.26(3)(b) of the Wisconsin
statutes.
(E) Forfeitures in treasury. The police department shall forward deposits or
forfeited penalties to the city treasurer or clerk of courts within 20 days
of receipt.
(A) Rules for operation.
§ 10-2-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 10-3-3
1-1:773
(1) Mode of operation. No bicycle shall be allowed to proceed upon any
street or alley in the city by inertia or momentum with the feet of
the rider removed from the bicycle pedals. No rider of a bicycle
shall remove both hands from the handlebars or practice any trick
or fancy riding in any street or alley in the city.
(2) Trick riding. No person shall operate a bicycle upon any street or
alley of the city without having manual control of the handlebars or
operate a bicycle in any other manner which necessitates the
element of unusual extraordinary skill and involves unnecessary
risk.
(3) Multiple riders. It shall be unlawful for two or more persons to ride
on a bicycle at one time on a street or alley, unless the bicycle is
designed for and equipped with a seat for each such person.
(4) Emerging from alley or driveway. The operator of a bicycle
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall upon
approaching a sidewalk, or the point in an alley or driveway
corresponding to the projected edge of the sidewalk on either side
of such alley or driveway that is furthest from the street, yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians and upon entering the street shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such street.
(5) Bicycles not to be pulled by moving vehicles. No person riding upon
a bicycle shall cling or attach himself or herself or his or her bicycle
to any other moving vehicle upon a street or alley.
(6) Bicycles not to tow or draw other objects. No person riding upon a
bicycle shall tow or draw any coaster wagon, sled, person on roller
skates, toy vehicles or any other similar vehicle on such street or
alley, except a trailer that is designed for transporting a child or
children or property if such trailer is designed to be used for such
purpose and is securely attached to the bicycle by mechanical
means.
(7) Speed. No person shall operate a bicycle on a street or alley at a
speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under then- existing
conditions or in the excess of any posted speed limit.
(8) Bicycles to stop for emergency vehicles. The operator of a bicycle
shall pull as close to the curb as possible or if there is no curb upon
the shoulder of any street and stop when any authorized
emergency vehicle approaches with siren or emergency lights
engaged.
(B) Rules for turning.
(1) Right turn. The operator of a bicycle upon a street intending to turn
to the right at an intersection shall approach the point of turning in
the traffic lane nearest the right-hand edge or curb of the street,
§ 10-3-3 MONROE CODE § 10-3-3
1-1:774
§ 10-3-4. Inspection and registration of bicycles. [2-2-2010; 2016
Code]
and in turning, shall keep as closely as practicable to the right-hand
edge or curb of the street.
(2) Left turn. The operator of a bicycle upon a street intending to turn
to the left at an intersection or into a private driveway shall first
signal such turn by hand gesture or an appropriate mechanical or
electronic signal device, and shall make such turn from the traffic
lane immediately to the right of the center of the street and shall
pass immediately to the left of the center of the intersection.
(3) Controlled Intersections. At any intersection with a street where
traffic is controlled by an official traffic sign, traffic control signal
or traffic officer, it shall be unlawful for the operator of a bicycle
upon a street to disobey such official traffic sign or signal or the
instructions of such traffic officer.
(4) Use of crosswalks. Crosswalks shall be used when walking a
bicycle through an intersection.
(C) Riding on sidewalk.
(1) It shall be unlawful to operate a bicycle on any sidewalk located
within the area which is bounded by 9th street on the north, 13th
street on the south, 15th avenue on the west and 18th avenue on
the east. Bicycles may be operated upon any other public sidewalks
of the city.
(2) In locations where riding a bicycle is permitted on the sidewalk,
every person operating a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall exercise due care and give
an audible signal when passing a bicycle rider or pedestrian
proceeding in the same direction.
(D) Parking. No person shall leave a bicycle at such a place or in such a way
as to create a hazard to pedestrians, automobile operators or to anyone
else. Bicycles shall be parked either upon a street against the curb, in
bicycle racks or, if on the sidewalk, in such a manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic, and not in such a manner as to
obstruct the ingress and egress to buildings used by the public. If there
is no bicycle rack or other facility intended to be used for the parking of
bicycles in the vicinity, the operator may park a bicycle on the sidewalk
in an upright position parallel to and within 24 inches of the curb of a
street.
(A) Registration required. No person shall operate a bicycle upon any
street, alley, bicycle lane, sidewalk, public property or bicycle pathway
within the city unless such bicycle shall first have been properly
registered and a bicycle identification tag attached as required by this
section.
§ 10-3-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 10-3-4
1-1:775
(B) Form of registration.
(1) Identification. Every owner of a bicycle shall list and register his or
her bicycle with the police department on a form as provided by the
department.
(2) Period of registration. All bicycle registrations shall remain in
effect for as long as the bicycle is owned by the original registrant.
(3) Owner to register. The police department shall not register any
bicycle which it knows or has reasonable grounds to believe is not
owned by or lawfully in the possession of the applicant.
(4) Issuance of multiple bicycle identification tags. The police
department may issue several sequentially numbered bicycle
identification tags to bicycle sales stores in the city. Those stores
shall affix bicycle identification tags to bicycles as they are sold.
(C) Registration fee. The fee for issuance of a bicycle identification tag shall
be set by resolution of the council.
(D) Records and transmittal of fees.
(1) The police department shall keep at its office a suitable record of
applications and registrations.
(2) A complete report shall be made to the city treasurer by the chief of
police, or his or her designee, of funds received for bicycle
registration fees, and all such fees shall be paid to the city
treasurer for deposit as city revenues.
(E) Bicycles to be kept in safe condition. All bicycles shall be kept in safe
mechanical condition. The chief of police, or his or her designee, shall
have authority to suspend the registration of and remove the bicycle
identification tag from any bicycle or to impound any bicycle which is in
unsafe mechanical condition or is operated contrary to any state or city
law. Such suspension and removal, or impounding shall continue for a
period not to exceed 10 days, but the registration shall not be
reinstated or such bicycle identification tag replaced if such bicycle is in
unsafe condition. Such suspension and removal shall be in addition to
other penalties provided by this chapter.
(F) Change of ownership. Within 10 days after any bicycle registered
hereunder shall have changed ownership or been dismantled and taken
out of operation such information shall be reported to the police
department by the person in whose name the bicycle has been
registered. No new bicycle identification tag shall be issued and no
registration fee shall be charged when ownership of a bicycle is
transferred to a member of the registrant's immediate family.
(G) Registration to be displayed. The bicycle identification tag issued under
this section shall be affixed to the registered bicycle so as to be plainly
seen and read and shall remain so affixed until ordered removed by the
§ 10-3-4 MONROE CODE § 10-3-4
1-1:776
§ 10-3-5. Bicycle dealers and rental agencies. [2-2-2010; 2016
Code]
§ 10-3-6. Vehicles permitted to be operated on bicycle route.
[2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
Any of the following vehicles may be operated on a bicycle route:
police department for cause. The bicycle identification tag shall be
installed on the frame of the bicycle which supports the bicycle seat,
facing toward the front of the bicycle.
(H) Exemption from registration. Any nonresident may operate a bicycle in
the city which is registered in any other municipality without obtaining
local registration if a valid bicycle identification tag issued by such
other municipality is attached thereto.
(I) Removal and alteration of bicycle identification tags prohibited.
(1) Removal prohibited. No person shall remove a bicycle identification
tag from a bicycle.
(2) Alteration prohibited. No person shall alter or counterfeit any
bicycle identification tag.
(A) Buyers. Every person engaged in the business of buying secondhand
bicycles shall make a monthly report to the police department listing
the name and address of the person from whom each bicycle is
purchased, the name, color, type, size and serial number of each bicycle
purchased and the number of the bicycle identification tag, if any, found
thereon.
(B) Sellers. Every person engaged in the business of selling new or
secondhand bicycles shall make a monthly report to the police
department listing the name and address of each person to whom each
bicycle is sold, the name, color, type, size and serial number of each
bicycle sold and the number of the bicycle identification tag, if any,
attached thereto.
(C) Rental agencies. No person shall rent or offer to rent any bicycle within
the city if such bicycle is not registered, a bicycle identification tag has
not been attached, as provided in this chapter, or such bicycle is not
equipped as required by the laws of the state of Wisconsin and this
chapter.
(A) A bicycle.
(B) Any vehicle upon which there is affixed a valid cheese country trail use
sticker, except a snowmobile.
(C) If the bicycle route is also a street or alley, any other vehicle that may be
lawfully operated on such street or alley.
§ 10-3-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 10-3-7
1-1:777
§ 10-3-7. Penalty. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction
be subject to a Class 5 forfeiture.
Chapter 10-4
PLAY VEHICLES REGULATIONS
§ 10-4-1. Declaration of purpose. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
The council finds that unregulated operation of play vehicles on public
streets, sidewalks, parking lots and other public areas is a hazard both to
the public and to individuals operating such play vehicles because such
operation tends to conflict with efficient and safe vehicular and pedestrian
use of such areas. The council further finds that unregulated operation of
play vehicles on private property without permission from the owner of
such property is an infringement upon private property rights and leads
to confrontations between property owners and persons riding such play
vehicles.
§ 10-4-2. State statutes adopted. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions
in chapters 340 to 348 of the Wisconsin statutes, describing and defining
regulations with respect to play vehicles, exclusive of any provisions
relating to penalties to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for
which the statutory penalty is a fine or term of imprisonment, are hereby
adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter.
§ 10-4-3. Play vehicles regulated. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
(A) Riding on sidewalks regulated. No person may ride a play vehicle on a
sidewalk within that part of the city which is bounded by 9th street on
the north, 13th street on the south, 15th avenue on the west and 18th
avenue on the east. A person may ride a play vehicle upon a sidewalk in
any other part of the city, provided, such person shall yield the right of
way to any pedestrian lawfully using such sidewalk.
(B) Riding on streets and parking lots prohibited. No person shall ride a
play vehicle on any street or public parking lot within the city unless a
permit therefor shall have been granted by the council or by any
committee, board or commission authorized to grant such permit by
resolution of the council.
(C) Riding on private property prohibited. No person shall ride a play
vehicle on any private property or property owned by a public entity
other than the city, unless written permission shall have been granted
therefor by the owner of such property.
§ 10-3-7 MONROE CODE § 10-4-3
1-1:778
§ 10-4-4. Penalty. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction
be subject to a Class 5 forfeiture.
Chapter 10-5
USE AND OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES
§ 10-5-1. Snowmobile trails and routes within the city. [2-2-2010;
2016 Code]
Except as provided in sections 350.02 and 350.045 of the Wisconsin
statutes, or for snowmobile events authorized under section 350.04 of the
Wisconsin statutes, no person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public
right of way, in any public park, or on any other public property in the city,
except on routes or trails designated by resolution of the council and in
accord with the regulations of this chapter.
§ 10-5-2. Procedure to amend snowmobile routes and trails.
[2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
The approved routes and trails may be amended or revised as necessary
by approval of the public safety committee and upon authorization of the
council by resolution.
§ 10-5-3. Sign posting responsibility. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
The council shall by resolution designate from time to time a responsible
party to post and obtain property owner consent to post the approved routes
and trails.
§ 10-5-4. Parking regulated. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
No person shall park or leave unattended any snowmobile on private
property without the consent of the owner, nor shall any snowmobile be
(D) Riding in swiss A.L.P.S. cheeseland playground prohibited. No person
may ride a play vehicle within that part of recreation park which is
enclosed by a fence and designated as the swiss A.L.P.S. cheeseland
playground.
(E) In-line skates. No person shall ride upon in-line skates on the streets of
that part of the city which is bounded by 9th street on the north, 13th
street on the south, 15th avenue on the west and 18th avenue on the
east. No person shall ride upon in-line skates on any private property or
property owned by a public entity, other than permitted streets and
sidewalks, unless written permission shall have been granted therefor
by the owner of such property. Every person riding upon in-line skates
on any permitted sidewalk or street shall yield the right of way to any
pedestrian or vehicle lawfully using such sidewalk or street.
§ 10-4-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 10-5-4
1-1:779
left parked unattended in any area where parking of a motor vehicle is
prohibited or restricted, except in compliance with any regulations
applicable to motor vehicles parked in such location.
§ 10-5-5. Compliance with trail and route signs and markers.
[2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
No person shall fail to obey any route or trail sign, marker or limit erected
under this chapter or the Wisconsin statutes.
§ 10-5-6. Hours of operation. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
No person shall operate a snowmobile within the city, except during the
period commencing at 6:00 AM and ending at 1:00 AM on the following day.
§ 10-5-7. Insurance responsibility. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
The council shall by resolution designate a responsible party to carry
liability insurance on the snowmobile routes and trails with the city
designated as an additional named insured.
§ 10-5-8. Penalty. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 4 forfeiture.
Chapter 10-6
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
§ 10-6-1. Purpose. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code; amended 11-18-2019]
The purpose of this chapter is to enable the establishment of all-terrain
vehicle, utility terrain vehicle and other off-road vehicle routes in the City
and provide safe and enjoyable vehicle recreation consistent with public
rights and interest.
§ 10-6-2. State statutes adopted. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code; amended
11-18-2019]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of section 23.33
of the Wisconsin Statutes and for which the penalty for violation thereof is a
forfeiture, are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter.
§ 10-6-3. Designated routes. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code; amended
11-18-2019]
No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle, utility terrain vehicle or
other off-road vehicle except on routes designated from time to time by
resolution of the council. Each designated route shall be appropriately and
conspicuously marked with route, speed limit, stop and directional signs
§ 10-5-4 MONROE CODE § 10-6-3
1-1:780
at the beginning of the route and at such intervals as necessary to enable
operators to follow the route.
§ 10-6-4. Rules of operation. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code; amended
11-18-2019]
No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle at a
speed exceeding 25 miles per hour, unless a different limit is indicated by
official signs posted on a designated route. The operator of an all-terrain
vehicle or utility terrain vehicle shall drive at all times in single file on the
extreme right side of the designated route and shall yield to pedestrians and
all other forms of vehicular traffic.
§ 10-6-5. Hours of operation. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code; amended
11-18-2019]
No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle within
the City, except during the period commencing at 6:00 a.m. and ending at
1:00 a.m. on the following day.
§ 10-6-6. Penalty. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code; amended 11-18-2019]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction
be subject to a Class 2 forfeiture.
Chapter 10-7
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES
§ 10-7-1. Purpose. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
The purpose of this chapter is to enable the operation of neighborhood
electric vehicles in the city.
§ 10-7-2. Equipment and safety devices. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
A neighborhood electric vehicle operated in the city shall be equipped with:
(A) Headlamps.
(B) Front and rear turn signal lamps.
(C) Tail lamps.
(D) Stop lamps.
(E) Reflex reflectors: one red on each side as far to the rear as practicable,
and one red on the rear.
(F) An exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side of the vehicle and either
an exterior mirror mounted on the passenger's side of the vehicle or an
interior mirror.
§ 10-6-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 10-7-2
1-1:781
§ 10-7-3. License and registration required. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
No person shall operate a neighborhood electric vehicle in the city unless
such person possesses a valid operator's license authorizing the operation
of a motor vehicle upon Wisconsin highways. No neighborhood electric
vehicle may be operated in the city unless such vehicle has been assigned a
VIN and is properly registered under the laws of this state.
§ 10-7-4. Routes of travel. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
It shall be unlawful to operate a neighborhood electric vehicle in the city
except on a neighborhood electric vehicle route.
§ 10-7-5. Rules of operation. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
Headlamps must be on at all times during operation of a neighborhood
electric vehicle. The operator of a neighborhood electric vehicle shall be
subject to, and shall comply with, all laws applicable to the operators of
motor vehicles on public highways.
§ 10-7-6. Penalties. [2-2-2010; 2016 Code]
Title 11, Public Ways and Property
Chapter 11-1
STREETS, ALLEYS AND SIDEWALKS
(G) A parking brake.
(H) A windshield that conforms to the Federal motor vehicle safety
standard on glazing materials (49 CFR 571.205).
(I) A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly, conforming to 49 CFR § 571.209
(federal motor, vehicle safety standard no. 209, seat belt assemblies),
installed at each designated seating position.
(A) The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be the same as the penalty
for the same violation committed in the operation of a motor vehicle,
other than a neighborhood electric vehicle, provided however, the
penalty for a violation of this chapter that would not also be a violation
if committed in the operation of a motor vehicle other than a
neighborhood electric vehicle, shall be a class 3 forfeiture and the costs
of prosecution.
(B) Failure to pay. Any person who fails to pay a forfeiture imposed by this
chapter shall be subject to the alternate sentencing provisions set forth
in sections 345.47 and 800.09 of the Wisconsin statutes.
§ 10-7-2 MONROE CODE § 11-1-1
1-1:782
§ 11-1-1. Improvements; plans and specifications. [1969 Code;
5-15-1990; 11-6-1991; 2016 Code]
All streets and alleys shall be opened, graded, changed, graveled,
macadamized, paved, worked or improved, and all sidewalks shall be built
and constructed, or rebuilt and all sewers and drains in public streets, alleys
and public grounds, all bridges and all other public works, in any streets,
sidewalks or other public grounds, shall be built, constructed, erected,
or completed according to the plans and specifications therefor adopted,
which plans and specifications shall be kept on file in the office of the city
clerk or city engineer. Such work shall be done in the manner and of the
materials in such specifications prescribed and not otherwise. No bids or
proposals for the doing or performing of any of the work mentioned shall
be called for, nor any contract therefor let or awarded, nor work thereon
commenced until such plans and specifications have been adopted by the
council and filed in the office of the city clerk, for inspection by any person
concerned.
§ 11-1-2. Permits required. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
It shall be unlawful for any person, except upon a permit:
(A) To excavate for and build, or cause to be excavated for and built, a
cellar, vault or other room under a sidewalk or street in front of his or
her store or place of business.
(B) To excavate or cause to be excavated a cellar, cistern, well, hole or
other depression, on or so near the line of a street, sidewalk, alley or
other public ground within the city, as to endanger the public use
thereof, or of life or limb of persons passing thereover.
(C) To excavate for or build, or cause to be excavated for or built, a
passageway, trench, drain or sewer, within, along or near such street,
sidewalk, alley, park or other public grounds.
(D) To erect, construct, place or maintain, or cause to be erected,
constructed, placed or maintained any telephone or electric light pole
or poles, or any scaffold, platform, bay window, awning or other
extension of a building, or any billboard, sign, illuminated signboard or
other advertising device, any rope, wire or chain within or over any
street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public ground within the city.
(E) To build any stairway or entrance from a sidewalk or street into a
basement or cellar adjoining or within any street, park or other public
ground within the city.
(F) To build or cause to be built, or allow to exist, any area, hole or opening
within any sidewalk space.
(G) To remove or cause to be removed any building upon, within, along,
over or across any street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public ground
within the city.
§ 11-1-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-1-2
1-1:783
§ 11-1-3. Application for permit. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
Every person applying for a written permit for any of the purposes of work
required in section 11-1-2 of this chapter shall present to the board of public
works his or her application in writing, with such plans and specifications as
may be required by the board of public works, signed by himself or herself,
or his or her authorized agent, and state his or her name and place of
residence, the purpose of the work for which such permit is desired, the
time to begin and complete the work and the location thereof, and shall also
contain an agreement on his or her part that if a permit is granted, he or
she will conform to and comply with all codes, rules and regulations of the
city pertaining to the work or purpose for which a permit is asked, and that
he or she will pay all damages caused by him, his or her agents, employees
or servants in the doing or execution of the work for which the permit may
be granted, and that he or she will keep and save the city free and harmless
(H) To build or repair any building next to and adjoining any street,
sidewalk, or alley where material may be placed or work performed
within such street or sidewalk.
(I) To use any street, sidewalk, park or other public ground for the deposit
of building materials, or the doing of any work or labor within the same,
in the moving, taking down, raising, erection and construction of any
building.
(J) To break, dig up, remove or in any way displace, or cause to be broken,
dug up, removed or in any way displaced, any pavement, macadam,
gravel or earth within any street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public
grounds, which might otherwise be lawfully done.
(K) To remove any trees along any street or sidewalk.
(L) To alter or change, or cause to be altered or changed, the grade of any
street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public grounds within the city.
(M) To interfere with, break down or remove, or cause to be interfered with,
broken down or removed, any guard protection, barrier or barricade
placed in any street, sidewalk, alley or other public ground as a
protection of the city against damages to the traveling public against
injury, or any work or improvement against damages.
(N) To keep or leave open any cellar door or grating of any vault in any
street or sidewalk, or to allow the same to be left open, nor shall any
excavation adjacent to any street or sidewalk be left open.
(O) To place in or over any gutter any material or object of any nature which
may obstruct the flow of water therein.
(P) To propel any cart or vehicle, pushed or pulled by hand, on any sidewalk
in the city, except carriages, carts and sleighs for small children and
single passenger handicapped vehicles occupied by a handicapped
person.
§ 11-1-2 MONROE CODE § 11-1-3
1-1:784
of any damages or claims against it by reason of failure, fault or neglect
by himself, his or her agents, servants or employees in the execution of
the work for which such permit is granted. He or she shall also satisfy the
board, if it be required so to do, that he or she is financially able to pay
any damages or claims to which he or she may become liable under such an
agreement, or that he or she will file with the city clerk a sufficient bond for
such purpose approved by the mayor in writing before the permit is issued.
§ 11-1-4. Issuance of permit. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
No permit under this chapter shall be issued, except on the vote and the
direction of the board of public works upon the application required by
Section 11-1-3 of this chapter and on the terms and conditions by such vote
fixed, and when so voted and directed, it shall be issued by the city clerk in
duplicate over his or her signature, stating the date of issue, the name and
address of the person to whom issued and the work or purpose for which
issued, the time within which the work is to be completed and the date on
which the permit will expire, and such further terms and conditions as the
board of public works may have fixed. Such permit shall be subject to all
the codes, rules and regulations of the city relative to the subject of such
permit, and one such duplicate original shall be delivered to the applicant
or his or her agent, and one such duplicate original shall be attached to
the application and kept on file by the city clerk; provided, however, that all
permits shall be subject to the review of the council.
§ 11-1-5. Warning signs, barricades required. [1969 Code; 2016
Code]
Every person to whom a permit shall be granted to build, repair or remove
any building, or to use any street or sidewalk for the deposit of building
materials, shall enclosed or cause to be enclosed on all sides, within or
exposed to a public street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place,
any obstruction, excavation, cellar, vault, coal bin or other room, well,
cistern, hole or other depression, passageway, trench, drain, sewer, open
area, opening, building, building material, broken up sidewalk, pavement,
macadam, gravel, earth or other obstruction, within or adjoining any street,
sidewalk, alley, park or other public ground within the city, by guards,
fences or barriers, at least three feet high and at night a red light or lights
shall be placed and kept, so as to cast a light on such obstruction, and if of
any excavation, trench, drain, sewer, cellar, vault, cistern, well, open area or
other opening, a red light shall be placed and kept at each end and as often
as every 50 feet along the entire side or length thereof. And such person
shall replace, rebuild, relay or make, or cause to be replaced, rebuilt, relaid,
or made, in all respects as good and safe, substantial and permanent as the
same was before any street, sidewalk, crosswalk, alley, park or other public
ground which may have been disturbed or displaced by such excavation,
trench or obstruction.
§ 11-1-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-1-6
1-1:785
§ 11-1-6. Bridges or platforms in right of way. [1969 Code; 2016
Code]
No bridge or platform over any gutter in any street or alley within the city
shall be more than 12 feet in width, or if plank, less than two inches thick
resting on and securely nailed to four stringers at least four inches square
and such bridge or platform shall not extend into any street more than
18 inches beyond the space occupied by a sidewalk, nor obstruct the flow
of water in the gutter, and any such bridge or platform, or any culvert or
box, or any obstruction to the flow of water in the gutter may be removed
summarily by any agent of the city; provided, that no bridge, platform or
gutter shall be placed on any street or alley that is improved by pavement,
macadam or gravel, with stone or concrete curbings, without a permit from
the city.
§ 11-1-7. Obstructions and encroachments. [1-15-2002; 2016 Code;
6-5-2018]
§ 11-1-8. Installation of public utility facilities. [1969 Code;
12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
(A) Obstructions and encroachments prohibited. No person shall encroach
upon or in any way obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk,
public grounds or land dedicated to public use, or any part thereof, or
permit such encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on
any public way adjoining the premises of which he or she is the owner
or occupant, except as provided in Subsection (B) of this section.
(B) Exceptions. The prohibition of the preceding Subsection (A) shall not
apply to the following:
(1) City employees acting in their scope of employment.
(2) Public utility encroachments duly authorized by state law or this
Code.
(3) Awnings, signs, other projections over sidewalks that are installed
and maintained in accordance with this Code and authorized by
permit.
(4) Temporary encroachments or obstructions authorized by permit or
as otherwise authorized by this Code.
(5) Commencing no sooner than 12:00 midnight prior to an approved
parade, chairs, ropes, blankets or other items may be placed on
public boulevards, public sidewalks or public rights-of-way on
designated parade routes as long as such items do not interfere
with such parade or are deemed to be a public safety hazard by the
police chief or other designed law enforcement officer. Such items
shall be removed immediately following such parade.
(A) Poles erected; subject to regulations and alterations.
§ 11-1-6 MONROE CODE § 11-1-8
1-1:786
(1) The city shall have the right at any time to designate the location of
all telephone, telegraph and electric light poles erected on or in the
public streets and alleys. The city may periodically direct any
alteration in the location and height of such poles, and the height of
all wires that are run on such poles.
(2) Before any alteration is made under this section, at least five days'
notice in writing shall be given the owner of the poles, and
reasonable opportunity shall be given the owner and all citizens to
be heard on the proposed alteration.
(3) When any such alterations are ordered, the owner of such poles
shall, at its sole expense, commence alteration within five days, and
shall complete the alteration as soon as practicable.
(4) If the owner of such poles does not complete the alteration within a
reasonable time after notification of the required alteration, the
city may perform the required work.
(5) If the city performs the alteration under subsection (A)(4) of this
section, the owner of the poles shall be liable for the cost of such
alteration, and shall also be subject to a class 3 forfeiture.
(B) Laying of sewers, water mains and gas mains.
(1) Sewer mains. When laying of sewer mains in the public streets of
the city, lateral mains shall be constructed and laid from the sewer
main to the curb line of all adjoining improved parcels and
improved lots abutting on that part of the street where the sewer
main is laid and the cost of the construction of lateral mains shall
be charged to the owner or owners of abutting parcels and lots;
provided, that if the street where a sewer main is laid is to be
permanently improved, lateral mains shall be laid to all parcels and
lots adjoining such street.
(2) Water mains. When laying water mains in the public streets of the
city, lateral mains shall be constructed and laid from the water
main to the curb line of all adjoining improved parcels and
improved lots abutting on that part of the street where the water
main is laid and the cost of the construction of lateral mains shall
be charged to the owner or owners of abutting parcels and lots;
provided, that if the street where a water main is laid is to be
permanently improved, lateral mains shall be laid to all parcels and
lots adjoining such street.
(3) Gas mains. When laying gas pipe or mains in the public streets of
the city, lateral mains shall be constructed and laid from the gas
mains or lines to all improved lots and improved parcels of land
abutting on that part of the street where the gas lines or mains are
laid and the cost of the construction of lateral mains shall be borne
by the gas company so constructing the mains; provided, that if the
street where the gas mains is laid is to be permanently improved,
§ 11-1-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-1-8
1-1:787
§ 11-1-9. Construction and repair of sidewalks. [3-15-1994;
11-5-2014; 2016 Code]
laterals shall be laid to all parcels of land and lots adjoining such
street.
(C) Installation and maintenance of underground telecommunication
conduits.
(1) Telecommunication conduit. Providers of telecommunication
services are hereby are authorized to install and permanently
maintain necessary underground conduit and manholes at
locations within streets, avenues and alleys in the city in locations
approved by the board of public works. During installation such
providers shall not unnecessarily obstruct any streets, avenues,
alleys or public grounds and shall suitably barricade and protect
that part of the street, avenue or alley where the work is being
done, and shall close off no portion of streets, avenues or alleys
without first having received a permit from the city. Such providers
shall complete all installation work as speedily as possible and shall
repair and make good any water or sewer pipes previously laid that
are damaged or destroyed during such installation. Following such
installation such providers shall restore said streets and alleys
under direction of the board of public works; shall further.
(2) Installations before December 31, 2015. All underground
telecommunication conduit and manhole installations that have
been lawfully placed prior to December 31, 2015 are hereby
approved.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the installation or
repair of sidewalks throughout the city to provide safe off street paths
for pedestrians on all public street frontage within the city.
(B) Mandatory installation. Sidewalks shall be constructed in the city as
follows:
(1) Sidewalk shall be installed where curb and gutter are installed
during the reconstruction of any street.
(2) Sidewalk shall be installed before issuance of any occupancy
permit issued for new construction or change in use. For purposes
of this subsection (B)(2), construction of an addition, garage, shed
or other improvement on a residential lot which there is located a
previously constructed residence does not constitute "new
construction."
(3) In addition to the installation or repair of sidewalk as provided in
subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section, the council shall from
time to time by resolution determine where other new sidewalks
shall be installed.
§ 11-1-8 MONROE CODE § 11-1-9
1-1:788
(C) Board of public works. The board of public works may order any
sidewalk which is unsafe, defective or insufficient to be repaired or
removed and replaced with a sidewalk in accord with the standards
fixed by the council.
(D) Exceptions to mandatory installation.
(1) A person may, by filing a petition with the plan commission, request
an exception to the requirement for installation of sidewalk for an
engineering consideration which renders the installation of
sidewalk on a particular property unreasonable.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (D)(1) of this section, a person who
owns real property located within the M-1, M-2 or M-3 zoning
districts may, by filing a petition with the plan commission, request
an exception to the requirement for installation of sidewalk within
the public right-of-way of any street or avenue, on the side of such
right-of-way that directly abuts such real property. The petitioner
shall not be required to show an engineering consideration which
renders the installation of sidewalk on the petitioner's property
unreasonable, but the plan commission may consider other thenexisting
or planned uses outside the petitioner's property that
generate, or may in the future generate, pedestrian traffic on the
segment of sidewalk for which the exception is requested and may
deny or condition approval of the exception accordingly. An
exception granted pursuant to this subsection may be for a limited
time or made subject to such other terms or conditions as the plan
commission may determine.
(3) The plan commission shall hear and decide each petition
requesting an exception to the installation of sidewalk.
(4) If a petition under this subsection is denied, the petitioner may file
a written notice of appeal upon the city clerk within 10 days
following the date the plan commission makes its decision. If the
city administrator objects to the granting of a petition under this
subsection, the city administrator may file a written notice of
appeal upon the city clerk within 10 days following the date the
plan commission makes its decision. The city clerk shall forward
the notice of appeal to the council, which shall consider such
appeal within 30 days following receipt of the notice of appeal. The
council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the plan
commission.
(E) Construction standards. The common council shall by resolution
establish the width, fix the grade, determine the material and prescribe
the method of construction of standard sidewalks throughout the city.
The board of public works, plan commission, director of public works
and city engineering department shall make such recommendations
and presentations as may be requested by the common council in
making any such resolution.
§ 11-1-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-1-9
1-1:789
§ 11-1-10. Sidewalk maintenance. [12-17-1991; 11-18-2003; 2016
Code]
(F) Permit, self-repair agreement.
(1) Any person other than the city seeking to repair sidewalk or
remove and replace sidewalk shall first submit an application for
permit as provided in section 11-1-3 of this chapter.
(2) In addition to the permit required in subsection (F)(1) of this
section, any person other than the city seeking to repair sidewalk
or remove and replace sidewalk shall first submit a sidewalk selfrepair
agreement to the city engineering department. Sidewalk
self-repair agreement forms shall be available upon request from
the city engineering department.
(3) Upon issuance of a permit and approval of the self-repair
agreement, a person may repair sidewalk or repair and replace
sidewalk.
(G) Payment for repair or construction. Payment for repair or construction
of sidewalk shall be charged as provided in section 66.0907 of the
Wisconsin statutes.
(A) Every person shall remove all snow, ice, dirt, rubbish or refuse material
from the sidewalk in front of or immediately adjacent to the premises
owned or occupied by him.
(1) Removal of snow, ice, dirt, rubbish or refuse material shall be
completed within a reasonable time after the accumulation of such
materials on the sidewalk.
(2) Ice or snow that cannot be removed shall be sprinkled with ashes,
sand, salt or other substance to allow safe pedestrian use.
(3) If the person responsible for removal of materials from the
sidewalk fails to remove such materials within a reasonable time,
the city shall be entitled to remove such material from the
sidewalk. Costs incurred by the city shall be billed to the owner of
the property to which the sidewalk adjoins. If such costs are not
paid, such charges shall be entered on the tax roll as a special tax
against the property, and shall be collected as other taxes upon real
estate.
(B) Unless otherwise permitted by law, no person shall cause to be
deposited any snow, slush, ice, dirt, debris, rubbish or refuse material of
any type or nature, on or upon any public or private property not owned
or occupied by such person or without the consent of the owner or
occupant thereof.
(1) This subsection (B) shall not apply to city employees or other
agents of the city acting within the scope of their duties.
§ 11-1-9 MONROE CODE § 11-1-10
1-1:790
§ 11-1-11. Awnings, signs and other projections over sidewalks.
[1-15-2002; 4-8-2015; 2016 Code]
(2) This subsection (B) shall not prevent the deposit of snow and ice
from a private residence upon the terrace immediately adjoining
the sidewalk of such private residence.
(3) Snow, slush, ice, dirt, debris, rubbish or refuse material of any type
or nature, deposited in violation of this subsection (B) is declared to
be a public nuisance and in addition to any penalty provided, the
city may abate the public nuisance by removing any snow, slush,
ice, dirt, debris, rubbish or refuse material of whatever type or
nature, and cause the cost of the removal to be charged to the
person who deposited or caused the deposit in violation of this
subsection (B). If such costs are not paid, such charges shall be
entered on the tax roll as a special tax against the property, and
shall be collected as other taxes upon real estate.
(C) In addition to any charges for services made under this section, any
person who violates any provision of this section shall upon conviction
be subject to a Class 5 forfeiture. A separate offense exists each
calendar day during which a violation occurs or continues.
(A) Definitions. In this section:
AWNING — Means a roof like structure which projects beyond the lot
line, over a public sidewalk, and is fastened to a wall of a building or to
a support fastened to a wall of a building.
AWNING SIGN — Means an identification sign painted on or affixed
flat to the surface of an awning and which does not extend vertically or
horizontally from the awning.
NONPROJECTING AWNING — Means an awning which projects four
inches or less beyond the lot line.
NONPROJECTING SIGN — Means a sign projecting four inches or less
beyond the lot line, over a public sidewalk, and is fastened to a wall of
a building or to a support fastened to a wall of a building.
PROJECTING AWNING — Means an awning which projects more than
four inches beyond the lot line.
PROJECTING SIGN — Means a sign, other than an awning sign,
projecting more than four inches beyond the lot line, over a public
sidewalk, and is fastened to a wall of a building or to a support fastened
to a wall of a building.
SIGN — Means any medium, including its structure, words, letters,
figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs,
trade names, or trademarks, by which anything is made known and
which is used to advertise or promote an individual, firm, association,
company, profession, business, commodity, event or product.
§ 11-1-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-1-11
1-1:791
§ 11-1-12. Protection of public. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
(B) Projecting awnings. No person shall place, hang or maintain any
projecting awning or cause the same to be placed, hung or maintained
unless the distance from any point on such projecting awning to the
public sidewalk is seven feet or more and the person has obtained a
written permit issued following approval of such projecting awning by
the board of public works.
(C) Projecting signs. No person shall place, hang or maintain any projecting
sign or cause the same to be placed, hung or maintained unless the
distance from the bottom of such projecting sign to the public sidewalk
is 8 1/2 feet or more and the person has obtained a written permit
issued following approval of such projecting sign by the board of public
works.
(D) Nonprojecting awnings and signs. No person shall place, hang or
maintain any nonprojecting awning or nonprojecting sign or cause the
same to be placed, hung or maintained unless the person has obtained a
written permit issued following approval of such nonprojecting awning
or nonprojecting sign by the board of public works.
(E) Other structures. No porch, gallery, store, platform, entrance to
basement, fire escapes, heating or air conditioning units, downspout,
railing or grating shall be allowed to extend into, upon or over any
public sidewalk without the written permit issued following approval
thereof by the board of public works.
(F) Conditions for issuance of permit. The board of public works may, as a
condition of the issuance of a permit under this section, require that a
projecting awning, nonprojecting awning, projecting sign,
nonprojecting sign or other structure be limited in size, installed at a
height greater than the minimum set forth in this section or impose
other conditions which are reasonably designed to protect public safety
or promote an aesthetic image which is consistent with adjoining
properties.
(G) Other approvals. Issuance of a permit pursuant to this section shall not
relieve the person to whom such permit is issued from obtaining other
permits and approvals required by the city or other governmental
authority having jurisdiction.
(A) Every person owning any building in the city having any area between
the building and sidewalk or extending into the sidewalk shall keep the
same covered by a closed iron, or a closed iron and glass cover laid
perfectly even with the surface of the sidewalk, or shall keep the same
surrounded on all sides by a sufficient railing or barrier at least three
feet high, except stairways leading from the sidewalks to basements
which shall have a sufficient railing or barrier at least three feet high on
three sides thereof.
§ 11-1-11 MONROE CODE § 11-1-12
1-1:792
§ 11-1-13. Crossings obstructed by railroad trains. [1969 Code;
12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
§ 11-1-14. Reports by director of public works. [2016 Code]
The director of public works shall make a periodic report and statement to
the board of public works of the labor and services performed by the city
employees who are under his or her supervision, the nature of the work
performed, the amount due and owing for such services and the name or
names of the person or persons from whom payment is due. The report shall
also contain a statement of any material belonging to the city sold by the
director of public works, the name of the party who purchased the same and
the amount due for such material. It shall be the duty of the city treasurer
to make collection of amounts so specified in the report of the director of
public works.
§ 11-1-15. Authority of city. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
The city may do any class of public work or any part thereof directly without
submitting the same for bids.
§ 11-1-16. Penalty. [12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, a person who
violates any provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to a
Class 3 forfeiture.
Chapter 11-2
STREET NAMES AND NUMBERING SYSTEM
(B) Every person who shall take up or remove any portion of any sidewalk,
or of any portion of any street or alley within the city, shall take all
necessary precautions to guard the public against all accidents
therefrom and shall be subject to such rules and regulations for the
protection of travel as the council may adopt.
(A) It shall be unlawful to stop any railroad train, locomotive or car upon or
across any street crossing for longer than five minutes without opening
the street for at least 10 minutes.
(B) Any person responsible for the stopping of a railroad train, locomotive
or car contrary to the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be
subject to a class 5 forfeiture.
(C) The owner of any railroad train, locomotive or car stopped in violation
of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be subject to a
class 5 forfeiture.
§ 11-1-12 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-2-1
1-1:793
§ 11-2-1. Street names. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
Names may be assigned to streets by action of the council. The names of
streets and avenues shall be indicated on the official map of the city. To
maintain a systematic numbering of streets within the city, the following
plan shall be generally followed.
§ 11-2-2. Street signs. [1969 Code; 2016 Code]
There shall be posted in a conspicuous place and at opposite corners
of every street intersection one or more street signs plainly and legibly
designating the names of the intersecting streets.
§ 11-2-3. Numbering plan. [1969 Code; 1977 Code; 2016 Code]
The owners and occupants of all dwelling houses and places of business
shall number the same and shall place and maintain thereon suitable
numbers in a conspicuous place on the front of such dwelling and place of
business.
(A) Streets running east and west shall be called streets and numbered
consecutively.
(B) Streets running north and south shall be known as avenues and shall be
numbered consecutively.
(A) System of numbering. To maintain a systematic numbering of buildings
within the city, the frontage shall be divided into spaces of 20 feet each
as far as practicable and to each such space shall be assigned its
appropriate number according to the following plan:
(1) On streets running east and west in the city, the numbering shall
commence at fifth avenue with number 500 and Increment by 100
within each block to the east and decrement by 100 within each
block to the west. Odd numbers shall be given in progressive or
degressive order on the north side of the street, even numbers shall
be given in progressive or degressive order on the south side of the
street.
(2) On avenues running north and south the numbering shall
commence at fifth street with number 500 and Increment by 100
within each block to the south and decrement by 100 within each
block to the north. Odd numbers shall be given in progressive or
degressive order on the west side of the avenues and even numbers
shall be given in progressive or degressive order on the east side of
the avenues.
(3) Also, there shall be two base lines: 1st avenue and 1st street: 1st
avenue shall be the base line for the east and west halves of the
city; 1st street shall be the base line for the north and south halves
of the city. The numbering method shall be as follows: Any street
west of 1st Avenue shall have a "W" preceding the street number,
§ 11-2-1 MONROE CODE § 11-2-3
1-1:794
Chapter 11-3
PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
§ 11-3-1. General prohibitions. [3-4-1980; 4-16-1985; 1-17-1995;
2016 Code; 1-17-2017; 7-5-2017]
It is unlawful for any person:
e.g., W 5th street. Any street north of 1st Street shall end with the
direction "north," e.g., 5th street north. Also any avenue north of
1st street shall have an "N" preceding the avenue number, e.g.,
N 5th avenue. Any avenue west of 1st Avenue shall end with the
direction west, e.g., 5th avenue west.
(B) Placing numbers. Every property owner in the city having a residence
or any business establishment shall place a number upon each building
in a conspicuous place where the same can be seen at all times.
Numbers used shall not be less than 2 1/2 inches in height. If any
person fails to comply with this requirement, the same shall be done
without notice by the city and the actual expense shall be charged to
the party owning such property.
(A) To alter or change or cause anything to be altered or changed within
any park or recreational facility of the city without prior written
permission from the board of park and recreation commissioners.
(B) To operate any motor vehicle in any park or recreational facility except
upon established roadway.
(C) To park or leave standing any motor vehicle within any park or
recreational facility except upon designated parking areas.
(D) To deface, damage, destroy or cause harm to any park building, or
facility within any park building or park equipment.
(E) To destroy, damage or injure or cut down any fruit, shade or ornamental
tree or shrub standing or being within any park or recreational facility
within the city.
(F) To leave or place any debris or waste material within any park or
recreational facility within the city except in containers specifically
provided for debris or waste material.
(G) To loiter, lounge or congregate within any city park or recreational
facility after being requested to move by any police officer or by any
person in authority at such place, between the hours of 11:00 PM and
5:00 AM.
(H) To interfere with, break down, deface or remove, or cause to be
interfered with, broken down, defaced or removed, any sign, guard,
§ 11-2-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-3-1
1-1:795
§ 11-3-2. Exceptions to prohibitions. [4-16-1985; 2016 Code]
No prohibition of this chapter shall apply to any law enforcement officer
acting within the scope of that officer's duty, or to any employee of the city
acting within his or her scope of employment.
protection, barrier or equipment placed in any park or recreational
facility of the city.
(I) To bring or permit to be brought an animal owned or controlled by such
person into any park or recreational area within the city, whether on a
leash or otherwise unless a permit or license be first obtained from the
city. This paragraph shall not apply to a service animal as defined in
section 106.52 of the Wisconsin Statutes or to any park or recreational
area within which the council has authorized the presence of an animal
without a permit.
(J) To bring in or consume any alcoholic beverage, or fermented malt
beverage within any park or recreational facility within the city unless a
permit be first obtained from the park department.
(K) To trap within the boundaries of a city park or recreational area without
first obtaining a permit from the park department.
(L) To operate any snowmobile on or in any park, playground or other
property owned, leased or rented by the city except snowmobiles
operated by law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties
or snowmobiles used in the maintenance of such property by authorized
personnel.
(M) To be within the fenced area of the Municipal swimming pool or within
the changing house or concession stand adjacent to the pool when the
pool is not open for swimming or to the public, or after being requested
to leave by any person in authority.
(N) To loiter, lounge or congregate within that part of Recreation Park
which is enclosed by a fence and designated as the Swiss A.L.P.S.
Cheeseland playground after being requested to move by any police
officer or by any person in authority at such place, between the hours of
9:30 PM and 7:00 AM.
(O) To carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other lighted smoking
equipment within that part of Recreation Park which is enclosed by a
fence and designated as the Swiss A.L.P.S. Cheeseland playground.
(P) To be within the fenced area of the dog park surrounding the water
tower which is designated as only for those persons authorized by the
city.
§ 11-3-1 MONROE CODE § 11-3-3
1-1:796
§ 11-3-3. Dog park provisions.8 [7-5-2017]
In addition to the other provisions within this chapter, the following
provisions shall apply to those parks designated for use as dog parks:
(A) A dog park is a fenced in area which has been designated by the city for
dogs to be without a leash.
(B) No dog shall be allowed to enter any park designated as a dog park
without its owner or authorized agent first obtaining a license issued by
the City. Every dog must have a separate dog park tag to be granted
legal access to a designated dog park.
(C) No dangerous or aggressive dogs are allowed. Dangerous or aggressive
dogs are those dogs that are likely to, or have intentionally caused
serious damage to other animals or people. If a license holder
determines that its dog becomes dangerous or aggressive after a dog
park tag has been issued, then such license holder shall inform the city
clerk's office and shall surrender such tag for that specific dog.
(D) An applicant seeking a dog park license shall provide the following:
(1) A completed application for a dog park license on forms provided
by the city clerk.
(2) Proof of current rabies vaccination, proof of current Bordetella
vaccination, and proof of current licensure in the community in
which each dog and the applicant reside.
(3) Waiver of liability form signed by the applicant.
(4) Payment of dog park license fee, which shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the council.
(E) Action on the application.
(1) No application shall be considered until the complete application is
submitted to the city clerk or its designee and the required
application fee has been paid. An application that meets all the
requirements of § 11-3-3D of this chapter shall be considered
complete.
(2) The city clerk or its designee shall review each complete
application to determine whether the applicant has adequately
demonstrated that the applicant has complied with those items set
forth in this chapter and may conduct such investigation into the
content of the application as considered necessary. The city clerk or
its designee may administratively approve or deny such application
or refer the application to the appropriate committee to consider
such application. Failure by the city clerk or its designee to approve
or deny an application within 30 days of submission shall be
8. Editor's Note: Former § 11-3-3, Penalty, as amended, was repealed 7-5-2017.
§ 11-3-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-3-3
1-1:797
considered a denial, unless such action has already been referred
to the appropriate committee. Any denial by the city clerk or its
designee may be appealed to the appropriate committee for review
as long as such appeal has been made in writing to the city clerk
within 30 days of the notice of denial.
(3) The city clerk, its designee, or the appropriate committee may
condition approval of the application upon the addition of such
terms and conditions as may be considered necessary to protect
the public and ensure safe operation of the dog park.
(F) Upon approval of a dog park license, the city clerk or its designee shall
issue a numbered dog park tag for each dog to be legally granted
access to the dog park. Numbered dog park tags shall only be worn by
the specific dog for which it was issued. It shall be illegal to transfer
such tags to other dogs and doing so shall be grounds to revoke the
license issued to the license holder. If the dog park license is not
renewed from year to year, the numbered dog tag is invalid and shall
not be worn. The same numbered dog park tag will be reauthorized
each renewal period if it is for the same dog for which it was previously
issued. A license holder shall be charged for lost or damaged tags that
need to be replaced at a cost to be established from time to time by
resolution of the council.
(G) The dog park license shall specify all household members authorized to
take such dog to the dog park. The license holder shall be responsible
for the actions of those members who are authorized by his or her
license.
(H) The dog park license shall be valid between January 1 through
December 31 of the year it is issued and must be renewed by the license
holder each subsequent year. The cost for the dog park licenses shall
not be prorated based on the date of issue.
(I) License holders or applicants are subject to procedures set forth in
§§ 3-5-4 and 3-5-5 of the Monroe City Code regarding revocation,
suspension, and refusal to issue or renew.
(1) Upon receipt of a signed written complaint filed with the city
clerk's office that alleges that a dog has attacked, has bitten
another person or dog, is dangerous or aggressive, or the license
holder or authorized household member is violating dog park rules,
the city clerk or its designee shall send notice to the license holder
suspending the specific dog or dogs in question or suspending the
dog park license preventing use of the dog park until adjudication
of the complaint. Upon receipt of the notice of suspension from the
city clerk, the license holder shall have 10 calendar days to submit
to the city clerk a written request for a hearing to appeal the
suspension and contest the complaint. If a timely request for
hearing is made by the licensee, then the city clerk shall follow the
procedures in § 3-5-4 and shall schedule a hearing before the
§ 11-3-3 MONROE CODE § 11-3-3
1-1:798
§ 11-3-4. Park rules. [4-16-1985; 2016 Code]
All park and recreation facilities are governed by the rules and regulations
of the board of park and recreation commissioners. Those rules and
regulations are to be kept on file with the city clerk.
§ 11-3-5. Penalty. [7-5-2017]
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction
be subject to a Class 4 forfeiture.
Chapter 11-4
TREES AND SHRUBS
§ 11-4-1. Powers of city forester. [6-16-2015; 2016 Code]
appropriate committee. If such license holder fails to timely
request a hearing, then such dog park tag or license shall be
revoked as indicated in the notice.
(2) After a hearing, the committee may suspend or revoke the dog park
tag for the individual dog in question, or the dog park license
issued to the license holder if in the discretion of the committee
that the circumstances so justify suspension or revocation of all dog
park tags issued to the individual. The committee may also make
determinations or recommendations to the city clerk regarding any
future application(s) for dog park licenses by the individual.
(A) Control over public property.
(1) The city forester, under the control of the board of public works,
shall direct the purchase, planting, maintenance, trimming,
pruning and removal of all trees and shrubs in any public area of
the city. No person shall plant, maintain, trim, prune or remove any
tree or shrub on or from any public land without permission from
the city forester. Such permit must be obtained from the city clerk
and may include specific qualifications and conditions.
(2) The terms "public property," "public area" and "public land" shall
include all land within the city not privately owned or not controlled
by any other political subdivision.
(3) The city forester shall make due investigation and study of various
species of trees and shrubs, with consideration given to length of
life, beauty, freedom from disease, care requirements, growth
habits, utility future effect of roots on adjacent sidewalks and
structures, cleanliness and other pertinent characteristics. Only
such species as are approved by the city forester shall be planted
on public lands. The following species are specifically prohibited
for such planting. Chinese elm, silver maple, mountain ash, poplar,
§ 11-3-3 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-4-1
1-1:799
§ 11-4-2. Planting program. [6-16-2015; 2016 Code]
Trees purchased other than from the park department, must be planted
by the property owner. Property owners will be able to choose from trees
approved by the board of park and recreation commissioners, with
individual tree approval and location coming from the city forester. Trees
to be purchased may be planted on public property only. Whenever the
board shall have declared that any trees or shrubbery situated in the space
between the curb line and the sidewalk line of any street or improved street
do not comply with the regulations of the board relative to style, type,
planting and arranging thereof, it shall order the same to be removed or
replaced or rearranged to comply with regulations. The following provisions
shall apply to all planting:
cottonwood, willow, catalpa, box elder, tree of heaven, walnut,
chestnut, birch, conifers and Russian olive.
(B) Control over private property.
(1) Any tree or shrub which overhangs any public land of the city, and
which, in the opinion of the city forester, endangers the life, health,
safety or property of the public, shall be declared a public nuisance.
The owner shall be notified in writing of the existence of the
nuisance and given a reasonable time for its correction or removal.
If not corrected, action shall be taken by the city forester to abate
the nuisance, and the cost assessed to the owner, recoverable by
suit. The owner shall be subject to general penalty provisions of
this code.
(2) The owner of property abutting upon any street or sidewalk shall
trim branches of all trees standing along such street or sidewalk so
that the branches shall not obstruct the passage of light from any
street light to the adjacent street or sidewalk, and he or she shall
also trim all branches which overhang any street, alley or sidewalk
so that there shall be a clear height of 15 feet above the street or
alley and a clear height of 10 feet above the sidewalk. The owner
shall remove all dead, decayed or broken trees, limbs or branches
which overhang any street, alley or sidewalk.
(3) Private activity. Whenever it is necessary for the work of the city
forester to move or protect service wires, the city forester shall
serve written notice on the owners of such wires and such owners
shall comply with such orders within a reasonable time.
(A) No trees or shrubs are to be planted at street intersections. Such
planting shall be done at least 15 feet from the intersection of the curbs.
(B) No person shall plant or cause to be planted any trees or shrubs of any
nature whatsoever within 25 feet of any hydrant or shut-off box, within
the street right of way.
(C) The following distances between trees must be adhered to:
§ 11-4-1 MONROE CODE § 11-4-2
1-1:800
§ 11-4-3. Removal of trees. [12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
Hard maple: 40 feet.
Norway maple or ash: 35 feet.
Hackberry, locust or linden: 30 feet.
(D) No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain, except during
construction work for a period not to exceed 30 days, upon any public
land, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may
impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any
tree or shrub growing thereon, except by written permission of the city
forester.
(E) No person shall break, mutilate, injure, kill or destroy any tree or shrub,
or permit any fire to burn where it will injure any portion of any tree or
shrub on public land.
(F) No person shall knowingly permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain or
be emptied on or about any tree or shrub on public land.
(G) No person shall plant or cause to be planted any trees or shrubs of any
nature whatsoever within 25 feet of any hydrant or shut-off box, within
the street right-of-way.
(H) No hedge or shrubbery shall be planted closer than 18 inches to a
sidewalk and shall be kept trimmed at all times so that no part shall
project over a sidewalk.
(I) No shrub or bush growing at the intersection of any two streets in the
city shall be allowed to grow taller than 2 1/2 feet from the ground
within a 30 foot radius from the intersection of two curb lines.
(J) No person shall knowingly permit electric wires to come in contact with
any trees or shrubs on public land unless protected by approved
methods, no person shall attach any electrical insulation to any tree on
public land.
(K) Ditches, trenches, tunnels and driveways shall be kept as far away from
any trees as possible. Builders shall erect suitable barriers around trees
or shrubs on public lands to prevent injury from construction work.
(A) All persons desiring to remove a tree located upon the terrace of any lot
or parcel of property located within the city shall, before removal of
such tree, secure a permit from the city clerk. There shall be no fee for
the issuance of such permit.
(B) The holder of such permit shall, within a reasonable time after the
removal of such tree or trees, remove any resulting stump or stumps at
the permit holder's expense.
§ 11-4-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-4-3
1-1:801
§ 11-4-4. Activities of utility companies controlled. [1969 Code;
1977 Code; 2016 Code]
Public utilities, under the supervision and direction of the city forester,
are authorized to trim trees upon and overhanging the streets, avenues,
alleys, highways, sidewalks and other public lands in the city, to prevent
the branches of such trees from coming in contact with wires and cables.
Under the supervision and direction of the city forester, such utilities are
authorized to cut roots of trees and shrubs under the streets, avenues,
alleys, highways, sidewalks and other public lands in the city, to construct,
maintain and operate their facilities in and about the city.
§ 11-4-5. Violation, penalty. [12-17-1991; 2016 Code]
Except as expressly noted elsewhere in this chapter, a person who violates
any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to a Class 3
forfeiture.
Chapter 11-5
DISEASED OR INFESTED ELM, OAK AND ASH TREES
§ 11-5-1. Finding. [8-20-2013; 2016 Code]
The council hereby finds that the health of elm, oak and ash trees within the
city is threatened by invasive diseases and pests, including a fatal disease
known as Dutch elm disease, a fatal disease known as oak wilt disease and
the Emerald Ash Borer, an exotic wood boring beetle that only feeds on ash
trees.
§ 11-5-2. Public nuisances declared. [8-20-2013; 2016 Code]
The following are hereby declared to be a public nuisance:
(C) A person who violates any provision of this section shall upon conviction
be subject to a Class 5 forfeiture.
(A) Infected or infested elm trees or elm wood. Any living or standing elm
tree or part thereof infected with the Dutch elm disease fungus
Ceratocystis ulmi (Buisman) or Ophiostoma ulmi or infested by any of
the elm bark beetles Scolytus mulristriatus (Marsh) or Hylurgopinus
rufipes (Eichh) or any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs,
branches, stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark
has not been removed and burned or properly treated with an effective
elm bark beetle destroying insecticide.
(B) Infected oak trees or oak wood. Any living or standing oak tree or part
thereof infected with the oak wilt disease fungus Ceratocystis
fagacearum or any dead oak tree or part thereof, including logs,
branches, stumps, firewood or other oak material from which the bark
has not been removed.
§ 11-4-3 MONROE CODE § 11-5-2
1-1:802
§ 11-5-3. Nuisances prohibited. [8-20-2013; 2016 Code]
No person or entity shall permit any public nuisance as defined in this
chapter to remain on any premises owned or controlled by such person or
entity within the city.
§ 11-5-4. Inspection. [8-20-2013; 2016 Code]
Following receipt of a complaint, or upon his or her own initiative, the city
forester shall inspect or cause to be inspected any property within the city
to determine whether a public nuisance as defined in this chapter exists
thereon.
§ 11-5-5. Abatement of nuisances. [8-20-2013; 2016 Code]
(C) Infested ash trees or ash wood. Any living or standing ash tree or part
thereof infested with any Emerald Ash Borer beetles Agrilus
planipennis or any Emerald Ash Borer infested dead ash tree or part
thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other ash
material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or
otherwise disposed of in a manner that destroys any Emerald Ash Borer
beetles that may be present.
(A) Public property. If the city forester, upon inspection or examination,
shall determine that any public nuisance as defined in this chapter
exists in or upon any public street, alley, park or other public place
within the city, including the terrace strip between curb and lot line, he
or she shall immediately abate such public nuisance in such manner as
to destroy or prevent as fully as possible the spread of the disease or the
insects that have caused such public nuisance.
(B) Private property. If the city forester shall determine with reasonable
certainty that any public nuisance as defined in this chapter exists in or
upon private property, the city forester shall report the existence of
such public nuisance to the board of park and recreation
commissioners. If the board of park and recreation commissioners
determines that such nuisance exists, it shall set a date and time for a
hearing, the objective of which shall be to determine if an order should
be made to abate such nuisance.
(1) Notice of hearing. Notice of the date, time and location of such
hearing shall be mailed, not less than 14 days before the hearing,
via first class mail addressed to the property owner's last known
address, and a copy shall be served upon the owner or occupant at
the property location or may be posted by attaching to the entrance
of any dwelling, building or other structure on the property on
which such public nuisance exists. If the owner is not known and
cannot be determined with reasonable diligence such notice shall
be issued to the tenant or other person or entity occupying such
property. The notice shall state that the board of park and
recreation commissioners has found that a nuisance as defined in
§ 11-5-2 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-5-5
1-1:803
this chapter exists on such property and proposes to order
abatement of such nuisance and how such abatement will be
accomplished. The notice shall specify the general location and
number of trees logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other material
constituting the nuisance on the property.
(2) Hearing procedures. The owner, tenant, or an authorized agent of
either, may appear at the hearing and shall have the opportunity to
provide evidence relevant to the issues before the board of park
and recreation commissioners. If the board of park and recreation
commissioners finds that a nuisance as defined in this chapter
exists it shall order the abatement of such nuisance and the city
forester shall issue a written notice to the owner, agent or tenant or
operator of the property to abate such nuisance within a
reasonable time as specified in the notice. The notice shall include
the method or methods by which the nuisance shall be abated and
the proper method or methods of disposal of such trees or parts
thereof, logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other material
constituting the nuisance, and that failure to abate the nuisance as
so ordered will result in the city abating the nuisance at the
property owner's expense. The notice shall be mailed via first class
mail addressed to the property owner's last known address, and a
copy shall be served upon the owner or occupant at the property
location or may be posted by attaching such notice to the entrance
of any dwelling, building or other structure on the property on
which such public nuisance exists.
(C) Appeal to council. If the property owner wishes to appeal the decision of
the board of park and recreation commissioners or the methods
required by the city forester to abate the nuisance, the property owner
may appeal such decision to the council. Such appeal shall be made by
filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within 10 business days
following service of the written notice issued by the city forester
directing abatement of the nuisance. Within 30 days following receipt of
such notice of appeal by the city clerk, the council shall review the
decision of the board of park and recreation commissioners or the city
forester, or both, and may affirm, deny or modify such decision. If the
decision is modified, the council shall file its decision with the city clerk
within 7 days following the meeting where the appeal was considered.
The council's decision shall state the specific facts and reasons which
are the basis for its decision to modify a decision of the board of park
and recreation commissioners or the city forester. The council may, but
shall not be compelled to, afford the party appealing an opportunity to
be heard before the council acts on an appeal.
(D) Abatement by city. If any public nuisance as defined in this chapter is
not abated within the time allowed, the city forester may cause the
same to be abated. No damages shall be awarded to the property owner
for the destruction of any elm trees, elm wood, oak trees, oak wood, ash
trees or ash wood, or any part thereof, resulting from such abatement.
§ 11-5-5 MONROE CODE § 11-5-6
1-1:804
§ 11-5-6. Assessment of costs of abatement. [8-20-2013; 2016 Code]
§ 11-5-7. Transporting of wood prohibited. [8-20-2013; 2016 Code]
No person or entity shall transport within the city any bark bearing diseased
elm wood, diseased oak wood or Emerald Ash Borer infested ash wood or
material without first securing the written permission of the city forester.
§ 11-5-8. Removal or pruning of oak trees prohibited. [8-20-2013;
2016 Code]
No person or entity shall remove, trim or prune any oak tree or portion
thereof between April 1 and August 15 without first securing the written
permission of the city forester.
§ 11-5-9. Interference with city forester prohibited. [8-20-2013;
2016 Code]
No person or entity shall prevent, delay or interfere with the city forester,
or any city agents or employees working under the direction of the city
forester, while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by
this chapter.
§ 11-5-10. Penalty. [8-20-2013; 2016 Code]
A person or entity that violates any provision of this chapter shall upon
conviction be subject to a Class 3 forfeiture.
Chapter 11-6
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
§ 11-6-1. Declaration of purpose. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate a sound economic base upon
which the airport will thrive and grow and to insure the public receives
reliable, safe and nondiscriminatory treatment in the conduct of authorized
activities at the airport. This chapter is also intended to protect the public
(A) Special charge. Costs of abating any public nuisance as defined in this
chapter may be chargeable to and imposed as a special charge against
the property upon which the nuisance existed. The cost of abating any
such nuisance which is located in or upon any park or public grounds,
boulevards or public right-of-way shall be borne by the city.
(B) Records and report. The city forester shall keep strict account of the
costs of work done to abate a nuisance as defined in this chapter for
which special charges are to be made, the description of the land, lots,
parts of lots or parcels of land upon which such work was done and the
amount chargeable to each. The city forester shall report to the council
the aggregate amounts chargeable to each lot or parcel.
§ 11-5-6 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-1
1-1:805
health, safety and welfare and to foster and promote the continued
development of the airport in a safe and efficient manner.
§ 11-6-2. Zones designated. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
§ 11-6-3. Zoning maps. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
The board shall identify the zoning areas it adopts and note the boundaries
of each area upon zoning maps which shall be made a part of this chapter.
The maps shall be identified as "Zoning map A - Monroe municipal airport,"
and "Zoning map B - Monroe municipal airport." These maps shall be
filed with the city clerk. The maps and all notations, references, and other
information shown upon the maps shall be as much a part of this chapter as
if the matters and information set forth on the maps were fully described in
this chapter. The maps may be amended from time to time by resolution of
the board.
§ 11-6-4. Definitions. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
In this chapter:
ABOVE GROUND LEVEL — Means the vertical distance between any
aircraft and the ground beneath the aircraft as measured in feet. The
elevation of the ground shall be the highest ground surface or top of
any structure or obstruction within a 2,000 foot horizontal distance of the
aircraft.
ACTIVITY LICENSE — Means any license, permit or other authorization
that is required by the United States government or the state for the
conduct of a person's business.
AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITIES — Means all activities that involve, make
possible, or are required for the operation of aircraft, or which contribute
to or are required for the safety of such operation.
AIRCRAFT — Means all contrivances used for flight in air or space,
including, but not limited to, airplanes, airships, dirigibles, helicopters and
gliders.
AIRPORT — Means the land, developments, and improvements that are
owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city and operated as the
Monroe municipal airport.
(A) Zones. All zones established by this section are as shown on maps
entitled "Height limitation zoning map-Monroe municipal airport-
Monroe, Wisconsin" and dated January 17, 1989, and shall be and
remain on file in the office of the city clerk.
(B) Authority. All other titles and chapters of this code are incorporated in
this chapter by reference. Whenever any provision of this chapter
conflicts with any other provisions of this code, the provision in this
chapter shall apply.
§ 11-6-1 MONROE CODE § 11-6-4
1-1:806
AIRPORT ACTIVITY CLUB — Means any nonprofit Wisconsin corporation,
nonprofit limited liability company or nonprofit partnership organized for:
a) sky diving; b) parachuting; c) balloon flights; d) operation of ultra-light
aircraft; e) operation of model or radio controlled aircraft flights; f) any
other purpose related to the airport that is not otherwise addressed in a
classification of an airport user under this chapter.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Means any structure, object of natural growth, use of
land, or other activity that obstructs the air space required for the flight of
aircraft landing, taking off, or otherwise using the Airport.
APPLICANT — Means a person that makes application for an operator
license, a lease authorizing use of a portion of the airport, or both.
APRON AREAS — Means those areas of the airport represented on zoning
map B – Monroe municipal airport labeled "apron."
BOARD — Means the airport board of management as established by the
city.
CERTIFIED AIR CARRIER — Means any carrier conducting any
aeronautical activity operating under federal aeronautical regulations part
121 or 135.
CLUB AIRCRAFT — Means an aircraft that is owned and operated by a
flying club or an airport activity club.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY — Means any activity conducted at, on, or from
the airport, that is intended to produce revenue payable to the person
conducting such activity.
COMMERCIAL AVIATION AREAS — Means those areas of the airport
represented on zoning map B - Monroe municipal airport labeled
"commercial aviation areas."
COMMERCIAL CARRIER — Means any nonscheduled fare generating
aircraft.
COMMERCIAL HANGAR — Means any hangar, other than an industrial
hangar, that is used or intended to be used either directly or indirectly for
any commercial activity.
COMMERCIAL HANGAR AREA — Means that area of the airport
represented on zoning map B - Monroe municipal airport labeled
"commercial hangar area."
CONCESSION — Means any nonaeronautical revenue producing facility or
service for the convenience of the public using the airport.
CROP DUSTING — Means the spraying of powdered or liquid insecticide or
fertilizer on crops from the air.
EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT — Means ambulances, crash rescue and fire
fighting apparatus and such other equipment as is necessary to safeguard
airport runways, taxiways, structures, ramps, and other property in
emergency situations.
§ 11-6-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-4
1-1:807
FAA — Means the federal aviation administration of the United States
government.
FCC — Means the federal communications commission of the United States
government.
FLYING CLUB — Means a nonprofit Wisconsin corporation, nonprofit
limited liability company or nonprofit partnership of five or more
individuals, organized for the purpose of making aircraft available to its
stockholders, members or partners.
GROSS INCOME — Means the monthly gross income of the relevant person
derived from the use of airport facilities, calculated by generally accepted
accounting methods.
HANGAR — Means any structure designed or used for aeronautical
purposes, or in which space is provided for aircraft storage or service.
HANGAR APPROACH APRON — Means the developed area between a
taxiway and any hangar over which aircraft may be moved.
HEIGHT ZONES — Means those areas represented on zoning map A –
Monroe municipal airport.
INDUSTRIAL AIRCRAFT — Means an aircraft that is owned by a business
entity, and operated for free transportation of owners and other individuals
or property.
INDUSTRIAL HANGAR — Means any hangar owned by a person that is used
exclusively for storage or maintenance of industrial aircraft.
INDUSTRIAL HANGAR AREAS — Means those areas of the airport
represented on zoning map B - Monroe municipal airport labeled "industrial
hangar areas."
LEASE — Means a contract for the letting of land or tenement for a
specified period of time. For an operator engaged in a short term
commercial activity the term of a license issued to such operator
authorizing use of airport property for a specified period of time shall be
considered a lease of such property for the period of time set forth in the
license.
LEASEHOLD IMPROVEMENTS — Means any modification, alteration or
repair, either structural or nonstructural in nature, performed by or at the
direction of a tenant.
MANAGER — Means the individual empowered by the board to administer,
oversee, and control the construction, operation, and maintenance of the
airport.
MUNICIPAL HANGAR — Means any hangar owned, leased or otherwise
controlled by the city.
MUNICIPAL TERMINAL AREA — Means that area of the airport
represented on zoning map B - Monroe municipal airport labeled "municipal
terminal area."
§ 11-6-4 MONROE CODE § 11-6-4
1-1:808
NFPA — Means national fire protection association.
NONCONFORMING USE — Means a structure, tree, or use of land that
does not conform with the use regulations covering the area in which it is
situated as of the effective date of this chapter.
NOTAM — Means a notice containing information concerning the
establishment, condition or change in any aeronautical facility, service,
procedure or hazard, the timely knowledge of which is essential to
personnel concerned with flight operations.
NTSB — Means the national transportation safety board of the United
States government.
OPERATING PRIVILEGES — Means the privilege or right to use the airport
or airport facilities for private, commercial, or any other purpose.
OPERATOR — Means any person that has received an operator license.
OPERATOR LICENSE — Means written authority, granted by the city,
allowing a person to conduct commercial activity on or from the airport.
PARKING SPACE — Means a space designated for the parking of a single
vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked.
PRIVATE AIRCRAFT — Means an aircraft owned by an individual and
operated for noncommercial purposes by such owner. "Private aircraft"
includes an aircraft used in the owner's business, so long as such use is
incidental to the business, and no income is directly attributable to the use
of the aircraft.
PRIVATE HANGAR — Means any hangar other than a municipal hangar,
industrial hangar, or commercial hangar.
PRIVATE HANGAR AREA — Means that area of the airport represented on
zoning map B - Monroe municipal airport labeled "private hangar areas."
PUBLIC AREA — Means any area of the airport open to the public, including
the terminal, vehicle parking, and park areas, as designated on zoning map
B - Monroe municipal airport.
PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE — Means all public areas designed and used for
the passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
RADIO HAZARD — Means any use of land or other activity that creates
electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and
aircraft.
RAMP — Means that area of the airport represented on zoning map B –
Monroe municipal airport labeled "ramp."
ROTORCRAFT — Means all aircraft supported in flight partially or wholly
by rotating airfoils.
RUNWAY — Means any sod or hard-surfaced area designated for the taking
off and landing of aircraft.
SHOP — Means any structure capable of housing one or more aircraft while
same are being repaired.
§ 11-6-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-4
1-1:809
SHORT TERM COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY — Means a commercial activity
that is operated for not more than 30 consecutive days or more than a
cumulative total of 60 days in any calendar year.
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS — Means a) FAA
"Standards for specifying construction of airports" and b) all other federal,
state and city building codes and other rules or regulations controlling
construction on public airports.
STATE — Means the state of Wisconsin and all subdivisions thereof,
including, but not limited to, the state department of transportation, bureau
of aeronautics.
STRUCTURE — Means any object constructed or installed by any person.
SUPERVISOR — Means the operator responsible for the daily operation
and management of the airport, under the supervision of the manager with
duties as specified in a contract between the operator and the city.
T-HANGAR — Means a T-shaped area within a hangar capable of housing
one airplane, whether such area is demarcated by walls or other means.
TAXIWAY — Means the sod and paved areas designated solely for the
taxiing of aircraft, represented by the area on zoning map B - Monroe
municipal airport labeled "taxiway."
TENANT — Means any person that has entered into a written lease with the
city for use of facilities at the airport.
TIE DOWN AREA — Means that area designed for the parking, tying down,
and storage of aircraft, and represented by the area on Zoning map B -
Monroe municipal airport labeled "tie downs."
TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT — Means an aircraft not using the airport as a base
of operations.
TREE — Means any object of natural growth that will grow to a height of
more than five feet, excluding farm crops that are cut to the ground at least
once each year.
ULTRA-LIGHT AIRCRAFT — Means any aircraft used or intended to be
used for manned operation for recreation or sport purposes that does not
have any United States or foreign airworthiness certificate and that: a) If
unpowered, weighs less than 155 pounds; or b) If powered 1) weighs less
than 254 pounds empty weight, excluding floats and safety devices that are
intended for deployment in potentially catastrophic situations; and 2) has a
fuel capacity not exceeding five U.S. gallons; and 3) is not capable of more
than 55 knots calibrated airspeed at full power in level flight; and 4) has a
power-off stall speed which does not exceed 24 knots calibrated airspeed.
USER — Means any person that uses any portion of the airport for any
purpose.
UTILITY AND SERVICE AREA — Means those areas of the airport
represented by zoning map B - Monroe municipal airport labeled "utility and
service area."
§ 11-6-4 MONROE CODE § 11-6-4
1-1:810
VEHICLE — Means every device, excluding aircraft, in, upon, or by which
any individual or property may be transported, including snowmobiles and
any other recreation device.
§ 11-6-5. Airport manager. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
§ 11-6-6. Commercial activities. [7-2-1991; 11-6-2002; 2-17-2016;
2016 Code]
(A) The manager shall be appointed by the board annually in January. The
manager shall serve a one year term, unless removed by the board for
violation of this chapter.
(B) The manager shall act within the scope of authority granted to him or
her by the board. In addition to the general management of the airport,
the manager shall be responsible for all duties delegated to him or her
by the board.
(C) The manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to issue a
NOTAM closing the entire airport or any part thereof, if, in the
manager's opinion, conditions of the airport or any part thereof are
unsafe for landing or takeoff. The manager shall notify the FAA flight
service station of the NOTAM in writing immediately following its
issuance. When the manager determines that the airport is again safe,
he or she shall provide written notice of that determination to the FAA
flight service station and the control tower in writing.
(D) The manager shall have the authority to authorize uses of the airport
within the authority granted to him or her, so long as such uses do not
interfere with the safe and efficient operation of the airport.
(E) The manager shall be responsible for the safekeeping of all lost items
given to him or her for 60 days. If such items are not claimed within 60
days after the manager obtains custody of such item, the manager may
dispose of such item as he or she sees fit, without liability to any person.
The manager shall be under no duty to determine the owner or other
person entitled to possession of such item.
(F) The manager shall attend all meetings of the board, unless excused by
the chairperson of the board.
(A) License required. No person shall conduct any commercial activity
before obtaining an operator license from the city that authorizes such
activity. The city may require that a lease be signed by an applicant
before issuing an operator license to such applicant.
(B) Other approvals. Every person conducting a commercial activity shall
maintain in good standing all necessary state and federal certificates
and activity licenses required for the conduct of such commercial
activity during the term of any lease or operator license issued under
this chapter and shall maintain at all times insurance coverage for such
§ 11-6-4 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-6
1-1:811
§ 11-6-7. Operator licenses; classification and description.
[7-2-1991; 10-20-1992; 3-4-2003; 2-18-2004; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
commercial activity conforming to the minimum requirements
established from time to time by the board.
(C) Term of license. An operator license issued under this chapter shall be
for a term ending on the next June 30 following the date of issuance.
(A) There shall be 11 categories of operator licenses:
(1) Operator license category I; line services.
A) The operator shall be authorized to sell and dispense aviation
fuels, lubricants, or other aviation petroleum products. The
operator shall provide all necessary ramp assistance in the
parking of aircraft as is necessary to provide such services.
B) The operator shall operate under contract with the city. The
terms of this contract and services to be performed shall be
negotiated annually.
C) The operator shall have available such emergency aircraft
starting equipment, fire extinguishers, aircraft engine heaters,
portable pressure tanks, towing equipment, and other service
equipment as is necessary for the proper conduct of the
operator's duties. The board shall provide an itemized list of
such required equipment to any applicant for a category I
operator license.
D) The operator shall make available all generally used aviation
fuel and shall provide parking and tie down services for
aircraft. The operator may provide services for washing
aircraft, inflation of tires, changing of aircraft engine oil, and
other minor repairs not requiring a certified mechanics rating.
E) The operator may be required to operate the unicom, and to
make available pilots' aeronautical maps, weather information,
current issues of the "Airman's guide and flight information
manual."
(2) Operator license category II; flight instruction.
A) The operator shall be authorized to provide flight training,
including, but not limited to, flight review, biannual flight
check, advanced rating and ground school instruction,
necessary to prepare an individual to take all examinations
required to obtain a pilot's license or rating.
B) The operator shall have available at least one FAA certified
flight instructor to cover the type of training offered. Such
instructor shall be an employee of the operator, or shall have a
category II operator license from the city.
§ 11-6-6 MONROE CODE § 11-6-7
1-1:812
C) The operator shall comply with relevant sections of FAA part
141 regulations.
(3) Operator license category III; aircraft charter and air taxi.
A) The operator shall be authorized to provide air transportation
of individuals or property to the general public for hire,
including charter and commercial operations as defined in the
federal aviation act and FAA part 135 regulations as amended
or replaced.
B) The operator shall have available at least one pilot rated by the
FAA to permit the flight activity offered by the operator. Such
pilot shall be an employee of the operator or shall have a
category III operator license from the city.
(4) Operator license category IV; aircraft sales.
A) The operator shall be authorized to sell new or used aircraft
through franchises, licensed dealerships, or distributorships.
B) The operator shall provide adequate arrangements for repair
and servicing of aircraft during any sales guarantee or
warranty period. The operator shall not conduct any repair or
servicing of aircraft beyond the sales guarantee or warranty
period.
C) The operator shall have available at least one individual having
a current private pilot certificate and hour requirements as
specified by the FAA for the type and category of aircraft to be
demonstrated for sale. Such pilot shall be an employee of the
operator or shall have a category IV operator license from the
city.
D) An applicant must file proof that it holds a valid sales or
distributorship franchise with the city clerk before being
granted a category IV operator license.
(5) Operator license category V; aircraft rental.
A) The operator shall be authorized to rent aircraft for operation
by student pilots or other pilots not employed by the operator.
B) The operator shall have properly certificated airworthy aircraft
available for rental. The operator shall either own such
aircraft, or shall rent such aircraft under a written lease. The
operator shall provide all documentation regarding the
ownership or lease of the aircraft to the city upon demand.
C) The operator shall have on hand, at all times, proper checklists
and operating manuals for every aircraft available for rental.
§ 11-6-7 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-7
1-1:813
D) Before entering into an agreement to rent or lease an aircraft
to any person, the operator shall deliver to such person written
notice which contains all of the following information:
1) Whether the operator maintains insurance coverage for
liability arising from the use or maintenance of the
aircraft.
2) If liability coverage is provided, the limits of such
coverage, the amount of any deductible and a statement
that the lessee may obtain from the lessor or the lessor's
insurance agent a copy of a certificate of coverage that
provides further information about any limitations of
coverage or other terms of coverage.
E) The operator shall have available at least one FAA certified
flight instructor having a current commercial pilot license. This
flight instructor shall either be an employee of the operator or
shall have a category II operator license from the city.
(6) Operator license category VI; Aircraft airframe and power plant
repair and maintenance.
A) The operator shall be authorized to maintain and repair
aircraft, power plants, and accessories, and may sell aircraft
parts and accessories.
B) The operator shall have available at least one individual who is
certified by the FAA with ratings appropriate for the work
being performed, who shall hold either an airframe or a power
plant rating, or both. This individual shall be an employee of
the operator or shall hold a category VI operator license from
the city.
C) The operator shall have available the equipment, supplies and
parts, sufficient to perform all maintenance and repairs upon
airframes or air power plants under manufacturer's
recommendations of the aircraft being serviced. If such
equipment, supplies and parts are not immediately available,
the operator shall have a source of supply from which the same
can be obtained upon a reasonable notice.
D) The operator shall file with the city clerk all FAA certifications
required to operate its business under this operator license
category.
(7) Operator license category VII; Aircraft painting or repair of
interiors.
A) The operator shall be authorized to paint aircraft and repair,
rehabilitate, and renovate aircraft interiors.
§ 11-6-7 MONROE CODE § 11-6-7
1-1:814
B) The operator shall provide the building necessary for painting
operations, if the operator provides that service. Such building
shall include a segregated painting area meeting all applicable
federal, state and local code requirements.
C) The operator shall have at least one individual available during
normal hours of operation who is qualified to do repairs for
which the operator is licensed. Such individual shall be an
employee of the operator or shall hold a category VII operator
license from the city.
(8) Operator license category VIII; FAA authorized repair station for
avionic sales and services.
A) The operator shall be authorized to engage in the operation of
an FAA authorized repair station to repair aircraft radios,
instruments and accessories for general aviation aircraft, and
to sell new or used aircraft radios, instruments and
accessories.
B) The operator shall have available at least one individual who is
a FCC rated repair technician. Such individual shall either be
an employee of the operator or shall hold a category VIII
operator license from the city.
C) The operator shall file its FAA license and its FCC rating with
the city clerk.
(9) Operator license category IX; Aircraft parking and storage. The
operator shall be authorized to engage in the temporary or
permanent parking or storage of aircraft.
(10) Operator license category X; Specialized commercial flying
services.
A) The operator may provide air transportation for only those
activities that are expressly authorized by the operator license
issued to such operator.
B) The operator shall lease from the city an area of sufficient size
from which to safely conduct business.
C) Each operator engaged in the business of crop dusting or other
commercial use of chemicals shall:
1) Except as otherwise authorized by the manager, provide a
centrally drained, paved area of not less than 2,500 square
feet for aircraft loading, washing and servicing.
2) Abide by all state and federal regulations relating to safe
storage and containment of noxious and hazardous waste
and stored chemicals. Where no such regulations exist, the
§ 11-6-7 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-7
1-1:815
§ 11-6-8. Operator license application. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016
Code]
operator shall follow all reasonable procedures for
handling such materials as are required by the manager.
3) Provide the city with copies of all applicable permits and
approvals required by the Wisconsin department of
agriculture, trade and consumer protection and any other
applicable regulatory agency.
4) Place facilities related to such operations in a location on
the airport which will provide the greatest safeguard to
the public, as directed by the manager.
5) Provide tank trucks or similar facilities for the handling of
liquid spray and mixing liquids.
6) Provide adequate ground equipment for the safe handling
and safe loading of dusting materials.
D) The operator shall have at least one individual on duty during
appropriate business hours who holds a current FAA
commercial certificate properly rated for the aircraft to be
used and the type of operation to be performed.
(B) No operator license shall be transferred without the prior approval of
the board. The board may require a complete application from the
intended transferee before considering any transfer.
(C) Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to give any operator or
applicant a right to an exclusive license or right of operation.
(A) Application requirements. An applicant shall make a written application
on forms prescribed by the city. The application shall contain the
following information:
(1) Applicant's legal name, business address and business telephone
number.
(2) If applicant is other than a natural person, the following
information:
A) The legal basis upon which the applicant exists, including the
home state of the applicant and if the home state is other than
Wisconsin the basis upon which the applicant is authorized to
do business in Wisconsin.
B) The legal name, home and business addresses, telephone
number and e-mail addresses [if any] of each officer, director
or other person possessing authority to act on behalf of the
applicant and the nature of such authority.
§ 11-6-7 MONROE CODE § 11-6-8
1-1:816
(3) The business that the applicant intends to conduct at the airport.
(4) A description of the space or area on the airport needed to conduct
the commercial activity and a request to use such space or area.
(5) Applicant's intended use of airport land, buildings, and other
facilities.
(6) The legal name, home and business address, telephone number and
e-mail address [if any] of each person who will be responsible for
the operator's day to day operations at the airport.
(7) Proof of compliance with all applicable state and federal
requirements. Such proof shall include, but shall not be limited to,
proof that the applicant holds current licenses for the business that
applicant intends to conduct or proof that the applicant has the
qualifications necessary to obtain and maintain such licenses.
(8) Proof of insurance with coverage limits that comply with the
minimum requirements established from time to time by the board.
(B) Documents. As a part of the application, the applicant shall provide:
(1) Copies of the owner's aircraft registration and aircraft lease
documents.
(2) Copies of all activity licenses, permits, and certificates needed for
the type of operation to be performed.
(C) Fees. The fee for processing an application for any license required by
this chapter shall be set by the board. Such fee shall be tendered at the
time the application is submitted.
(D) Action on the application.
(1) No application shall be considered until the complete application is
submitted to the board or the board's designee and the required
application fee has been paid. An application that meets all the
requirements of subsections 11-6-8(A) and (B) of this chapter shall
be considered complete.
(2) The board or the board's designee shall review each complete
application to determine whether the applicant has adequately
demonstrated that the applicant has complied with those items set
forth in this chapter. The board or the board's designee may
conduct such investigation into the content of the application as
considered necessary. If such investigation is conducted by the
board's designee he or she shall within 30 days following the filing
of the application refer such application to the board for final action
or administratively approve or deny such application if authorized
to do so by the board. Failure by the designee to approve or deny an
application for which approval authorization has been delegated by
the board within 30 days following the filing thereof shall be
§ 11-6-8 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-8
1-1:817
§ 11-6-9. Leases. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
deemed to be a denial thereof as of the 30th day following the filing
of such application unless such application has been referred to
the board for final action. The board shall consider an application
referred to the board for action within 30 days following the
referral. Failure of the board to act upon an application within 30
days following the referral shall be deemed to be a denial thereof
as of the 30th day following such referral.
(3) The board's designee, or the board if an application is referred to
the board for final decision, may condition approval of the
application upon the addition of such terms and conditions as may
be considered necessary to protect the public, ensure safe
operation of the airport, and ensure appropriate development of
the business and of the airport.
(4) A final decision on the application shall be made within 60 days
following submission of a complete application, including a
decision approving or denying any request for the lease of a
municipal hangar. If an application is denied, the reasons for such
denial shall be given to the applicant in writing and the application
fee shall be refunded to the applicant.
(E) The applicant shall be under a continuing duty to report changes in the
information on the approved application to the city clerk.
(F) Issuance of license. Each approved license shall be issued by the city
clerk within 10 days following approval thereof. No activity for which a
license is required shall be undertaken by an applicant until a license
authorizing such activity has been issued.
(G) Other approvals. Issuance of a license shall not relieve the applicant
from obtaining other licenses and approvals required by the city or
other governmental authority having jurisdiction.
(A) Application. Any person that wants to lease land or improvements on
the airport shall file an application with the board or the board's
designee. Such application shall include:
(1) The applicant's legal name, business address and business
telephone number.
(2) If the applicant's is other than a natural person, the following
information:
A) The legal basis upon which the applicant exists, including the
home state of the applicant and if the home state is other than
Wisconsin the basis upon which the applicant is authorized to
do business in Wisconsin.
§ 11-6-8 MONROE CODE § 11-6-9
1-1:818
B) The legal name, home and business address, telephone number
and e-mail address [if any] of each officer, director or other
person possessing authority to act on behalf of the applicant
and the nature of such authority.
(3) The applicant's intended use of airport land, buildings, and other
facilities, including the estimated number of takeoffs and landings
per year.
(4) An estimate of costs to be incurred by the applicant for
development and improvements to the airport to provide the
intended service.
(5) A schedule for development and construction of improvements.
(6) The legal name, home and business address, telephone number and
e-mail address [if any] of each person who will be involved with the
use of the leased premises at the airport.
(7) A current financial statement or other information adequate to
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the board, that the applicant has
the financial resources to fulfill the applicant's obligations under
the lease.
(8) A statement setting out the involvement of the applicant, or any
officer, director or agent of the applicant, with any other person
operating at the airport at the time of such application. If the
applicant or any officer, director or agent of the applicant, is
involved with such other person as an officer, director or agent, the
applicant shall also state whether such other person is in
conformance with all leases, operator licenses, and other contracts
between the city and the such other person.
(9) Copies of the owner's aircraft registration and aircraft lease
documents.
(10) Proof of insurance with coverage limits that comply with the
minimum requirements established from time to time by the board.
(B) Action on the application.
(1) No application shall be considered until the complete application is
submitted to the board or the board's designee. An application that
meets all the requirements of subsection 11-6-9(A) of this chapter
shall be considered complete.
(2) The board or the board's designee shall review each complete
application to determine whether the applicant has adequately
demonstrated that the applicant has complied with those items set
forth in this chapter. The board or the board's designee may
conduct such investigation into the content of the application as
considered necessary. If such investigation is conducted by the
board's designee he or she shall within 30 days following the filing
§ 11-6-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-9
1-1:819
of the application refer such application to the board for final action
or administratively approve or deny such application if authorized
to do so by the board. Failure by the designee to approve or
deny an application for which approval authorization has been
delegated by the board within 30 days following the filing thereof
shall be deemed to be a denial thereof as of the 30th day following
the filing of such application unless such application has been
referred to the board for final action. The board shall consider
an application referred to the board for action within 30 days
following the referral. Failure of the board to act upon an
application within 30 days following the referral shall be deemed to
be a denial thereof as of the 30th day following such referral.
(3) Approval of the application may be conditioned upon the addition of
such terms and conditions as may be considered necessary to
protect the public, ensure safe operation of the airport, and ensure
appropriate development of the business and of the airport.
(4) A final decision on the application shall be made within 60 days
following submission of a complete application. If an application is
denied the reasons for such denial shall be given to the applicant in
writing.
(5) The applicant shall be under a continuing duty to report changes in
the information on the approved application to the city clerk.
(6) The applicant shall enter into a written lease with the city within 30
days after a final decision approving the application. This time
period may be extended for good cause.
(7) If the applicant does not enter into a written lease with the city
within the time set forth in this section, the approval shall be
considered withdrawn and the application voided. The applicant
may then file a new application under this chapter, which
application shall be reviewed according to the provisions of this
chapter.
(C) Every lease shall contain, at a minimum, the following information and
provisions:
(1) The time period covered by the lease;
(2) The amount to be paid for the annual rental of space;
(3) A description of the structures and land to be used by the lessee;
(4) A description of the business to be operated, if any;
(5) A requirement that the lessee obtain and maintain insurance as
required by this chapter, with the city named as an additional
insured;
§ 11-6-9 MONROE CODE § 11-6-9
1-1:820
(6) A requirement that the lessee maintain the leased premises in good
condition and a listing of such maintenance requirements;
(7) A requirement that any modification of the lease shall be made in a
writing signed by the lessee and by a representative of the board;
(8) A provision that the lessee shall not sublease the leased premises
without prior written authorization from the board;
(9) If the lessee is an operator that is to be open to the public, the lease
shall contain a requirement that the lessee have its business open
and services available at reasonable hours and provide for qualified
personnel to be in attendance during normal operating hours;
(10) If the lessee is an operator whose business involves air
transportation, the lease shall contain a requirement that the
lessee have available at least one properly certified aircraft
equipped for the type of transportation offered;
(D) No lessee shall transfer or assign any lease without prior written
authorization of the board. If lessee is an entity, the sale or other
transfer of a majority ownership interest in such entity shall be
considered to be a transfer. The board's authorization to transfer or
assign shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(E) It is in the public interest that the city encourage airport development
in those areas where substantial construction costs are incurred by
lessees, particularly when such construction is of industrial hangars,
commercial hangars or private hangars on airport property. To
encourage such construction, the board may approve long-term leases,
low-rent leases, leases that provide for re-examination and
readjustment of rates and charges at specified times during the lease
term, and any other type of lease that furthers this public interest.
(F) Each lessee shall keep its leased property free from all fire hazards.
(G) All lessees shall supply and maintain adequate and readily accessible
fire extinguishers approved by underwriters laboratories.
(H) No person shall effect structural or decorative change of any structure
without prior written permission of the board.
(I) Lessees shall be fully responsible for all damages to buildings,
equipment, real property, and appurtenances in the ownership or
custody of the airport caused by negligence, abuse or carelessness by
the lessee's employees, agents, customers, visitors, suppliers, or
persons with whom the lessee does business.
(J) Lease rates. Rates for leasing city owned or controlled property at the
airport shall be set from time to time by resolution of the board.
§ 11-6-9 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-9
1-1:821
§ 11-6-10. Airport operation. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
(K) Insurance. Every lessee of city owned or controlled property at the
airport shall maintain at all times insurance coverage conforming to the
minimum requirements established from time to time by the board.
(A) Finances.
(1) All revenue derived from the use of the airport shall be collected by
the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall maintain records of all
such receipts, and shall deposit such revenue into a separate and
segregated fund.
(2) The expenditures from such fund shall be made only upon approval
of the board or the board's designee.
(3) The revenues shall be used only for maintenance, operation,
improvement, acquisition, and general management expenses of
the airport.
(B) Zone uses.
(1) Apron areas shall only be used for temporary parking and servicing
of aircraft.
(2) Commercial aviation areas shall only be used for the conducting of
business activities by operators, and storage of aircraft and
materials connected with such commercial activities.
(3) Commercial hangar areas shall only be used for storage of
commercial aircraft and storage of motor vehicles when such
aircraft is in use.
(4) Industrial hangar areas shall only be used for storage of industrial
aircraft and storage of motor vehicles when such aircraft is in use.
(5) The Municipal terminal area shall be maintained by the city for the
use of all patrons of the airport.
(6) Private hangar areas shall only be used for the storage of private
aircraft and storage of motor vehicles when such aircraft is in use.
(7) Public areas shall be open for the use of the public for any use
reasonably related to the use of the airport and not otherwise
prohibited by this chapter.
(8) Tie down areas shall only be used for the long term parking, tying
down, and storage of aircraft.
(9) The utility and service area shall be reserved for use by persons
expressly authorized by the board.
§ 11-6-9 MONROE CODE § 11-6-10
1-1:822
(C) Special activities. No person shall conduct any of the following
activities on, from, or over the airport without the prior approval of the
board:
(1) Aerobatic flight.
(2) Ground demonstration.
(3) Fly-in.
(4) Balloon flights.
(5) Parachuting.
(6) Flour bombing.
(7) Sky diving.
(8) Operation of ultra-light aircraft.
(9) Operation of model or radio controlled aircraft flights.
(10) Meetings, conventions, picnics or other such gatherings involving
more than 10 people.
(11) Any other activity that is outside of the normal operation of the
airport and that may affect the safe or efficient operation of the
airport.
(D) Cleaning of aircraft. No person shall use any volatile, flammable liquid
having a flash point of less than 130 degrees Fahrenheit in the cleaning
of aircraft, aircraft engines, propellers, appliances, or for any other
purpose unless such operations are conducted in a room specifically set
aside and state approved for that purpose. Such room shall be properly
fireproofed and shall be equipped with adequate, readily accessible,
state approved fire extinguishing apparatus.
(E) Flammable and combustible materials storage.
(1) Liquids. Flammable and combustible liquids may be stored in a
hangar or other structure at the airport only in strict conformity
with NFPA standard no. 30 (Flammable and combustible liquids
code-2015 edition) and any subsequent editions amendatory and
supplemental thereto.
(2) Signal flares. No person shall keep or store any signal flare or other
similar material in any hangar or other structure on the airport,
unless such material is stored in rooms or cabinets specifically
approved for such purpose by underwriter laboratories. This type
of material may be kept in aircraft provided it is in approved
receptacles installed in the aircraft for storage of such material.
(F) Doping and painting.
§ 11-6-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-10
1-1:823
(1) No doping of areas larger than two square feet shall be conducted
on the airport, except in properly fireproofed and ventilated rooms
or buildings in which all illuminations, wiring, heating, ventilation
equipment, switches, outlets and fixtures are explosion-proof,
spark-proof and vapor-proof. In addition, all doors and windows in
such room shall open easily. Such room shall meet all federal, state
and local building codes.
(2) Painting of more than 10 square feet shall not be permitted on the
airport except in licensed repair shops.
(3) No aircraft painting or doping is permitted in any municipal
hangar.
(G) Fueling and defueling aircraft.
(1) Fueling operations.
A) No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while the engine is
running.
B) No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while the engine is
being warmed by application of heat from the exterior of the
engine.
C) No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while such aircraft is in
a hangar or other enclosed space unless such aircraft is fueled
or defueled in connection with repair or maintenance
operations by an operator holding a license authorizing such
repair or maintenance operations.
D) No individual shall smoke within 100 feet of an aircraft being
fueled or defueled.
E) No individual shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver in
an aircraft during fueling or defueling.
F) No individual shall switch any electrical appliance off or on in
an aircraft during fueling or defueling.
G) No individual shall use any material or equipment during
fueling or defueling of aircraft which is likely to cause any
spark or flame.
H) No person shall start the engine of any aircraft when there is
any excess fuel under such aircraft.
I) Fueling hoses and equipment shall be maintained in good,
nonleaking condition. All fueling hoses and equipment shall be
approved by the national board of fire underwriters.
J) All hoses and equipment used in fueling or defueling
operations on the airport shall be equipped with a grounding
device approved by the manager.
§ 11-6-10 MONROE CODE § 11-6-10
1-1:824
K) No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while passengers are on
board, unless the aircraft doors are locked open.
L) All persons engaged in the fueling and defueling of aircraft
shall exercise due care to prevent the overflow of fuel during
such operations.
M) All persons engaged in the fueling or defueling of aircraft shall
remove all volatile liquids spilled during such operations.
N) No person shall use any portable container for storage or
transport of fuel, except:
1) Under circumstances constituting an emergency under
any local, state or federal rule or regulation.
2) Those uses pertaining to airport maintenance.
(H) Weapons and explosives. Unless expressly authorized by a clearly
preemptive state or federal law, no person shall carry or cause to be
carried any weapon or explosive on the airport, except as follows:
(1) Legally encased sporting guns for transshipment.
(2) Peace officers acting within the scope of their employment.
(3) Post office employees acting within the scope of their employment.
(4) Airport employees acting within the scope of their employment.
(5) Members of the armed forces of the United States on official duty.
(6) Persons with written authorization of the board or the board's
designee to harvest game on the airport.
(I) Flammable liquids.
(1) No person shall carry or cause to be carried on the airport any
flammable liquid, except petroleum products, solvents, or other
liquids used in the normal fueling, repair, or operation of aircraft.
(2) No person shall carry or cause to be carried in the airport terminal
any flammable liquid of any type.
(J) Use of roads and walkways.
(1) No person shall travel on the airport other than on the roads, walks
or places provided for the particular class of traffic.
(2) No person shall occupy the roads or walkways in such a manner as
to hinder or obstruct their proper use.
(K) Animal restrictions. No animal shall be permitted on the airport,
except:
(1) Seeing eye dogs, or dogs assisting the handicapped;
§ 11-6-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-10
1-1:825
(2) Animals that are to be transported by air, and that are properly
confined for such transportation;
(3) Animals restrained by leash not more than six feet long, or
otherwise properly confined.
(L) Use of shop areas. No shop, garage, equipment or facility shall be used
by any person other than one to whom the item is leased, or an
employee of such person.
(M) Solicitation. No person shall solicit fares, alms, or funds for any purpose
on the airport without prior permission of the board.
(N) Open-flame operations. No person shall conduct open-flame operations
on the airport without the written permission of the manager.
(O) Smoking. No person shall smoke on the airport apron, in any hangar or
shop, service station area, gasoline storage area or in any building,
room or within 100 feet of any fueling or defueling operations or where
otherwise prohibited by state law.
(P) Trash.
(1) All waste, rags, and other rubbish shall be kept in metal containers
with self-closing covers.
(2) All waste, rags, and other rubbish shall be removed by each
operator and lessee daily.
(3) Each operator and lessee shall be responsible for the proper
storage, transporting and disposal of all waste, rags, and other
rubbish generated by that person. If any such material escapes
from the vehicle transporting it, the person transporting it shall be
responsible for cleanup of such material. If the person does not
clean up such material to the satisfaction of the manager, the
manager shall have the material satisfactorily cleaned up, and shall
charge the person with the cost of such clean up.
(4) No person shall permit the accumulation or storage of crates,
boxes, barrels or other containers on its premises.
(5) Trash and garbage containers shall only be placed in areas
designated by the manager.
(6) Every user shall keep the area for which that user is responsible
clean and sanitary at all times.
(7) No fuels, oils, dopes, paints, solvents, or acids shall be disposed of
or dumped anywhere on the airport. All such materials shall be
disposed of as required under federal, state, and local law.
(Q) Property damage. Any person damaging any light or fixture shall report
such damage to the manager's office immediately. Such person shall be
§ 11-6-10 MONROE CODE § 11-6-10
1-1:826
fully responsible for any costs required to repair or replace the
damaged item.
(R) Floor care. Each user shall keep the floors of the hangars, hangar areas
and terminal apron and ramp areas used by them clean and clear of oil,
grease and other materials or stains, except as specifically authorized
by the board.
(S) Storage of equipment. No person shall store or stack materials or
equipment in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to people or
property.
(T) Municipal hangar regulations.
(1) Each person using a municipal hangar shall extinguish all lights
and disconnect all electrical appliances before leaving such hangar.
(2) Each person using a municipal hangar shall close and secure the
hangar doors when leaving the hangar for more than one hour.
(3) Each person using a municipal hangar shall report any
malfunctioning of hangar doors or equipment to the manager
promptly.
(U) Equipment and miscellaneous in apron area.
(1) All ramp equipment shall be parked and kept in a neat and orderly
manner.
(2) No receptacles, chests, cases, or housing shall remain on the apron
or ramp areas except as approved in writing by the manager.
(V) Miscellaneous provisions.
(1) No person shall engage in a course of conduct that adversely
affects the safe or efficient operation of the airport, airport
employees, or other airport personnel.
(2) No person shall resist or obstruct an airport employee while such
employee is doing any act in an official capacity and with lawful
authority. "Obstruct" includes, without limitation, knowingly giving
false information to the employee with intent to mislead him or her
in the performance of his or her duty.
(3) During time of war or national emergency, the board may grant a
right of use of any or all airport facilities to the United States of
America for military use. All rights of use of all airport users are
subject to such grant. If such right of use is granted, it shall
suspend all operating privileges of all other users of the airport,
and shall not be considered a taking of property.
(W) No person shall engage in any activity that:
§ 11-6-10 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-10
1-1:827
§ 11-6-11. Aircraft operation. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
(1) Obstructs the view of persons operating aircraft on the ground at
the airport.
(2) Makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and
other lights.
(3) Results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport.
(4) Impairs visibility in the vicinity of the airport.
(5) Endangers or is hazardous to the landing, taking off or
maneuvering of aircraft using the airport.
(6) Creates a radio hazard on or in the immediate vicinity of the
airport.
(A) Aircraft registration.
(1) The owners of all aircraft based on the airport shall register their
aircraft with the manager's office within seven days after bringing
the aircraft on the airport, and before beginning operations.
(2) If there is any change in the ownership of a registered aircraft, the
registered owner or owners shall report such change of ownership
to the manager within seven days following the transfer of
ownership. The new owner or owners shall register the aircraft
within 14 days following the transfer of ownership.
(B) Aeronautical activities. All aeronautical activities at the airport and
above the airport, shall be conducted in conformity with orders issued
by the board and the current pertinent provisions of the Wisconsin state
aeronautics board.
(C) Accidents and incidents.
(1) Any person involved in any aircraft accident or incident occurring
on the airport shall, within 10 business days, make a full written
report thereof to the manager. Such report shall be made on a form
provided by the manager.
(2) When a written report of an accident or incident is required by FAA
regulations, a copy of such report shall be submitted to the
manager in lieu of the report required by this section.
(3) All disabled aircraft, parts of such aircraft, and all debris related to
such aircraft shall be promptly removed from all areas where the
public can see such items and from the landing area.
(4) If any person refuses to move a disabled aircraft as directed by the
manager, the manager may have the aircraft towed away at the
expense of the aircraft owner or operator. Neither the city, the
board, the manager, nor any person towing such aircraft at the
§ 11-6-10 MONROE CODE § 11-6-11
1-1:828
direction of the manager shall be liable for any damage that may
result in the course of, or at any time following, such towing.
(5) Subsections (C)(1) through (C)(4) of this section shall be subject to
NTSB Regulation 830.
(D) Warm-up. No aircraft shall perform warm-up or engine test operations
in any area that would result in a hazard to other aircraft, persons or
property.
(E) Taxiing rules.
(1) Each individual operating an aircraft shall visually inspect the area
surrounding the aircraft before beginning any operation involving
the movement of the aircraft.
(2) No person shall taxi an aircraft until he or she has determined that
there will be no danger of collision with any individual or object as
a result of such taxiing.
(3) No aircraft shall be taxied in a careless or reckless manner.
(4) No aircraft shall be taxied except at a safe and reasonable speed.
(5) All aircraft shall be taxied under prescribed taxiing patterns.
(6) No person shall start or run any engine in any aircraft unless a
competent person is in the aircraft attending the engine controls.
(7) Blocks shall be placed in front of the wheels of all aircraft before
starting any engine on such aircraft unless such aircraft is provided
with adequate brakes.
(8) No person shall run any engine of an aircraft so as to cause damage
to other aircraft or property, or in such a manner as to blow paper,
dirt, or other materials across taxiways or runways in such manner
as to endanger the safety or operations on the airport.
(F) Landing and takeoffs.
(1) Each person landing or taking off from the airport shall follow the
following procedures:
A) Landing aircraft shall maintain traffic pattern altitude until
turning onto base leg before commencing final approach.
B) Aircraft taking off from the airport shall climb out straight
ahead from the end of the runway until at least 400 feet above
ground level. However, aircraft making practice takeoffs and
landings, shall make their first turn at a point at least 1,000
feet beyond end of the runway and at an altitude of not less
than 400 feet above ground level, continuing to climb after
their first turn until the aircraft reaches an altitude of at least
800 feet above ground level.
§ 11-6-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-11
1-1:829
C) Each person landing or taking off from the airport shall
maintain a left-handed rectangular traffic pattern, unless
otherwise directed by the manager.
(2) Takeoffs and landings over populated areas shall be kept to a
minimum for public safety and convenience.
(3) Pilots possessing a student permit only shall only land or take off at
the airport while on a cross-country flight to further their
aeronautical knowledge, or while under the supervision of a
qualified instructor.
(4) No motorless aircraft, nor any aircraft with a total loaded weight of
more than 30,000 pounds, shall land or take off from the airport
without the prior authorization of the manager.
(G) Aircraft parking. No person shall park any aircraft on other than the
apron areas or tie down areas without the prior written permission of
the manager.
(H) Rotorcraft shall not operate within 200 feet of any area where light
aircraft is parked or operating, except for refueling operations.
(I) Miscellaneous regulations. No person shall use oil warming devices or
electrical heating devices for an aircraft unless such devices are an
integral part of the aircraft.
(J) Reckless flying; penalty.
(1) In this subsection, "drug" means:
A) Any substance recognized as a drug in the official U.S.
pharmacopoeia and national formulary or official homeopathic
pharmacopoeia of the United States or any supplement to
either of them;
B) Any substance intended for use in the diagnosis, cure,
mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease or other
conditions in persons or other animals;
C) Any substance other than a device or food intended to affect
the structure or any function of the body of persons or other
animals; or
D) Any substance intended for use as a component of any article
specified in subsections (J)(1)A) to (J)(1)C) of this subsection,
but does not include gases or devices or articles intended for
use or consumption in or for mechanical, industrial,
manufacturing or scientific applications or purposes.
(2) In this subsection, "controlled substance" has the meaning set forth
in the controlled substances act under the Wisconsin statutes.
§ 11-6-11 MONROE CODE § 11-6-11
1-1:830
§ 11-6-12. Flying clubs. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
(3) No individual may operate an aircraft in the air or on the ground or
water while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled
substances or a combination thereof, under the influence of any
other drug to a degree which renders him or her incapable of safely
operating an aircraft, or under the combined influence of
intoxicating liquor and any other drug to a degree which renders
him or her incapable of safely operating an aircraft, nor operate an
aircraft in the air or on the ground or water in a careless or
reckless manner so as to endanger the life or property of another.
In determining whether the operation was careless or reckless the
court shall consider the standards for safe operation of aircraft
prescribed by federal statutes or regulations governing
aeronautics. The court shall make a written report of all
convictions, including bail or appearance money forfeitures
obtained under this subsection to the Wisconsin department of
transportation, which shall send the report to the proper federal
agency.
(4) Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall upon
conviction be subject to a class 5 forfeiture for the first offense and
a class 2 forfeiture for the second or subsequent offense.
(A) Each member of a flying club must be a bona fide partner, member or
shareholder in the club. The ownership of a flying club shall be divided
equally among the partners, members or shareholders.
(B) No flying club shall derive greater revenue from the use of its aircraft
than the amount necessary for the operation, maintenance, and
replacement of its aircraft.
(C) Club aircraft may only be operated by bona fide club members. Such
aircraft shall not be used for hire, charter, air taxi, or other commercial
activities.
(D) Flight instruction may be given in club aircraft to club members, so
long as such flight instruction is given by an operator holding a
Category II operator license. The giving of such instruction shall not be
considered commercial use of club aircraft.
(E) Each flying club shall file a complete list of the club's membership with
the city clerk. Such list shall be updated upon any change of
membership, but no less often than annually. Such list shall set forth
each club member's name, address, telephone number, type of
ownership interest in the club, and the extent of that ownership
interest.
(F) Each flying club shall enter into a lease at the airport.
(G) Each flying club shall provide the city with copies of aircraft
registrations for each club aircraft.
§ 11-6-11 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-12
1-1:831
§ 11-6-13. Airport activity clubs. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
(H) Each flying club shall maintain a master flight log describing the use
category of each of the club's aircraft and the purpose of each flight
made. When a flight is made for flight instruction, the log entry shall
also include the student's name, the flight instructor's name, and the
flight instructor's operator license number. This log shall be made
available to the board upon request.
(I) Each flying club shall maintain insurance with coverage limits that
comply with the minimum requirements established from time to time
by the board and shall file proof of such insurance with the board or the
board's designee.
(J) A flying club may conduct noncommercial ground activities involving
club members and their immediate families, in the area leased by it,
without prior approval. All other activities of a flying club must be
approved by the board before the activity is to take place, and no flying
club, nor any member of such a club, shall conduct any such activity at
the airport without such prior approval.
(K) The area in which a flying club's activities may be conducted shall be
designated by the board. The board may change this area from time to
time, in the interests of safe and efficient use of the airport. This area
may or may not correspond to the area leased by the club.
(A) No airport activity club shall derive greater revenue from the use of its
aircraft than the amount necessary for the operation, maintenance, and
replacement of its aircraft.
(B) Club aircraft may only be operated by bona fide club members. Such
aircraft shall not be used for hire, charter, air taxi, or other commercial
activities.
(C) Flight instruction may not be given in club aircraft.
(D) Each airport activity club shall file a complete list of the club's
membership with the city clerk. Such list shall be updated upon any
change of membership, but no less often than annually. Such list shall
set forth each club member's name, address, telephone number, type of
ownership interest in the club, and the extent of that ownership
interest.
(E) Each airport activity club shall provide the city with copies of aircraft
registrations for each club aircraft.
(F) Each airport activity club shall maintain a master flight log describing
the use category of each of the club's aircraft and the purpose of each
flight made. This log shall be made available to the board upon request.
(G) An airport activity club may conduct noncommercial ground activities
involving club members and their immediate families, in the area leased
§ 11-6-12 MONROE CODE § 11-6-13
1-1:832
§ 11-6-14. Civil Air Patrol. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
by it, without prior approval. All other activities of an airport activity
club must be approved by the board before the activity is to take place,
and no airport activity club, nor any member of such a club, shall
conduct any such activity at the airport without such prior approval.
The board shall not approve an activity unless the applicant provides
proof of insurance with coverage limits that comply with the minimum
requirements established from time to time by the board.
(H) The area in which an airport activity club's activities may be conducted
shall be designated by the board. The board may change this area from
time to time, in the interests of safe and efficient use of the airport.
(I) At least 24 hours before each airport activity club activity, except
ground activities, the club shall request the manager to file an
appropriate NOTAM. Such request shall include the date, beginning
time and the ending time of the activity. Such request shall be made by
a bona fide officer of the club.
(J) If any aerial activity of an airport activity club is to occur within federal
aeronautical regulations part 77 airspace, the club shall provide, at its
own expense, appropriate radios, operating on the airport's unicom
frequency and meeting all FCC and FAA requirements. No aerial
activities shall be conducted by the club unless such radio is operating
and attended. The individual attending such radio shall be properly
trained in its use and shall notify all nearby aircraft of the club
activities. The individual attending such radio shall not be engaged in
any other activity during such attendance.
(K) If any aerial activity of an airport activity club is to take place more than
500 feet above ground level the club shall, at all times during such
activities, maintain radio contact with VFR advisories with Rockford
approach control. The club shall notify Rockford approach control
before beginning each such aerial activity and again upon completion of
each such activity. The club shall also notify all local air traffic of such
activity, on the local unicom frequency, immediately before and upon
completion of such activity.
(L) Each airport activity club shall maintain and make available to the
manager a club activity record describing each activity conducted by
the club, except ground activities on the area leased by the club. Such
activity records shall include, at a minimum, names of participants, type
of activities, number and times of functions, name and address of radio
operator, and the complete radio operation log.
(A) Aircraft owned by Civil Air Patrol, Inc., shall not be classified as club
aircraft, commercial aircraft, or industrial aircraft.
(B) Civil Air Patrol aircraft shall be operated under Civil Air Patrol
regulations.
§ 11-6-13 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-15
1-1:833
§ 11-6-15. Vehicular traffic regulation. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016
Code]
(A) Registration. No individual shall operate any motor vehicle on the
airport except on public thoroughfare without first registering the
motor vehicle with the manager and obtaining written permission for
such operation. Emergency equipment is exempt from this provision.
(B) Licensing. No individual shall operate motorized ground equipment on
the airport without a valid operating license for such equipment issued
by such individual's state of residence.
(C) Speed limits.
(1) No individual shall operate a motor vehicle on the airport in a
reckless or negligent manner, or more than the applicable speed
limits.
(2) No individual shall operate a motor vehicle more than 15 miles per
hour on the ramp, apron, aircraft parking and hangar areas.
(D) Right of way.
(1) Pedestrians and aircraft shall have the right of way over vehicular
traffic at all times.
(2) All vehicles shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft.
(E) Accident reports. Any individual involved in an accident on the airport
shall file a written report with the city police department as soon as
possible, but not later than 24 hours from the time of the accident.
(F) Lighting requirements.
(1) All vehicles operating on the airport between sunset and sunrise
shall have fully operating headlights and tail lights visible for at
least 500 feet.
(2) All fuel trucks and service vehicles shall carry an overhead 360
degree revolving amber beacon.
(3) In addition to those requirements set forth in subsections (F)(1)
and (F)(2) of this section, all vehicles operating on the airport shall
meet all applicable FAA lighting requirements.
(G) Every individual operating a motor vehicle on the airport shall give
proper signals, and shall comply with all posted traffic signs.
(H) No individual under the influence of liquor or narcotic drugs shall
operate a motor vehicle on the airport.
(I) No individual shall operate any motor vehicle on the airport if such
motor vehicle is overloaded or carrying more passengers than that for
which the vehicle was designed.
§ 11-6-15 MONROE CODE § 11-6-15
1-1:834
§ 11-6-16. Pedestrians. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
(J) No individual shall ride on the running board of a vehicle or otherwise
ride on the outside of a motor vehicle while such vehicle is in motion.
For purposes of this subsection, the bed of a pickup truck shall not be
considered the outside of a motor vehicle.
(K) No individual shall stand up in the body of a motor vehicle while that
motor vehicle is in motion.
(L) No individual shall operate a motor vehicle while any other individual's
arms or legs are protruding from the body of such motor vehicle.
(M) No motor vehicle shall be operated on the airport if it is so constructed,
equipped, or loaded as to endanger people or property.
(N) No individual shall operate a motor vehicle on the airport unless such
vehicle is equipped with exhausts protected by screens or baffles to
prevent the escape of sparks and the propagation of flame on the
airport.
(O) Parking.
(1) No individual shall park a motor vehicle on the airport, other than
in areas specifically established for parking and in the manner
prescribed by signs, lines, or other means, unless such parking is
approved in advance by the manager.
(2) A lessee may park automobiles inside leased space only when the
aircraft is in use, or when the lessee is on an extended trip by
aircraft.
(3) All employees of firms conducting business at the airport shall park
in areas specifically designated for employee parking.
(4) Any motor vehicle parked in violation of this section may be towed
or otherwise moved at the direction of the manager and at the
owner's or operator's expense.
(P) No person shall abandon any motor vehicle on the airport.
(Q) Ground transportation.
(1) No carrier for hire shall load or unload passengers at the airport at
any place other than that designated by the manager.
(2) No carrier for hire shall operate on the airport without prior
approval of the board.
(3) Emergency vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this section.
(A) No pedestrian is allowed on the airport except in the terminal, on public
thoroughfares, or on the apron or aircraft tie-down areas while
embarking or disembarking from an aircraft, without first registering
§ 11-6-15 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-16
1-1:835
§ 11-6-17. Building regulations. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
with the manager and obtaining written permission for his or her
presence elsewhere on the airport.
(B) The manager may give permission for pedestrian traffic into prohibited
areas. The authority hereby granted may be delegated to the supervisor
by the manager.
(C) Right of way.
(1) Pedestrians shall have the right of way over vehicular traffic at all
times.
(2) Aircraft shall have the right of way over pedestrians at all times.
(3) All pedestrians shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft.
(A) Before commencement of any construction, alteration, repair or
removal of any structure on the airport, the plans for such work shall be
presented to the board for its approval. The board shall review such
plans to determine if the proposed work conforms with zoning map A -
Monroe municipal airport and zoning map B - Monroe municipal
airport. The board shall also determine whether the proposed work will
be consistent with then-existing structures and the plans for future
development of the airport. If the proposed work conforms, and is
consistent, the board shall approve the plans for submittal to the
building inspection department for its approval. No work shall be
allowed unless the plans have been approved by the board and the
building inspection department.
(B) No structure shall be constructed, altered, repaired or removed, unless
the owner or lessee of such structure has obtained a license approved
by the board for such work. Such license shall be posted along with the
building permit authorizing such work.
(C) No tree may be planted without a permit from the board. The building
inspector may order any tree planted without a permit to be removed at
the expense of the person that planted such tree.
(D) The board shall not authorize the construction, alteration, or repair of
any structure that would become a greater hazard to air navigation
than it is when the application for license is made.
(E) As a precondition to the issuance of any license under this section, the
applicant for such license shall be required to grant the city permission
to install, operate and maintain such markers and lights on such
structure as are considered necessary to show the presence of an
airport hazard. Installation, operation, and maintenance of such
markers and lights shall be at the sole expense of the city.
(F) All hangars shall be of metal or masonry construction, or of a pole-type
construction with an exterior metal covering.
§ 11-6-16 MONROE CODE § 11-6-17
1-1:836
§ 11-6-18. Schedule of charges. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
§ 11-6-19. Appeals and review. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
§ 11-6-20. Penalties. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
(G) All construction, alteration, and repair of structures on the airport shall
be in compliance with standard construction specifications.
(H) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the removal,
lowering or other change or alteration of any nonconforming use.
However, any alteration or modification of a nonconforming use
commenced after the effective date of this chapter shall be in
conformity with this chapter.
(I) The building inspector of the city shall be responsible for enforcing the
building regulations set forth in this chapter. The regulations in this
chapter are intended to supplement the city building code. To the
extent that the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the city
building code, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.
(A) The board shall set, and periodically review, a schedule of fees for
certified air carriers. Such fees shall include, but shall not be limited to,
landing fees, and floor rental charges. Landing fees shall be based on
aircraft weight and frequency of landings. All fees set pursuant to this
subsection shall apply equally to all certified air carriers, whether
scheduled or nonscheduled.
(B) The board shall set, and periodically review, a schedule of fees for the
rental of municipal hangars, public parking areas, and other airport
facilities.
(C) The board may require that payment of charges made under this
chapter be paid before granting an aircraft clearance to depart from the
airport.
(A) Appeal and review of any decision of the board under this chapter shall
be conducted under chapter 5 of Title 2 of this code.
(B) The board of appeals may, after investigation and public hearing, grant
such variances from the provisions of this chapter if it finds:
(1) The granting of the variance will be in the public interest; and
(2) Special conditions exist, and under such special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in
unnecessary hardship to the person requesting the variance; and
(3) The granting of the requested variance will do substantial justice
and will be in accord with the spirit of this chapter; and
(4) The granting of the variance will not create a hazard to the safe,
normal operation of the airport.
§ 11-6-17 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § 11-6-20
1-1:837
§ 11-6-21. Precedence. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
This chapter shall not apply to scheduled certificated or scheduled
commuter airline operating under FAA part 121 or 135 regulations.
However, any scheduled certificated or commuter airline desiring to
operate at the airport shall be required to enter into a lease and operating
rights agreement with the city, which agreement shall provide for payment
of fees, leasing of space and establishment of operating rules and
regulations relative to such airlines' operations at the airport.
§ 11-6-22. Severability. [7-2-1991; 2-17-2016; 2016 Code]
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any provision
of this chapter is declared invalid by a decision of a court of competent
jurisdiction, any other provision not specifically invalidated by such decision
shall remain valid and in effect.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
(A) Except as otherwise noted in this chapter, each violation of this chapter
shall be punishable by a Class 1 forfeiture.
(B) Each day or partial day of violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be considered a separate violation.
(C) The board may revoke or suspend any license granted under this
chapter for violation of any provision a this chapter, under the
procedures set out in chapter 5 of Title 3 of this code for suspension or
revocation of licenses.
(D) The board may suspend or revoke the operating privileges of any
person for violation of this chapter, or for violation of any other
provision of this code, under the procedures set out in chapter 5 of title
3 of this code for suspension or revocation of licenses. A person that has
had its operating privileges suspended or revoked shall not be entitled
to conduct any commercial or noncommercial activities from or on the
airport during the period of such revocation or suspension.
(E) The manager or his or her designee shall be authorized to remove from
the airport any individual who violates any provision of this chapter
relating to the safe operation of the airport. Such removal may be in
addition to, or preceding, any suspension or revocation of a license or
operating privileges. The manager shall not be liable to any person for
his or her lawful actions under this subsection.
§ 11-6-20 MONROE CODE § DL-1
1-1:838
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
9-6-2016 Mayor and
Council
amendment
Ch. 1-5
9-6-2016 Animal control
regulations
amendment
Ch. 9-2
1-3-2017 Airport Board of
Management
amendment
Ch. 2-13
1-17-2017 M-3 Industrial
Park District
amendment;
public parks and
recreation
facilities
amendment
Ch. 5-11; Ch.
11-3
2-7-2017 Mayor and
Council
amendment;
continuity of
government and
emergency
management
amendment;
historic
preservation
amendment;
animal control
regulations
amendment
Ch. 1-5; Ch. 1-11;
Ch. 5-19; Ch. 9-2
2-22-2017 Animal control
regulations
amendment
Ch. 9-2
2-22-2017 Taxicabs
amendment
Ch. 3-8
§ DL-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § DL-1
1-1:839
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2-22-2017 Board of Public
Works
amendment;
Finance and
Taxation
Committee
amendment;
Public Safety
Committee
amendment;
Judiciary and
Ordinance
Review
Committee
amendment;
License
Committee
amendment;
Salary and
Personnel
Committee
amendment
Ch. 2-1; Ch. 2-8;
Ch. 2-9; Ch. 2-10;
Ch. 2-11; Ch.
2-12
3-7-2017 Definitions,
general
regulations and
accessory
building
regulations
amendment
Ch. 5-2
§ DL-1 MONROE CODE § DL-1
1-1:840
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
5-16-2017 City Officers
amendment;
Board of Public
Works
amendment; City
Plan Commission
amendment;
Zoning Board of
Appeals
amendment;
Senior Citizens
Board
amendment;
Visitors and
Promotion
Commission
amendment;
Ethics Board
amendment
Ch. 1-6; Ch. 2-1;
Ch. 2-4, Ch. 2-5;
Ch. 2-7; Ch. 2-14;
Ch. 2-15
5-16-2017 Mayor and
Council
amendment
Ch. 1-5
5-16-2017 Airport Board of
Management
amendment
Ch. 2-13
5-16-2017 City Officers
amendment;
Information
Technology
Committee
repealer
Ch. 1-6; Ch. 2-16,
reference only
7-5-2017 Animal control
regulations
amendment;
public parks and
recreation
facilities
amendment
Ch. 9-2; Ch. 11-3
7-5-2017 License and
permit
revocations,
suspensions and
refusals
amendment
Ch. 3-5
§ DL-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § DL-1
1-1:841
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
6-5-2018 Mayor and
Council
Amendment; City
Officers
Amendment
Ch. 1-5; Ch. 1-6
6-5-2018 Monroe Water
Utility
Amendment
Ch. 8-4
6-5-2018 Streets, Alleys
and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 11-1
6-5-2018 Monroe Water
Utility
Amendment
Ch. 8-4
6-5-2018 Mayor and
Council
Amendment
Ch. 1-5
6-5-2018 Animal Control
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 9-2
9-4-2018 Zoning
Regulations
Title 5
9-17-2018 Wards and
Aldermanic
Districts
Amendment
Ch. 1-9
10-15-2018 Dance Licenses
Amendment
Ch. 3-10
10-15-2018 Sidewalk Cafes
Amendment
Ch. 3-9
10-15-2018 Taxicabs
Amendment
Ch. 3-8
10-15-2018 Solid Waste
Recycling and
Disposal
Amendment
Ch. 8-3
10-15-2018 Animal Control
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 9-2
1-7-2019 Board of Review
Amendment
Ch. 2-2
1-7-2019 Public Records Ch. 1-16
§ DL-1 MONROE CODE § DL-1
1-1:842
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1-7-2019 Code of Ethics for
City Officials and
Employees
Amendment
Ch. 1-15
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
10-8-2019 Detaching
Territory
NCM 5
11-18-2019 Definitions
Amendment;
All-Terrain
Vehicles
Amendment
Ch. 10-1; Ch.
10-6
5
11-18-2019 Building Code
Amendment
Ch. 4-1 5
11-18-2019 Mayor and
Council
Amendment
Ch. 1-5 5
§ DL-1 OFFICIAL CITY CODE § DL-1
1-1:843